52 Plenary Sessions 53 ESHG Abstracts in human chromosomes, we have developed PCR methods to detect crossovers in sperm DNA. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) and sperm analysis within the MHC class II region show that crossovers are Plenary Sessions heavily clustered into 1-2 kb wide hotspots that profoundly influence LD patterns, with blocks of strongly-associated markers 10’s of kb PS 1. Plenary Session 1 long lying between clusters of hotspots. Current evidence suggests that this mosaic pattern of recombining and non-recombining DNA PS01. The Human Genome Sequence: will it come to an is quite common elsewhere in the human genome. Other similar- end ? width hotspots identified by sperm analysis have been found closely J. Weissenbach; associated with minisatellites, where they appear to drive repeat Genoscope and CNRS UMR-8030, Evry, France. DNA instability, and in the recombinationally active pseudoautosomal The International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium has not pairing region PAR1. While most hotspots engage in fully reciprocal curtailed its efforts with the annoucement of the completion of the crossover, one MHC hotspot shows reciprocal crossovers mapping to draft sequence (June 2000). On the contrary significant progress has different locations. This asymmetry is most simply explained by SNPs been accomplished since the analysis (February 2001) and the hope influencing the efficiency of crossover initiation, with the result that for a complete sequence for 2003 is still realistic. markers near the site of initiation undergo biased gene conversion The draft sequence has been improved by doubling the number of as a result of gap repair during recombination. This model is further shotgun reads of the BAC clones included in the assembly (about supported by the occurrence of frequent conversion events without 30,000 clones). This resulted in larger assembled contigs which could crossover at the centre of at least one hotspot. The emerging picture be more frequently ordered and oriented. Finishing is the major focus is that crossovers initiate at extremely localised sites in human at present. chromosomes, and that the similar widths of hotspots may simply To date chromosomes 14, 20, 21, 22 and Y are fully sequenced. The reflect similar processes of gap expansion and repair operating at published draft sequence (assembled September 2000) contained different hotspots. Paradoxically, these hotspots appear to be prone some 220,000 sequence gaps among which about 2000 were not to extinction by meiotic drive of variants that suppress recombination bridged by cloned DNA fragments. The sequence gap number has activity. decreased to 98,000 (assembled August 2001) and the number of clone gaps has been reduced to 390 (November 2001). Similarly the PS 2. Human Genetics in the European Context global coverage has increased from 2,700 Mb (September 2000) to 2,900 Mb (August 2001). 2,048 Mb of non-redundant sequence PS04. The Role of the European Parliament in Human (64%) is in the finished state. Genetics Because of the high redundance of the number of BAC clones that R. Goebbels; were used for the draft sequence, a large number of sequence Member of European Parliament, Brussels, Belgium. variants could be identified and more than 4,000,000 SNPs are Mr. Goebbels is Member of European Parliament. Former President presently featured in dbSNP. Sequence analysis does not reveal of the Temporary Committee on Human Genetics and other new similar spectacular changes. The gene count remains controversial. technologies of modern medecine set by the European Parliament in However the number of 25,000 confirmed genes is not going to 2000-2001. increase rapidly since it is dependent on experimental validations. PS05. The European Orphan Drug Legislation: Impact PS02. Gene therapy of inherited disorders. Results and and Issues perspectives Y. Le Cam; A. Fischer; EURORDIS, Plateforme Maladies Rares, Paris, France. Unité d’Immunologie et d’Hématologie Pédiatriques and INSERM U Mr. Y. Le Cam is General Director of EURORDIS. The European 429 - University Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. Organization for Rare Disorders (EURORDIS) is a coalition of Gene therapy is an attractive option for a number of genetic more than 200 associations and National Alliances of patients disorders. Genetic supplementation could in theory lead to long organisations associated with rare diseases from 14 countries in lasting disease phenotype correction. However, efficient targeting, Europe. induction of long lasting transgene expression and a few other issues limit present application. Given the status of gene transfer technology, PS06. Patenting and Licensing diagnostic tests: the BRCA case two settings appear more favourable. The first relies on a growth Gert Matthijs1, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet2; advantage conferred to transduced cells by transgene expression 1Leuven, Belgium, 2Paris, France combined with cell longevity. This is best examplified by the severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) condition. X-linked (SCID) is PS 3. Genetic Testing in Minors caused by mutations of the gene encoding the γc receptor subunit. Induction of expression on lymphocyte progenitors by retroviral PS07. Neonatal screening for CF: a 13 years experience mediated gene transfer leads to tremendous cell proliferation resulting in the generation of a high number of mature, long lived T in Brittany (France) lymphocytes. Based on this strategy, seven out of 8 patients with C. Ferec, V. Scotet, M. de Braekeleer, M. P. Audrézet; typical XL-SCID have benefited from gene therapy. They have indeed EMI-U 0115 - C.H.U., Brest, France. recovered a functional immune system with a follow-up up to 3 years Cystic Fibrosis is the most frequent autosomal recessive disease without adverse effects. A dozen of other genetic conditions might among Caucasians. The disease, characterized by chronic broncho- therefore also benefited form this approach. The second favourable pneumopathy and pancreatic insufficiency, is still fatal with a median setting is based on continuous secretion of a protein in blood life expectancy of about 30 years. Among the possible strategies stream by transduced cells of various sources such as hepatocytes, for prevention is neonatal screening based on the expectation that fibroblaste or muscular cells. AAV vectors appear well-suited. As early diagnosis leading to early treatment would result in lower based on preliminary results, application to the treatment of inherited morbidity and longer life expectancy. Thirteen years ago, we started a hemostasis disorders (hemophilia) or lysosomal storage disorders systematic neonatal screening program in Brittany, France, a region can be considered. Broader application of gene therapy is awaiting of 2.8 million inhabitants mostly of Celtic origin. The initial program progress in gene transfer technology. The advent of lentiviral vectors, was based on an IRT/IRT two-tier protocol (1989/1992) then we enabling transduction of non cycling cells, if proven safe, might implemented a two-tier IRT/DNA analysis pilot program. During this provide a significant boost to gene therapy. 13 years period, 454 285 IRT tests were done on children born in Brittany and 163 were diagnosed with CF. The cumulative incidence of CF was one in 2787. The number of new cases identified each PS03. Patterns of human meoitic recombination year is relatively constant (12/14). All the mutated CFTR alleles A. J. Jeffreys, K. Holloway, L. Kauppi, C. May, R. Neumann, T. but one were characterized: 41 different mutations were identified Slingsby, T. Taylor; corresponding to 48 different genotypes. During this period, 35% University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. of these one-in-four risk couples opted for prenatal diagnosis and To analyse the fine-scale distribution of meiotic recombination events Plenary Sessions 54 55 during the same period 10% of CF children were diagnosed in utero elevations in anxiety symptoms. Behavior problems declined for all due to the discovery of an hyperechogenic bowel during pregnancy. groups, and behavior competence scores remained unchanged. We evidenced in this population study the spectacular changing We conclude that most children do not suffer clinically-significant epidemiology of CF psychological distress after testing. However, because some The possibility of direct benefits resulting from neonatal screening children showed clinically-significant anxiety symptoms, long-term (with nutritional and respiratory benefits) raises the question of psychological support should be available to those families with both whether the time has arrived for routine neonatal screening for mutation-positive and -negative children, and with multiple mutation- CF. We have shown the efficiency and the feasibility of neonatal positive children. Our findings call for a multidisciplinary approach to screening for CF in Brittany based on 13 years experience. The genetic testing for children. IRT combined with mutation analysis on the same Guthrie cards can be done in any population in which most of the mutations can PS10. Carrier Testing in Childhood: Conflict or be identified. The implementation of a national neonatal screening Compromise? program for CF has been decided by the health care authorities in C. Barnes; France, the program has begun at the beginning of this year. Genetics Centre, Guy’s & St. Thomas’ Hospital Trust, London, United Kingdom. PS08. Lessons from the newborn screening programme The advantages of performing a diagnostic genetic test, with proven in Wales medical benefits, on a symptomatic child is seldom questioned. A. J. Clarke, E. Parsons, D. Bradley; Equally, there is a general consensus against testing healthy children Department of Medical Genetics, University of Wales College of for untreatable adult-onset genetic disorders. Genetic testing to Medicine, Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom. determine the “carrier” status of a healthy child with a family history The newborn screening programme in Wales has incorporated tests of a recessive or X-linked monogenic disorder or a balanced for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) since 1990 and for cystic chromosome rearrangement, however, remains controversial. There fibrosis (CF) since 1997. Initial concerns that screening for DMD are many views on this issue, and the parents’ perspective can be might lead to family disruption have not been justified, but we have very different from that of medical professionals, amongst whom learned lessons about screening for diseases where the affected opinions and practices vary. Also, the impact of carrier testing on child is not expected to benefit from early diagnosis. children themselves remains a relatively unexplored area. 1. The test must be perceived as optional by the midwife and After an overview of the relevant literature to date, the response of family. one Genetics Centre to requests for the carrier testing of minors will 2. This requires an educational initiative for the community be described and discussed. midwives. A Position Statement on the genetic testing of children was devised 3. Changes to service delivery may make more explicit the optional in consultation with laboratory colleagues. This document was character of such non-therapeutic screening tests. circulated to regional paediatricians, and supplied to other physicians 4. A protocol for handling positive screening test results must be on request. The document provides basic information about issues to developed and monitored. consider in childhood testing and a summary of current departmental 5. Careful and sustained coordination of communication between guidelines on the genetic testing of minors. The document explains the family, the primary health care team and specialist care is why requests for carrier tests in children are no longer automatically required. accepted, and strongly encourages clinicians to refer parents Newborn screening for CF also identifies unaffected carrier infants, requesting such tests for genetic counselling. An information leaflet who will not benefit from their early diagnosis – they have elevated for parents is also available. trypsin levels, one recognised CFTR mutation but normal sweat It is hoped that such proactive initiatives can increase constructive electrolytes. The recognition of these infants may be regarded as dialogue between parents and professionals, and decrease the a disadvantage of screening, but does result in staging of the ‘bad conflict that has often arisen in this area. news’ concerning affected infants. Should only those infants with two CFTR gene mutations be regarded as positive on the screening test ? PS 4. Heart and Muscle Our experiences have implications for the introduction of screening for additional disorders, such as MCAD deficiency. We have also PS11. Cardiac development and Cardiovascular found that a few infants have in the past been missed by the routine malformation newborn screening programme. Newborn screening is not just a J. Goodship, D. Henderson; laboratory process. Institute of Human Genetics, International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. PS09. Genetic Testing for Hereditary Colorectal Cancer in Understanding normal development is important to improved Children: Long-Term Psychological Effects understanding of cardiovascular malformation (CVM). Development A. M. Codori, K. L. Zawacki, G. M. Petersen, D. L. Miglioretti, J. A. of the four chambered heart from a linear tube is a complex process. Bacon, J. D. Trimbath, S. V. Booker, K. Picarello, F. M. Giardiello; I will present current thinking that takes information from older Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD. studies but incorporates newer data using molecular markers and Children who carry a gene mutation for familial adenomatous 3D reconstruction. Of particular importance is the ballooning model polyposis (FAP) need annual screening for precancerous polyps and of development of the cardiac chambers from the primary heart eventual cancer-preventing colectomy. Predictive genetic testing can tube. I will then illustrate, using three examples, how mutations in identify children who need regular screening. Testing children for genes expressed at different stages of development lead to CVM. FAP has clear medical benefits, but the psychological effects have ZIC3 is a transcription factor with a role in early development. not been well studied. We evaluated the long-term psychological Mutations in ZIC3 lead to a range of heart defects associated with effects of genetic testing in 48 children and their parents. In each laterality disturbance demonstrating the importance of early events family, one parent was a known gene mutation carrier. Before genetic that establish midline and the left right axis to normal cardiac testing, and three times afterward, participants completed measures development. NKX2.5 is a cardiac specific homeobox gene and a of psychological functioning, which, for children, included depression homologue of Drosophila tinman. Mutations in this gene have been and anxiety symptoms, and behavior problems and competencies. reported in patients with cardiac malformations and conduction Parents completed a measure of depression symptoms. Data were defects. The third example is the mechanism by which elastin collected at 3-, 12-, and 23-55 months after disclosure. 22 children mutations lead to supravalvular aortic stenosis. Progress has been tested positive; 26 children tested negative. Mean length of follow- made in identifying genes implicated in CVM occurring in syndromes up was 38 months. There were no clinically-significant changes in e.g. TBX5 in Holt Oram syndrome, TFAP2B in CHAR syndrome, mean psychological test scores in children or parents, regardless of PTPN11 in Noonan syndrome. However the vast majority of CVMs the children’s test results. However, children who tested positive and are isolated malformations. Diabetes is a known risk factor but other had a mutation-positive sibling showed significant, but subclinical, environmental factors have not yet been identified. Genetic factors increases in depression symptoms. Furthermore, several individual are implicated as the recurrence risk is substantially higher than the mutation-negative children with a positive sibling had clinical population incidence but little progress has been made in identifying 54 Symposia 55 these genes. Cardiovascular malformations occur in 7/1000 livebirths; For many years, interest has focused on the delineation of the the challenge is to identify their causes. somatic aspects of the phenotypes and their underlying pathogenetic mechanisms. However, in the last decade, researchers in this field PS12. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: more than just a paid more attention to the cognitive and behavioural features of disease of the sarcomere various genetic conditions, the so-called “behavioural phenotypes” H. Watkins; (B.P.). John Radcliffe Hospital, University Department of Cardiovascular A behavioural phenotype is “a behavioural pattern, including cognitive Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom. processes and social interaction style, that is consistently associated No abstract received. with, and specific to, a syndrome which has a chromosomal or a genetic etiology”. This approach has proven to be of practical importance for the patients both regarding an earlier syndrome PS13. Molecular Mechanisms in Myotonic Dystrophy diagnosis, as well as in the multidisciplinary management and follow- (DM1) up. In addition, the link between a specific behavioural phenotype and T. A. Cooper; a genetic defect represents an unique opportunity to gain insight in Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Houston, TX, the complex neurobiological processes underlying human behaviour. United States. In this lecture, focus lies on the clinical goals of research in B.P. , and No abstract received. this will be illustrated using the Velo-Cardio-Facial syndrome (VCFS), the Smith-Magenis syndrome and the Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). PS 5. Late Breaking Research Session and Baschirotto Lecture S02. The tortuous path from genotype to phenotype: PS14. Baschirotto Lecture: Gene discovery in cancer: genes and cognition in mutant mice who benefits? H. P. Lipp; A. de la Chapelle1,2; Institute of Anatomy, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 1Human Cancer Genetics Program, The Ohio State University, Genetically modified mice are increasingly used to analyze the Columbus, OH, United States, 2Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, relations between genes, brain and behavior. One approach Helsinki, Finland. concentrates on deleting or controlling genes of theoretical When new genes with cancer significance are discovered it is importance for memory and learning, e.g., genes encoding proteins reasonable to ask how and when the discovery can be translated for intracellular signalling pathways. The other focuses on deleting into cancer therapy and prevention. Unfortunately, the most common genes in the mouse homologous to human mutations causing mental answer is that we do not know. A more suitable question would seem retardation and cognitive impairment. Both approaches face (i) to be whether novel genes will have any impact at all on cancer problems of elucidating the causal relations between genes, brain therapy. and behavior, and (ii) the difficulties of matching cognitive processes In the academic world the great incentive that drives researchers is in mice and men. - in addition to curiosity if not passion - career aspects. Researchers (i) Phenotypic expression of mutation effects is often masked or will be credited for discoveries they make no matter whether the altered by homeostatic regulation at the intracellular level, and by discoveries are ever translated into e.g. new drugs or treatment brain plasticity and environmental effects. This will be illustrated modalities. by examples taken from the analysis of genetically modified mice In the commercial world the great incentive is money. Successful carrying different targeted mutations. discoveries directly translate into money for all: the company, its (ii) A cross-species comparison of cognition must take into account employees, scientists, and shareholders. that the associative cortex in mice is small and largely confined to How about the public, the cancer patient? The patient has more the hippocampal formation and proximally connected structures. On at stake than the researcher or the company. Luckily, whether a the other hand, hallmarks of cognition in men (e.g., general problem discovery has an impact on the clinical outcome is the ultimate solving abilities and memory), and of other mammals (e.g., spatial measure of its success. Therefore, the efforts of academic memory and learning of rats) might be of lesser importance for mice. researchers and companies can be said to ultimately focus on the This will be illustrated by a comparison of cognitive impairments in patient, and almost nothing but the patient. This is fortunate, but the laboratory and under naturalistic conditions. progress has nevertheless been dismally slow. It would appear In conclusion, the availability of mutant mouse model represents a that every time a new research area is opened, hopes of ultimate fundamental methodological progress in modeling the genotype-to- translational success are high but in reality progress is slow. The phenotype pathway characteristic for human mental retardation, but recent breakthroughs in drug development targeting genetically we must learn to understand the constraints imposed by species determined defects have instilled high hopes. Another area showing differences. Supp by SNF and NCCR “Neural Plasticity and Repair”. promise is the molecular screening for inherited susceptibility to cancer. Lives can be saved and efforts can be optimized when clinical surveillance can be focused on those at high risk while those at low S03. Fragile X Syndrome – its impact on families risk can be spared. It should not take many years before we know B. Carmichael; whether presently ongoing large investments - both academic and Genetic Nurse Specialist, Southend Hospital, Westcliff on Sea, commercial - will pay off. United Kingdom. Fragile X Syndrome is the commonest inherited cause of learning Symposia difficulty. Although X-linked, it affects both girls and boys. While learning difficulties are a consistent feature, fragile X is also S 1. Cognition and Behaviour associated with characteristic behavioural problems in many affected children. S01. The study of behavioural phenotypes : implications Having a child with a learning difficulty has an impact on any family, for practice and management as has the presence of an inherited disorder in a family. Many of the A. Swillen, J. P. Fryns; challenges faced by Fragile X families are no different from those Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, faced by other families with genetic disorders, or with learning- Leuven, Belgium. disabled children. However, there are features of fragile X which A major challenge in both clinical practice and research in the field make it unique. of mental retardation and of learning disorders is to identify the Some mothers of fragile X children are themselves affected, making underlying causes : the genetic, chromosomal and environmental parenting and behavioural management difficult. Women with factors that have an important influence on a person’s development fragile X do not always have good social skills, and this can lead to and behaviour. estrangement from their families and a lack of peer support. Social Advances in clinical genetics have lead to an increased recognition anxiety and lack of confidence can make it hard for some affected of specific syndromes. In recent years, cytogenetic and molecular females seek help for themselves or for their children. genetic tools have resulted in the identification of the underlying Finding the underlying genetic mechanism which causes the genetic defects in a large number of these disorders. condition has made possible reliable diagnosis and carrier detection. Symposia 56 57 However, more than 30 years after the first observation of the ability to cause depletion of multiple oncogenic proteins. Progress fragile site on the X chromosome, prenatal diagnosis can still be and challenges with the gene to drug approach in cancer will be problematic. reviewed, with examples from recent work. These issues will be discussed from the perspective of my work as a genetic counsellor, as an active member of the UK Fragile X Society, S 3. Neurological Disease and from my experience of living in a Fragile X family. S07. Friedriech and other recessive ataxias S 2. Cancer Genetics M. Koenig, H. Puccio, P. Bomont, M. C. Moreira, D. Simon, S. Klur, M. Gribaa, C. Lagier-Tourenne, M. Schmitt; S04. Cancer gene discovery following the Human IGBMC (CNRS-INSERM-ULP), Illkirch, Strasbourg, France. Genome Sequence With the exception of metabolic disorders, only two forms of M. Stratton; recessive ataxia were well characterised some twenty five years The Sanger Centre, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge, ago : Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) and ataxia-telangiectasia (AT). DNA United Kingdom. linkage studies allowed to identify the molecular cause of these No abstract received. frequent forms of inherited ataxia and to start to unravel the complex heterogeneity of the remaining cases. In a collaborative endeavour, S05. Molecular genetics of prostate cancer we identified the gene defective in FRDA and its product, frataxin, T. Visakorpi; a mitochondrial protein whose deficiency results in disturbances Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, Tampere, of iron homeostasis and of iron-sulfur proteins. The molecular Finland. pathogenesis of FRDA is defined by severely reduced levels, but not The molecular mechanisms underlying the development and absence, of normal frataxin as a result of the intronic trinucleotide progression of prostate cancer are inadequately understood. Over expansion mutation present in homozygous, and occasionally in the past 10 years, genetic alterations in prostate cancer have compound heterozygous, patients. We have used conditional and been identified using techniques, such as linkage analysis, loss of inducible knock-out strategies to artificially recreate this partial heterozygosity analysis (LOH), fluorescence in situ hybridization frataxin deficiency in mouse models that present with several clinical, (FISH) and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). These histological and biochemical features of the human disease, in analyses have implicated several chromosomal regions in the different combinations. Idebenone, an antioxidant proposed by P. development of prostate cancer. Linkage analyses and subsequent Rustin to protect against iron excess toxicity, showed a moderate positional cloning have now revealed two prostate cancer but significant effect on survival on the first model that we tested. We susceptibility genes, HPC1/RNASEL, and HPC2/ELAC2. However, pioneered the use homozygosity mapping for primary localisation of they seem to explain only a small fraction of the hereditary prostate autosomal recessive conditions and applied it successfully to ataxia carcinomas. The most common epigenetic event in the sporadic with isolated vitamin E deficiency (AVED), giant axonal neuropathy prostate tumors seems to be hypermethylation of GSTP1 gene (GAN), ataxias with oculomotor apraxia (AOA1 and AOA2), Refsum found already in premalignant prostate lesions. The chromosomal disease (RD) and ataxia with visual impairment and deafness (van arms that most frequently contain losses in prostate tumors are Bogaert ataxia). We subsequently identified the defective gene 6q, 8p, 10q, 13q, 16q and 18q. Except the PTEN at 10q23, the for the first three conditions and used the genetic knowledge to target genes for these deletions are not known. Although gains and clinically delineate the AOA forms. The identification of many more amplifications of chromosomal regions are rare in early prostate genes involved in recessive ataxias should shed light on general cancer, they are found in late stage, especially at 7p, 7q, 8q, 18q, and pathological mechanisms and suggest therapeutic interventions. Xq. Of these, the best characterized is amplification of Xq, found in 30% of hormone-refractory prostate carcinomas, and which affects S08. Friedreich’s Ataxia: Insights into the Mechanism and androgen receptor (AR) gene. Amplification of AR gene leading to Prospects for a Therapy its overexpression, as well as, in lesser extent, mutations in the AR P. Rustin, V. Geromel, N. Darin, A. Munnich, A. Rötig; gene, seem to play critical role in emergence of hormone-refractory INSERM U-393 - Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. prostate cancer. The most commonly gained region in prostate In 1996, mutations in the gene encoding frataxin, a mitochondrial cancer is 8q. However, the true target genes for this aberration have protein of yet unknown function, were shown to cause Friedreich’s remained unclear. ataxia, the most common hereditary ataxia with cardiomyopathy. In more than 97% of the patients, a GAA triplet expansion in the S06. From cancer genomics to new cancer therapeutics first intron of the gene results in a lack of function of frataxin, due P. Workman; to hampered transcription of the gene. Decreased frataxin was CRC Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute for Cancer subsequently found to cause a generalized mitochondrial iron-sulfur Research, Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom. protein deficiency in the heart from Friedreich’s ataxia patients. Post- Cancer drug discovery has now firmly entered the postgenome era. mortem sample analysis confirmed the functional impairment of these This is characterised by two features: 1) A focus on new therapeutic proteins in both heart and brain of the patients. The exact function targets defined by the molecular pathology of cancer; and 2) Use of frataxin remains a matter of debate, the protein being possibly of modern technologies, particularly genomics, high throughput involved in either mitochondrial iron export or storage, or in iron-sulfur screening, combinatorial chemistry, structural biology, cassette protein synthesis. Whatever the exact function of the frataxin could dosing pharmacology and molecular biomarkers, to increase success be, the disabled recruitment of early antioxidant defenses recently and accelerate the pace of drug development (see Workman P, reported in patient cell lines should participate to increased sensitivity Curr Opin Pharmacol 2 342-352 2001; Workman P, Curr Opin Invest to the oxidative insults noticed in Friedreich ataxia patients. Given Drugs 2 1180-1135 2001). the strong evidences for an increased oxidative stress, antioxidant The expectation is that such molecularly targeted, genome-based therapy appeared a reasonable therapeutic option. Patients were drugs will be more effective and less toxic than cytotoxic agents and therefore treated with idebenone, a potent antioxidant ubiquinone will be used chronically in long term disease management. A wide analogue. A preliminary study reported a spectacular improvement range of novel genome-based agents are in clinical and preclinical of the cardiomyopathy in three patients after 6 months of idebenone development and some have now received regulatory approval oral supplementation (5 mg/kg/d). These preliminary results were (see Workman P and Kaye SB, A Trends Guide to Cancer, Trends afterwards confirmed on a larger cohort of patients with a significant in Molecular Medicine, 8 (4) Suppl 2002). Herceptin (trastuzumab) decrease of heart hypertrophy measurable in about half of the is approved for treatment of ErbB2 positive breast cancer and patients after 6 months of treatment. The variable response to the Glivec (imatinib) for use in chronic myelogenous leukaemia and treatment, and its inability to counteract the ataxia so far, should gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST) as a result of its action on the prompt identification and development of new molecules possibly Bcr-Abl and mutant c-Kit tyrosine kinases that drive these diseases. targeting the induction of cells early antioxidant defenses. Iressa (ZD1839) shows activity in various cancers through inhibition of the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases. Hsp90 inhibitors, such as 17AAG, are of special interest because of their 56 Symposia 57 S09. Clinical trials for Friedreich Ataxia in adults S12. C. elegans: an animal model for high-throughput A. Dürr; functional genomics INSERM U289 et Dép.de Génétique, Cytogénétique et Embryologie, R. Baumeister; Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France. ABI/Biochemistry, Laboratory of Molecular Neurogenetics, Ludwig- No abstract received. Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. The different genome projects have resulted in an exponential S10. Functions and Biogenesis of Peroxisomes and the increase in sequence information available in the databases. At the Metabolic and Molecular Basis of Peroximal Disorders same time, the number of functionally characterized genes is only J. A. Wanders, H. R. Waterham; increasing linearly. How can we increase the speed of functional Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Laboratory genomics to make full use of the data mining? Model organisms Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Departments of Pediatrics/Emma have helped significantly to understand the roles of particular genes Children’s Hospital and Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam, Netherlands. in an organism. However, the time and effort to perform even single Peroxisomal disorders (PDs) are relative newcomers in the area of targeted gene manipulations in mouse or Drosophila melanogaster genetic diseases which now comprise over 20 different disorders with is significant, and the complexity of these organisms prevents in Zellweger syndrome as the prototype. The PDs can be subdivided many cases the detailed analyses of the KO consequences. The into 2 groups including 1. the peroxisome biogenesis disorders nematode C. elegans offers several advantages: About 60 % of the (PBDs) and 2. the single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies. In PBD human disease genes are represented by homologues in C. elegans. patients peroxisomes are strongly deficient resulting in a generalized In addition, the animals are small enough to be kept in large numbers loss of peroxisomal functions. Within the PBD group there is not only in a format that allows mass manipulations (microtiter plates) and profound clinical heterogeneity ranging from Zellweger syndrome with knock-outs of candidate genes can be obtained in a matter of 4-6 early death to infantile Refsum disease with survival into adult life but weeks. In addition, C. elegans is the only multicellular organism for also marked genetic heterogeneity with the involvement of at least which the development of each single cell and the entire connectivity 12 different genes. Most of these genes, called PEX-genes, have of its nervous system are known. At the same time, the cellular been identified allowing molecular diagnosis in virtually all patients. diversity of the C. elegans nervous system is remarkable, including Peroxisomes catalyze a range of important metabolic functions the same neurotransmitters, although the total number of neurons is including fatty acid beta-oxidation, etherphospholipid biosynthesis, only 302. We will focus on C. elegans models of genes involved in fatty acid alpha-oxidation and glyoxylate detoxification, a.o. In recent human neurodegenerative diseases, in particular on methods and years many peroxisomal disorders have been identified resulting technologies that can be automated in order to accelerate functional from single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies in each of these genomics. pathways with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy as the most frequent single peroxisomal defect. This advanced knowledge has led to the S13. Proteolysis and Alzheimer’s disease development of highly reliable methods for the post- and prenatal C. Haass; laboratory diagnosis of patients at the metabolite, enzyme and DNA- Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Adolf-Butenandt-Institute, Munich, level. Despite these many achievements much remains to be learned Germany. about the pathogenesis of peroxisomal disorders and about treatment No abstract received. strategies. S 5. Molecular karyotyping S 4. CNS function in man and model organisms S14. Molecular karyotyping and array CGH S11. The search for autism susceptibility genes P. Lichter; A. Monaco1, IMGSAC2, SLIC3; Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Abt. Organisation komplexer 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Genome, Heidelberg, Germany. Oxford, United Kingdom, 2The International Molecular Genetic Study No abstract received. of Autism Consortium (http://www.well.ox.ac.uk/~maestrin/iat.html), United Kingdom, 3The Specific Language Impairment Consortium S15. Multicolor FISH in two and three-dimensions (http://www.well.ox.ac.uk/monaco/dianne/index.shtml), United M. R. Speicher1,2, J. Kraus1,2, R. Gangnus1, C. Maierhofer1, I. Kingdom. Jentsch1, S. Langer1, G. Lederer1, C. Keri1, C. Fauth1,2; Autism is characterised by impaired social interaction and 1Institut für Humangenetik, Technische Universität München, Munich, communication, and is accompanied by repetitive and stereotyped Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, GSF Forschungszentrum für behaviours and interests. Autism has an onset in the first three years, Umwelt und Gesundheit, Neuherberg, Germany. persists throughout life, and is associated with mental handicap For our multicolor-FISH applications we are currently using seven and epilepsy although it can include milder, but related impairments different fluorochromes for probe labeling on a routine basis. DAPI in individuals of normal intelligence. From family and twin studies is used in addition for DNA-counterstaining. This multitude of there is substantial evidence that autism has a strong yet complex different fluorochromes allows a wide range of different multicolor genetic component. In order to identify autism susceptibility genes approaches for diagnostic applications and basic research. In the IMGSAC has collected approximately 250 families with more than 24-color karyotyping (multiplex-FISH/M-FISH) this increase in one child or relative affected. 83 sibling-pairs families with autism fluorochromes has several advantages including a significant were screened for linkage using a whole genome scan and areas reduction of probe complexity, facilitation of image analysis, of increased allele sharing were genotyped with 119 markers in a and most importantly improvement of resolution. We estimate further 69 sibling pair families. Four regions of linkage were identified that interchromosomal rearrangements can be diagnosed if the including chromosome 2q (MLS 3.74), 7q (MLS 3.20), 16p (MLS translocated or inserted segment has a size in the range of 230 kb to 2.93) and 17q (MLS 2.34), three of which have been replicated by 2.6 Mb. Furthermore, application of the latest software developments other groups. Candidate gene and association studies are now in has allowed to simultaneously visualize and analyze multiple small progress in order to isolate the susceptibility genes at these loci. region specific probes (BACs, PACs, YACs) in an automated fashion. On chromosome 7q31, the FOXP2 gene is mutated in a severe Thus, sophisticated probe sets can now be tailored for specific monogenic form of speech and language impairment and encodes a purposes, e.g. a high resolution screen of all subtelomeric regions transcription factor containing a polyglutamine tract and a forkhead in one hybridization.In addition, multicolor FISH is now amenable to domain. FOXP2 was tested for association and mutation in both applications in interphase-FISH. Our technology of 3D-deconvolution complex language impairments and autism. No association or coding- microscopy employs an epifluorescence microscope equipped with region variants in FOXP2 were found and the gene is therefore a motorized table to collect a stack of images at defined levels in unlikely to play a major role in autism or more common forms of z-direction. Images are processed by deconvolution to remove out- language impairment. of-focus information. Subsequently, 3D-reconstruction algorithms are applied. This approach allows the simultaneous analysis of up to 13 different region-specific-probes in lymphocyte-preparations and up to 7 different probes on thick (30 µm) tissue sections. Applications to Symposia 58 59 breast and ovarian tissue samples will be presented which revealed S19. Toward Gene Therapy of Junctional Epidermolysis an unprecedented insight into heterogeneity and organization of Bullosa (JEB) these tumors on a single cell level. M. De Luca1, E. Dellambra1, G. Pellegrini1, L. Guerra1, S. Bondanza1, F. Mavilio2; S16. Measuring gene dosage by multiplex amplifiable 1Laboratory of Tissue Engineering, Istituto Dermopatico probe hybridization dell’Immacolata, Rome, Italy, 2Institute of Biochemistry, University of J. A. L. Armour, E. J. Hollox; Modena, Modena, Italy. Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen’s Medical Cell therapy is an emerging therapeutic strategy aimed at replacing or Centre, Nottingham, United Kingdom. repairing severely damaged tissue with cultured cells. Since surface Measuring the copy number of single-copy DNA segments can be epithelia experience a continuous self-renewal process during life, the used to screen chromosomal regions for deletion or duplication. success of keratinocyte-mediated cell therapy requires cultivation and Multiplex Amplifiable Probe Hybridization (MAPH) involves a transplantation of epithelial stem cells. Under the appropriate culture combination of hybridization and PCR to measure copy number at conditions, epithelial stem cells can be cultivated and generate up to 60 loci simultaneously, using standard preparations of genomic autologous sheets suitable for transplantation. Cultured keratinocytes DNA. Short segments of DNA (100-500bp) are used as probes, so are currently used to restore severe epithelial defects. that high-resolution measurement of copy number can be made at JEB is a group of severe inherited skin diseases caused by (for example) individual exons of genes such as BRCA1. We have mutations in the genes encoding laminin 5 or other components of assembled and characterised a set of probes in which each of the the hemidesmosome. We show here full phenotypic correction of the 41 unique human subtelomeric regions is represented at least once. adhesion properties of stratified epithelium obtained from epidermal Using this probe set, copy number at all chromosome ends in one stem cells isolated from patients suffering from laminin-5-deficient individual can be screened in a single gel lane. A series of positive JEB, and transduced ex vivo with a retroviral vector expressing controls has been used to demonstrate the sensitivity of the probes, the ß3 chain of laminin-5. We also propose a non invasive surgical and 83 normal control individuals were used to assess the frequency procedure that allows transplantation of cultured epidermal sheets in of polymorphic copy number with no apparent phenotypic effect. local anesthesia. At some chromosome ends, notably XpYp, we have detected copy Thus: number polymorphisms on a scale (1-2kb) too small to detect by - the possibility of cultivating large areas of epidermis FISH. In screening for pathological rearrangements, the quantitative - the availability of surgical protocols for grafting large skin areas data produced by MAPH can be analysed statistically to test a null - the demonstration of sustained transgene expression and stable hypothesis of normal copy number, and diagnostic thresholds can be gene correction in epidermal stem cells from JEB-patients adjusted to vary the rates of false negatives and false positives. The prompt us to propose the implementation of a phase I/II clinical trial ease with which large numbers of samples can be screened suggests aimed at ex vivo gene therapy of selected JEB patients. the use of MAPH in primary screening of subtelomeric copy number, prior to definitive diagnosis by FISH. S20. Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency is associated with genetic defects in S17. Multiplex PCR of Short Fluorescent Fragments: the NF-κB pathway a simple, fast and reliable method for the detection of J. L. Casanova; heterozygous genomic rearrangements Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine des Maladies Infectieuses, T. Frebourg1,2, F. Charbonnier2, F. Casilli1, G. Raux1, P. Saugier- Faculté de Médecine Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. Veber1,2, N. Drouot2, M. Tosi1; The molecular basis of X-linked recessive anhidrotic ectodermal 1INSERM EMI 9906, Faculty of Medicine, Rouen, France, dysplasia with immunodeficiency (EDA-ID) has remained elusive 2Department of Genetics, CHU, Rouen, France. until hypomorphic NEMO mutations were found in male EDA-ID The detection of heterozygous genomic deletions and duplications patients from several kindreds and two patients with a related and is technically difficult and represents a serious limitation to the hitherto unrecognised syndrome of EDA-ID with osteopetrosis complete diagnosis of many genetic diseases. We have developed and lymphedema (OL-EDA-ID). Mutations in the coding region are Multiplex PCR of Short Fluorescent Fragments, a simple method associated with EDA-ID, and stop codon mutations with OL-EDA-ID. which is based on: (i) the simultaneous amplification of several short NEMO encodes the regulatory subunit of the IKK complex, which is genomic sequences using fluorescently labeled primers, (ii) the use essential for NF-κB signalling. Germline loss-of-function mutations in of a limited number of cycles, (iii) the superposition of the fluorescent NEMO have been shown to be lethal in male foetuses. In contrast, electropherograms and, (iv) comparison, between patients and NEMO mutations causing OL-EDA-ID and EDA-ID are milder, as controls, of the peaks representing the fluorescence of each they impair but do not abolish NF-κB signalling. EDA results from amplicon. This method has already been adapted to the following impaired NF-κB signalling through the Eda receptor. Abnormal genes: MSH2, MLH1, MSH6, C1NH, SMN, BRCA1 et RB1. It has immunity in OL-EDA-ID patients results from impaired cell responses already been included into our diagnostic routine of the HNPCC to at least Lps, IL-1ß, IL-18, TNFα and CD154. In conclusion, syndrome, of the hereditary forms of breast and ovarian cancer impaired but not abolished NF-κB signaling in humans results in two and of retinoblastoma and has improved the genetic counseling related X-linked syndromes which associate specific developmental of spinal muscular atrophy. Moreover, this method has allowed and immunological defects. Other patients with EDA-ID still lack a us to characterize precisely the boundaries of a large number of genetic cause, implying that the etiological investigation of the EDA- heterozygous deletions or duplications. This method is much more ID syndrome should provide a molecular dissection of the NF-κB sensitive and rapid than the Southern blot technique commonly used, pathway. is better suited than quantitative real time PCR to the analysis of genes containing large numbers of exons, and appears to be more S 7. Genome Organisation & Gene Expression flexible than the MAPH (Multiplex Amplifiable Probe Hybridization) method, particularly because it can be rapidly adapted to large S21. Recent Duplication and the Dynamic Mutation of the numbers of genes. Human Genome. E. E. Eichler; S 6. Skin deep: from skin disease to immunity Department of Genetics and Center for Human Genetics, Case Western Reserve School of Medicine and University Hospitals of S18. Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa: clinical and Cleveland, Cleveland, OH, United States. molecular features It has been estimated that 5% of the human genome consists of A. Hovnanian; interspersed duplicated material that has arisen over the last 30 UPR2163 Unité de physiopathologie cellulaire et moléculaire, CHU million years of evolution. Two categories of recent duplicated Purpan, Toulouse, France. segments can be distinguished: segmental duplications between No abstract received. non-homologous chromosomes (transchromosomal duplications) and duplications largely restricted to a particular chromosome (chromosome-specific duplications). A large proportion of these 58 Symposia 59 duplications exhibits an extraordinarily high degree of sequence this methylation plays a structural role in anchoring the PcG at identity at the nucleotide level (>95%) spanning large (1-100 kb) CMMs, we challenged PC binding on polytene chromosomes in genomic distances. Through processes of paralogous recombination, permeabilised salivary glands with various competitor peptides. these same regions are targets for rapid evolutionary turnover among Strikingly, only a subset of PC bound loci were competable by the the genomes of closely related primates. The dynamic nature of these H3K9 methylated peptide, suggesting that other additional histone regions in terms of recurrent chromosomal structural rearrangement modifications may mark the CMM. and their ability to generate fusion genes from juxtaposed cassettes suggests that duplicative transposition has been an important force S 8. Complex Diseases in the evolution of our genome. Cycles of segmental duplication over periods of evolutionary time may provide the underlying mechanism S24. From Crohn Disease to IBD1 for domain accretion and the increased modular complexity of the J. P. Hugot; vertebrate proteome. Further, our data suggest that a small fraction Fondation Jean Dausset, Paris, France. of important human genes may have emerged recently through No abstract received. duplication processes and will not possess definitive orthologues in the genomes of model organisms. I will discuss the organization of S25. The heritability of Type 1 Diabetes: genetic bases recent segmental duplications within the human genome and their and molecular mechanisms impact in terms of disease, gene innovation and rapid restructuring of F. Cucca; the primate genome. Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. S22. The relationship between genome organisation and The genetic analysis of a complex trait like type 1diabetes (T1D) gene expression at a human telomeric region is complicated by many factors. Aside from IDDM1, the major D. R. Higgs; disease superlocus located in the HLA region on chromosome 6p21, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom. low penetrance, compounded by small individual genetic effects A major challenge in the post-genomic era is to understand the of the other loci create severe difficulties. Interlocus and allelic relationship between genome structure and function (transcription, heterogeneity might further complicate the analysis. Some of the replication, repair and recombination). Over the past ten years it has aforementioned factors could be alleviated by concentrating on an become clear that the interaction of DNA with chromatin and the isolated and relatively homogenous population such as that from associated epigenetic modifications (DNA methylation, changes in Sardinia. This island has, together with Finland, the highest incidence replication timing, histone tail modification, nuclear sublocalisation) of T1D in the world. Children with Sardinian parents, who live in the play a major role in elaborating the information encoded in DNA. Italian mainland, where the indigenous incidence of T1D is much However, the hierarchy of these epigenetic phenomena and the order lower, have the same incidence of T1D as the Sardinian children of events in regulating nuclear processes appear complex and are living on the island, thus supporting the role of genetic factors in the largely unknown at present. high incidence of the disease. The Sardinians represent a genetic To learn more about the relationship between chromosome structure isolate in which the substantial lack of population sub-structure and function we have been characterising the most telomeric 300 reduces the risk of artifacts due to population admixture. Finally, the kb region of the short arm of human chromosome 16. This is a present time Sardinian population seems to be the result of a fixation GC-rich, Alu-dense region containing a variety of widely expressed of alleles and haplotypes, rare or absent in other European derived and tissue-specific genes, including the embryonic and adult alpha- populations, that are particularly useful for trans-ethnic analysis to like globin genes. We have extensively characterised the structure fine map the etiological variants. and epigenetic modifications of this region enabling us to define a Our results illustrate the advantages deriving from the genetic segment of the chromosome which has been maintained as a well- analysis of T1D in the Sardinian population. The relative importance defined conserved syntenic region throughout evolution. This region in the dissection of this complex trait of population specific variables appears to contain most, if not all, of the information required to as well as of the disease related factors and of the chromosome- fully regulate alpha globin gene expression in experimental assays. region specific effects will be discussed. The critical cis-acting sequences which mediate these aspects of chromosome function are being characterised and have been shown S26. Unravelling the genetics of thrombosis. to be dispersed throughout a region of at least 100 kb. J. M. Soria; Unitat d’Hemostasi i Trombosi, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, S23. Chromosomal Elements Conferring Epigenetic Barcelona, Spain. Inheritance Thrombosis is a complex disease. Multiple interactions between C. Maurange, M. Prestel, G. Rank, L. Ringrose, H. Ehret, A. Kuhrs, genetic and environmental factors contribute to the development of R. Paro; the disease. Presently, we know of six or seven genetic risk factors ZMBH, Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. for venous thrombosis, that can explain about 60% of families with In Drosophila the proteins of the Polycomb (PcG) and trithorax thrombophilia. To identify new genetic risk factors for thrombosis group (trxG) are necessary to maintain throughout development we design the GAIT project (Genetic Analysis of Idiopathic the differential expression patterns of developmental regulators Thrombosphilia). such as the homeotic genes. PcG and trxG proteins read the This project included 397 individuals from 21 Spanish families. In all activity state of their target genes, as set during the stages of of them we measured 43 quantitative phenotypes, and we genotyped determination, and “lock” the surrounding chromatin either in an a total of 500 highly informative genetic makers. The statistical active or repressed state. The control of the chromatin state is genetic analysis has been performed using a variance component occurring through the binding of PcG and trxG proteins to common model included in the software package SOLAR. cis-elements termed Cellular Memory Module (CMM). In order to Our results demonstrate the importance of genetic factors in study the mode of CMM action in more detail we have established a determining variation in hemostasis-related phenotypes. Most transgene system that allows us to switch CMMs from a repressed importantly, over 60% of the variation in susceptibility to thrombosis is to an activated state that is mitotically heritable. Results from this attributable to genetic factors. system show that transcription through a CMM is necessary for From the genome-wide scan, the first undertaken to identify regions switching the activity state, which might explain the function of containing genes influencing variation in susceptibility to thrombotic several non-coding RNAs transcribed close to genes potentially disease and its intermediate phenotypes, we demonstrated that the controlled by CMMs. In a complementing approach, we study the G20210A mutation is functional in relation to prothrombin plasma role of CMMs in determination and transdetermination processes in levels and the risk of thrombosis, and the polymorphism responsible Drosophila imaginal discs.The molecular nature of the epigenetic for the ABO blood group is functional in relation to plasma levels of mark maintaining either silencing or activation of a CMM throughout factor VIII and factor von Willebrand . development is not known. We are investigating histone modifications Moreover, our analyses revealed a strong linkage between a QTL as candidates for such a mark and indeed find a correlation between influencing FXII levels and the FXII gene (specifically the 46C/T FXII H3K9 methylation and PC protein localization. To determine whether DNA variant; LOD = 10.21). In addition, a region on chromosome 1 Concurrent Sessions 60 61 showed strong evidence of linkage with free PS levels (LOD = 4.07). subventricular zone progenitor cells, which generate neuroblasts Another interesting result suggests that multiple loci are influencing that migrate to the olfactory bulb. In response to a spinal cord injury, the normal variation in APCR, and FV DNA variants play a relatively ependymal cells lining the central canal are induced to proliferate minor role in this normal variation in APCR. These examples as part and generate migratory progeny that differentiate into astrocytes and of the current results confirm the valuable potential of this approach contribute scar formation. as a basic tool for mapping the genes of complex diseases. Recent data from our laboratory further demonstrate that these stem cells also generate neurons in unexpected regions of the brain, S 9. Towards Treatment of Neurodegenerative Disease suggesting that adult neurogenesis is even more widespread than previously thought. S27. Repairing and protecting neurones, a dual goal for Given the expanding implications of adult neurogenesis, the central cell based therapy to the brain issue of whether neurons generated in the adult mammalian brain M. Peschanski; actually participate in functional synaptic circuitry has yet to be INSERM U421/IM3, Faculté de Médecine, Créteil, France. resolved. We have used virus-based transsynaptic neuronal tracing For more than a dozen years, a major combined biological and to demonstrate that neurons generated in different regions of the clinical research endeavour has been dedicated to the set up of new adult brain integrate correctly into the existing synaptic circuitry. therapeutics based upon cell and gene therapy for neurodegenerative Furthermore, we demonstrate that neurons generated in the adult diseases. This research essentially takes into account two brain respond to a physiological stimulus and are thus functional. determinant characteristics of all these diseases, that can be Taken together, these findings may have implications for our briefly summarised as follows: 1. a neurodegenerative disease is understanding of the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders due to the loss of one or a small number of specific populations and further provide a promising foundation for the development of of neurones, allowing in some cases for focal intra-cerebral therapeutic strategies to stimulate neurogenesis in the adult brain. intervention; 2. this neuronal loss is always progressive, according however to a schedule which is quite different from one disease to Concurrent sessions another, therefore providing a potential “therapeutic time window” for protective intervention. Without a discrete knowledge of the C01. Human Dignity: In Danger of Banality? physiopathology of the diseases, and of their specific molecular and B. Knoppers; cellular mechanisms, one can envision basically two different, and Université de Montréal, Montréal, PQ, Canada. complementary therapeutic modalities for these diseases. First, one Increasingly, human dignity is relegated to the rank of a standard may consider substituting to the degenerated neurones, homologous ethical principle or human right and then used as an unexplained cells that are capable of replacing them anatomically and functionally. source of blanket prohibitions (e.g. reproductive cloning, creation This so-called “substitutive” therapeutics is essentially based, at this of embryos for research, germ line therapy ….). Once considered moment, upon the use of neural cells obtained from human foetuses the source of other human rights and outside the range of any following elective abortions. Second, proteins have been identified normative hierarchy, the commonplace political and legislative use of that are able to protect neurones against various experimental the concept of human dignity in the context of human genetics risks aggressions in animals and are, therefore, good candidates to rescue turning it into a banality. Drawing on the origins of the concept and neurones affected, though not yet degenerated, during disease tracing its legal and ethical interpretations and use since the 1948 progression. This so-called “conservative” therapeutics is essentially Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we will criticize this trend attempted, at this moment, by cell or viral based transfer of a gene of and offer a different perspective that ensures its fundamental and interest into the brain. I will present data on Huntington’s disease. overarching nature. S28. Dysfunction of wild-type huntingtin in Huntington’s C02. Prenatal diagnosis (PND) in adult-onset disorders: Disease survey of cases and attitudes in Portugal. E. Cattaneo; J. Sequeiros1,2, J. Rocha1,3, J. Pinto-Basto1, J. Leal Loureiro1,4, T. Department of Pharmacological Sciences and Center of Excellence Coelho1,5, A. Lopes1,6; on Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Milano, Milan, Italy. 1UnIGENe-IBMC, Univ. Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS - Univ. Porto, Porto, Huntingtin is a cytoskeletal protein which is important for neuronal Portugal, 3C.Gen.Clín., Porto, Portugal, 4Hosp.S.Teotónio, Viseu, survival and activity. Attention onto this protein stems from the Portugal, 5H.G.S.António, Porto, Portugal, 6H.M.Lemos, Porto, knowledge that an expansion in the variable CAG tract in the Portugal. encoding gene causes Huntington’s Disease (HD), an inherited, Prenatal diagnosis in adult-onset diseases may be controversial due fatal,autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder characterized to several decades of a (physically) healthy life. We surveyed all by selective loss of the striatal neurons (HDCRG, Cell, 1993). 33 national centres offering PND, for number of requests and their Evidence indicate that HD occurs through a gained toxicity of attitudes regarding termination of pregnancy (TOP): 26 (79%) replied. mutant huntingtin. More recently, the possibility that loss of normal 50 cases were ascertained (including 34 for FAP-TTRMet30, 3 huntingtin function may contribute to HD has gained considerable HD, 3 MJD, 3 SCA2, 1 DRPLA, 3 DM). 29 amniocenteses were attention (Rigamonti, J. Neuroscience 2000; Cattaneo, Trends in performed. Several were simultaneous requests for pre-symptomatic Neuroscience, 2001). We indeed report that normal (but not mutant) testing (PST), a very difficult situation, given time constraints and the huntingtin is able to increase the transcription of Brain Derived potential for three distressful situations (PST, PND, TOP). Pregnancy Neurotrophic Factor in cortex, which is then delivered to striatum via was not terminated despite a ‘carrier’ result at least in 4 cases. the cortico-striatal afferents and thereby acting, within striatum, as a Concerning attitudes of the ‘Commisions for TOP’, 9 answers were survival factor (Zuccato, Science, 2001). Loss of this activity occurs “unanimous”, 10 “by majority” and 5 were only the director’s; only in HD due to huntingtin’s mutation leading to striatal vulnerability. 1/3 had a medical geneticist; 7 found the current law satisfactory, Strategies aimed at restoring normal huntingtin activities in HD may but 15 did not; 13 interpreted it as permiting TOP, while 9 did not therefore be beneficial. (although 5 of these would practice it!). Only 5 centres would not accept TOP for any adult-onset disease, 19 centres would perform S29. Stem cells and functional neurogenesis in the adult TOP for all diseases, 1 for all but FAP (liver transplant is now a ‘therapeutical’ option); 14 centres would not accept for PND if couple brain not considering TOP, but 10 would. R. M. Cassidy; The non-termination of a carrier foetus will result in a pre- Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, symptomatic test for the unborn child (precluded by ethical Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. and/or legal reasons). PND in adult-onset diseases needs tactful Over the past decade it has become clear that stem cells in the adult counselling, special sensibility and intensive psychosocial evaluation mammalian brain continuously generate new neurons, predominantly and support. We propose a specific protocol of consults and in the hippocampus and olfactory bulb. Data generated in our evaluations. Current law may need redefinition. laboratory demonstrate that ependymal cells lining the ventricular system of the brain and spinal cord function as neural stem cells in the adult CNS. Ependymal cells divide rarely to give rise to 60 Concurrent Sessions 61 C03. External quality assessment in genetic testing C05. A real time quantitative PCR test for trisomy 21 reveals patterns of errors B. Zimmermann1, W. Holzgreve1, F. Wenzel2, S. Hahn1; S. Patton1, R. Elles1, D. Barton2, E. Dequeker3, C. Mueller4, M. 1University Women’s Hospital, Basel, Switzerland, 2University of Losekoot5, B. Bakker5, B. Rautenstrauss6, M. Simoni7, V. Biancalana8, Basel, Basel, Switzerland. P. Vogt9, M. Voelckel10, D. Lohmann11; A significant proportion of clinical genetics is involved with the 1European Molecular Genetics Quality Network, Manchester, United analysis of gross chromosomal anomalies. In prenatal diagnosis a Kingdom, 2National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, major concern are aneuploidies, of which Down’s syndrome is the 3University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4University of Wuerzburg, most important in live births. The detection of these gross changes Wuerzburg, Germany, 5Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, is still time consuming despite modern technologies such as FISH or Netherlands, 6Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, quantitative fluorescent PCR. 7Institute of Reproductive Medicine of the University, Münster, For this purpose we have developed a novel alternative using Germany, 8University Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France, 9University real time quantitative PCR using genetic loci in the Down’s region of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 10Hôpital d’enfants de la of chromosome 21 and a control locus on chromosome 12. This Timone, Marseille, France, 11University of Essen, Essen, Germany. locus was chosen in such a manner that it should also detect cases Genetic testing for inherited disorders is now a routine part of of Down’s syndrome resulting from unbalanced Robertsonian laboratory medicine. Studies of the reliability of such testing translocations. have indicated significant levels of inaccuracy in laboratory The assessment of the ratio of these two loci by multiplex real time reports, arising from errors in sample identification, genotyping or PCR has shown that this technique can be used for the reliable and interpretation. These errors can have significant consequences rapid distinction of trisomy 21 from karyotypically normal tissue (refer for prenatal diagnosis and carrier testing for example. External to Figure 1). We have now extended this test to detect trisomy 18, Quality Assessment (EQA), or Proficiency testing, is one approach and it can be readily extended to examine the most common other to quantifying these errors and can be used to raise the standards fetal aneuploidies (13, 16, X and Y) or instances of chromosomal loss of output from laboratories. The European Molecular Genetics or gain. Furthermore, since it permits the rapid automatic analysis of Quality Network (EMQN) runs EQA schemes for ten different genetic numerous samples it is very well suited for high-throughput diagnostic disorders. Each scheme is designed to test the ability of laboratories settings. to interpret data in the light of clinical information supplied with a referral, and to produce a clear and accurate report. Laboratories C06. A telomere depletion assay for non-invasive prenatal from all the European Union countries have participated in these diagnosis exercises. In 2001, the schemes evaluated 315 returns from M. A. Hulten, S. Dhanjal; laboratories, a 33% increase on 2000. Error rates (no. of diagnostic Warwick University, Coventry, United Kingdom. errors/no. of cases analysed) varied between 0.7% and 7.6%. The Many different and increasingly sophisticated (and time consuming) causes of errors include incorrect genotyping, sample swaps and technologies have been applied in order to separate foetal cells from incorrect interpretation of technically correct results. Examples of maternal, but to date none of these have achieved the ultimate goal results and errors will be presented. The errors identified indicate a of obtaining a pure sample of all types of cells of foetal origin. We clear need for EQA to measure current standards of proficiency and describe a novel approach for identification of foetal cells in maternal encourage laboratories to raise their technical performance. blood samples using an in vitro telomere depletion assay (TDA). We present the principle for this new assay together with preliminary C04. Mendelian Cytogenetics Network database experimentation substantiating its practicability and future potential. (MCNdb): New improved version. Maternal blood samples (10-20 ml) are collected in EDTA tubes. K. R. Rasmussen1, C. Lundsteen2, H. Ropers3, N. Tommerup1; Foetal cells are firstly enriched using a Triple Density Gradient 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, and then fixed in 3:1 methanol:acetic acid. The cells are spread Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, on clean glass slides and aged on a hot plate (40-50°C) for 2 h. 2Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, Enzymatic digestion of telomeric DNA sequences is carried out in 3Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. situ, by application of 2-3 units of BAL 31 enzyme (New England Bio Mendelian Cytogenetics Network (MCN) is a global collaboration Labs) in 50µl buffer at 37°C for 10 mins. The enzymatic reaction is involving >300 cytogenetic laboratories, aimed at the systematic stopped by washing in 2xSSC at room temperature; the slides are collection of data and material from disease-associated balanced then dehydrated through an ethanol series and air dried. Telomeres chromosomal rearrangements (DBCRs). A five year grant from the are identified by FISH with a pantelomeric DNA probe. Foetal and Danish National Research Foundation establishing the Wilhelm adult cell nuclei are differentiated by their respective telomere Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research at the University fluorescence: foetal nuclei are expected to be brightly fluorescing of Copenhagen has ensured continued and extended support of while adult nuclei should contain little or no telomere fluorescence. MCN for 2001-2006. This will include improved facilities for assisted Foetal sex, identified by subsequent FISH using the Y probe, was help with retrieval of DBCRs from cytogenetic archives, improved congruent in an initial series of 12 pregnancies. mapping facilities in collaboration with the Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin (MPI) and systematic high resolution C 2. Complex diseases comparative genome hybridization (CGH) of DBCR-cases within MCN. The online version of the associated database MCNdb (http: //mcndb.imbg.ku.dk) at the University of Copenhagen has been C07. Mutations of the RET / GDNF / HASH1 signalling developed into a working tool for the participating laboratories: pathway in congenital central hypoventilation syndrome New DBCRs can be submitted online. We have improved the query (CCHS, Ondine’s curse) interface, where clinical information and breakpoint data on more L. de Pontual1, V. Nepote2, T. Attié-Bitach1, H. Trang2, M. Simonneau2, than 2100 published and unpublished DBCRs can be queried and M. Vekemans1, A. Munnich1, C. Gaultier2, S. Lyonnet1, J. Amiel1; displayed together with relevant information drawn from the OMIM 1Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 2R. Debré Hospital, morbid map, data on cytogenetic microdeletions/duplications and Paris, France. the murine phenotypic map, thus improving the chance to identify CCHS is a hitherto unexplained congenital disorder of the metabolic relevant DBCRs. YAC clones can be selected and ordered from MPI control of breathing. Hirschsprung disease is associated with (http://www.molgen.mpg.de/~abt_rop/neurogenetics/chromosome_ CCHS in 25% of the cases (Haddad syndrome, HS, MIM 209880), rearrangements.html) for FISH mapping of specific breakpoints, and suggesting a common defect of neural crest derived cells. The RET, the breakpoints of DBCRs are linked to the human genome map by GDNF and HASH1 genes were regarded as candidate genes in a direct interface between MCNdb and the UCSC Human Genome CCHS due to: i) their role in early neuronal differentiation, ii) the Browser (http://genome.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hgTracks.html), phenotype of homozygous knock-out mice, and iii) their expression in enabling rapid identification of sequenced BAC clones for planning the central and peripheral nervous systems of mouse embryo. of FISH mapping and for direct visualization of candidate genes for Thirty patients were screened for RET, GDNF and HASH1 genes specific phenotypes and diseases. mutations by SSCP and direct DNA sequencing (23 CCHS and 7 HS cases). We identified a heterozygous nucleotidic variation of one Concurrent Sessions 62 63 of the 3 tested genes in 6/30 patients: i) a P1039L mutation of the N. M. Gough8, T. J. Kilpatrick1, T. P. Speed1, S. J. Foote1; RET gene (HS case), ii) a recurrent GDNF gene mutation of the in 1The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, 2 CCHS patients (R93W), and, iii) 2 heterozygous polyalanine tract Australia, 2The Cooperative Research Centre for the Discovery contractions of 5/13 and 8/13 codons as well as a de novo P18T of Genes for Common Human Diseases, Melbourne, Australia, missense mutation of the HASH1 gene in 2 CCHS and 1 HS cases. 3Menzies Centre for Population Health Research, Hobart, Australia, These DNA variations were not found in 180 control chromosomes 4Australian National Register of MS families, Canberra, Australia, and concern amino acids conserved in mammalians. Although 5The Victorian Transplantation and Immunogenetics service, polyalanine expansions are well documented in human, contractions Melbourne, Australia, 6The Royal Hobart Hospital, Hobart, Australia, have not been hitherto reported. In vitro studies will investigate the 7Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 8The putative role of these mutations on HASH1 function. Finally, these Cooperative Research Centre for Discovery of Genes for Common findings support the view of the involvement of genes participating Human Diseases, Melbourne, Australia. to the HASH1 / RET / GDNF signalling pathway and an oligogenic Association of the HLA class II haplotype, DRB1*1501-DQB1*0602, inheritance of CCHS. is the most consistently replicated finding of multiple sclerosis (MS) genetic studies. However, the high level of linkage disequilibrium C08. A rare RET haplotype acts as risk-modifier allele in (LD) in the HLA region has hindered the identification of other loci Hirschsprung disease. that single marker tests for association are unlikely to resolve. In P. Griseri1, B. Pesce1, G. Patrone1, F. Puppo1, M. Sancandi1, J. order to address this issue we generated haplotypes spanning 11-12 Osinga2, R. Hofstra2, M. Devoto3, R. Ravazzolo1, I. Ceccherini1; megabases (~5cM) across the entire HLA region. The haplotypes, 1Ist. G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2Dep. Medical genetics, Groningen, inferred by also genotyping relatives of 152 MS cases and 105 Netherlands, 3Dip. Oncologia, Biologia e genetica, Genova, Italy. controls of Tasmanian ancestry, define a genomic segment from Hirschsprung disease, a common genetic disorder characterized D6S276 to D6S291 including 13 microsatellite markers integrated by intestinal obstruction secondary to enteric aganglionosis, with allele typing data for DRB1 and DQB1. Association to the demonstrates a complex pattern of inheritance, with the RET proto- DRB1*1501-DQB1*0602 haplotype was replicated. In addition, we oncogene as a major gene and several different susceptibility found that the class I/extended class I region, defined by a genomic loci, related to Ret-signaling pathway or other neural-crest cells segment of ~350 kb between MOGCA and D6S265, harbours genes developmental programs. To test whether HSCR phenotype could that independently increase risk and provide protection from MS. result by additive effect of multiple genetic defects, we investigated Log linear modelling analysis of constituent-haplotypes representing the role of a polymorphic RET variant, 2508C>T, in exon 14 of the genomic regions containing class I (MOGCA-D6S265), class III gene, characterized by low frequency among HSCR patients and (TNFa-TNFd-D6S273) and class II (DRB1-DQB1) genes indicated over-representation in individuals affected by sporadic medullary that having class I and class II susceptibility variants on the same thyroid carcinoma. Typing several different loci across the RET gene, haplotype provides an additive effect on risk. Moreover, we found we were able to determine that not the single SNP variant, but a no evidence for a disease locus in the class III region. We propose whole conserved haplotype displays anomalous distribution and non- that the types of statistical approaches outlined here for the analysis random segregation in HSCR families. We provide genetic evidences of haplotypes will assist in defining the HLA’s contribution to MS. about a low-penetrant protective role of this haplotype in HSCR More broadly, these methods provide the basis for gene localisation pathogenesis and demonstrate a possible functional effect linked to through the dissection of haplotypes associated with other RET mRNA expression. phenotypes. C09. Meta-analysis of Celiac Disease genome screens C11. Genetic epidemiology of carotid artery thickness in M. C. Babron1, F. Clerget-Darpoux2, H. Ascher3, P. Ciclitira4, J. type 2 diabetes families of the Diabetes Heart Study Partanen5, L. M. Sollid6, L. Greco7; D. W. Bowden, C. D. Langefeld, L. A. Lange, L. E. Wagenknecht, J. 1INSERM U535, Le Kremlin Bicetre, France, 2INSERM U535, Le J. Carr, B. I. Freedman, S. S. Rich; Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 3Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC. 4St Thomas’ Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5Finnish Red Cross Carotid artery intimal medial thickness (IMT) is a strong predictor Blood Transfusion Service, Helsinki, Finland, 6University of Oslo, of subsequent cardiovascular morbidity. The role of genetic factors Oslo, Norway, 7University Federico II, Napoli, Italy. in thickening of the carotid wall remains largely unknown. We Identification of genetic risk factors for multifactorial disease such as hypothesize that in families with multiple members having diabetes, celiac disease (CD), is often carried out through systematic linkage carotid IMT is influenced by both inherited and environmental factors. analysis on the whole genome. Each study highlights regions of Familial aggregation of carotid IMT in the presence of type 2 diabetes interest, which nevertheless rarely achieve the genome-wide level of was studied in 252 individuals with type 2 diabetes from 122 families significance. However, some studies tend to pinpoint the same broad enrolled in the Diabetes Heart Study. Common carotid artery IMT area of the genome. was measured by high-resolution B-mode ultrasonography. Other A meta-analysis method GSMA (Wise et al, 1999) was proposed to measured factors included lipid levels, body mass index, fasting globally interpret full genome scan results. It has then been extended glucose, hemoglobin A1c, albumin-creatinine ratio, and self-reported to take into account replication studies on more restricted genome medical history. Heritability estimates were obtained using the regions (Wise, 2001). Briefly, this method is based on the sum of the variance component approach implemented in the software SOLAR. ranks of the linkage statistics obtained for a set of chromosome bins. Tests of association between carotid IMT and these variables were Four genome scans has been carried out by the partners of the performed using mixed model analysis that accounts for familial European Cluster on CD, using the same statistic. Each partner also correlation. The sample was 89% Caucasian (11% African American), carried out replication studies on additional sample of families. 59% female and had a mean±SD for age and duration of diabetes of GSMA was first applied to the genome scans only. Apart from the 60.6±10.4 and 11.2±7.9, respectively. In a multivariate model, carotid well-known risk factor in the HLA region on 6q, regions 2q, 5q, 11q IMT was positively associated with age (p=0.001), male gender and 14q were significant at the 5% level. Region 5q was pinpointed (p=0.001), African American ethnicity (p=0.020), smoking (p=0.001), in 3 out of the 4 scans, 11q in 2 out of the 4. Region 2q contains the hypertension (p=0.040), and total cholesterol (p=0.019). Adjusting CTLA4/CD28 cluster whose role in CD has been suggested by other for age, gender and ethnicity, we estimated the heritability (h2±SE) studies. Accounting for the different replication studies carried out by for carotid IMT to be 0.32±0.17 (P=0.030). Further adjusting for total the European partners, strengthens the evidence for region 5q. cholesterol, hypertension status and current smoking status yielded This study was funded by the Commission of the European an estimate of 0.41±0.16 (P = 0.005). These data provide empirical Communities (QLRT-1999-00037). evidence that sub-clinical cardiovascular disease has a significant genetic component. C10. Genetic Dissection of the HLA Region using Haplotypes of Tasmanians with Multiple Sclerosis J. P. Rubio1,2, M. Bahlo1,2, H. Butzkueven1, I. A. F. van der Mei3,2, M. M. Sale3,2, J. L. Dickinson3, P. Groom3,2, L. J. Johnson1,2, R. D. Simmons4, B. Tait5, M. Varney5, B. Taylor6, T. Dwyer3, R. Williamson7, 62 Concurrent Sessions 63 C12. Comparison of strategies to detect the role of a XLMR consortium was established. We collected approximately 200 candidate gene well-characterized XLMR families, in which the mental retardation A. Jannot1,2, L. Essioux2, M. G. Reese2, F. Clerget-Darpoux1; occurs as a trait compatible with X-linked inheritance. We exchanged 1Unité INSERM 535, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 2ValiGen, La DNA and cell lines of families that have been localized to the X Défense, France. chromosome with significant lod scores of 2 or more, smaller families To detect the effect of a candidate gene in a multifactorial trait, one with a lod score less than 2, and pairs of 3 or 2 affected male family acknowledged strategy is to genotype all its known intragenic SNPs members. In addition, mentally retarded patients with X-chromosomal and to test the association between each SNP separately and the rearrangements have been collected and analyzed in order to identify trait. One difficulty is that the model underlying the association of the novel candidate genes for MRX. An overview of the collected families, gene to the trait can be more complex and involve a combination as well as linkage data and mutation analysis in 7 of the MRX genes of intragenic SNPs. The effect of a gene might not be detected (GDI1, OPHN1, PAK3, IL1RAPL1, TM4SF2, ARHGEF6, MECP2) will if each SNP has only small marginal effect on the trait. A second be reported. The patient collection of the European XLMR consortium possible strategy is to test the association of the trait with the will be a valuable resource for the identification of novel MRX genesin combination formed by the whole set of SNPs. Because only some the postgenome era. Extended collaborative efforts will be required to of the genotyped SNPs belongs to the functional combination, the handle the massive testing of candidate genes information used for this test is diluted. To overcome this drawback, a third strategy is to test the association with all the possible C15. Mutations of the human ortholog of Aristaless cause combinations of variable numbers of SNPs. When the functional X-linked mental retardation and epilepsy. combination is tested, the information is not diluted. The gain of P. Stromme1, M. E. Mangelsdorf1,2, M. A. Shaw1, K. M. Lower1,2, S. M. power by using this strategy is balanced by the correction for multiple S. Lewis3, H. Bruyere3, V. Lutcherath4, A. K. Gedeon1, R. H. Wallace1, testing. Herein, we performed simulation studies based on genotypic I. E. Scheffer5, G. Turner6, M. Partington6, S. Frints7, J. Fryns7, G. R. data taken from three genes to compare these three strategies. Sutherland1,2, J. C. Mulley1,2, J. Gecz1,2; Different models of correspondence between a quantitative trait and 1Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, Australia, 2University of the genotype were considered. We found that the strategy that gives Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 3Children’s and Women’s Health Center the best power is very model-dependent. of British Columbia and the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4Central Hospital of Rogaland, Stavanger, Norway, C 3. Molecular Genetics of Mental Retardation 1 5Monash Medical Centre and Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 6Hunter Genetics and University of Newcastle, Waratah, C13. Neuronal intranuclear inclusions in a new cerebellar Australia, 7University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. tremor/ataxia syndrome among fragile X carriers Mental retardation and epilepsy are common, often debilitating P. J. Hagerman1, C. M. Greco1, F. Tassone1, A. Chudley2, M. R. Del conditions of the human brain. Frequently associated, epilepsy and Bigio2, S. Jacquemont1, M. Leehey3, R. J. Hagerman1; mental retardation are heterogeneous conditions. Where causes are 1University of California, Davis, School of Medicine, Davis, CA, primarily genetic, major advances have been made in the unravelling 2University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada, 3University of of their molecular basis. The human X-chromosome alone is Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO. estimated to harbour more than 100 genes in which mutations cause Fragile X syndrome is generally regarded as a non-progressive mental retardation. At least eight autosomal genes for idiopathic neurodevelopmental disorder in which premutation carriers (~55 to epilepsy have been identified, and many more for conditions where 200 CGG repeats; FMR1 gene) are largely unaffected. However, epilepsy is a feature. We have identified mutations in a novel human neurological findings of progressive action tremor, ataxia, cognitive X-chromosome linked, Aristaless related homeobox gene (ARX), in decline, and generalized brain atrophy have recently been described nine X-linked families with mental retardation and epilepsy. Among in some adult males with premutation alleles. Neurohistological these were 4 families with X-linked infantile spasms syndrome (ISSX studies on the brains of four adult male carriers (range: 70-135 CGG or West syndrome; MIM 308350), 2 families with Partington syndrome repeats) who had the neurological findings reveal ubiquitin-positive, (PRTS; MIM 309510, and S. Frints, unpublished), one family with intranuclear inclusions in both neuronal and astrocytic cells, with X-Linked Myoclonic Epilepsy with Spasticity and Intellectual Disability highest frequencies (~40% of neuronal nuclei) in the hippocampus. (XMESID; I. Scheffer, unpublished), one MRX family (M. Partington, Intranuclear inclusions were absent from Purkinje cells, although unpublished), and one family with syndromic XLMR (M. Partington, inclusions were present in a small number of neurons in the dentate unpublished). Two recurrent mutations found in seven families, result nucleus and diffusely in cerebellar astrocytes. The presence of in expansion of polyalanine tracts of the ARX protein. Such mutations intranuclear inclusions in all brains examined to date is strongly are likely to cause protein aggregation similar to other polyalanine supportive of association with the premutation alleles. Results from and polyglutamine disorders. Additionally, a missense mutation within additional brains, including a carrier female with no neurological the ARX homeodomain and a truncation mutation were identified. findings, will be presented. The mechanistic basis for the inclusions The ARX gene has emerged as yet another major contributor to X- is not known. FMRP (lymphocyte) levels are generally near normal chromosome linked mental retardation, similar to genes like FMR1, in the mid-premutation range, although FMR1 mRNA levels are FMR2, ATRX, or MECP2. elevated by 2 to 5-fold in this range. The absence of an abnormal protein product in fragile X carriers suggests that the ubiquitin- C16. ARX, a novel prd-class-homeobox gene highly positive inclusions may reflect a general cellular (neuronal) response expressed in the telencephalon, is mutated in X-linked in which the cell’s protein-degradative capacity is exceeded as a mental deficiency consequence of altered gene regulation. The intranuclear inclusions T. Bienvenu, K. Poirier, L. Ben Jeema, V. Desportes, C. Moraine, H. observed with the CAG (polyglutamine) repeat disorders (e.g., van Bokhoven, V. Kalscheuer, S. Frinyts, J. Gecz, H. Chaabouni, J. P. Huntington’s, the SCAs) may reflect a similar (general) mechanism. Fryns, C. Beldjord, J. Chelly; These models will be discussed. Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiopathologie des Retards Mentaux. Institut Cochin. CHU Cochin, Paris, France. C14. The European XLMR consortium: goals, Investigation of a critical region in Xp22.1 involved in a non- achievements and future prospects specific X-linked mental retardation family (MRX54) enabled us B. C. J. Hamel; to demonstrate that the disease-related gene encodes a novel University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. homeobox protein, Aristeless (ARX). Further screening detected de Up to now, molecular studies have identified 7 genes that are novo and inherited mutations in eleven families affected with non specifically mutated in MRX families: FMR2, OPHN1, PAK3, specific MR, Only missense mutations and in frame duplication/ IL1RAPL1, TM4SF2, and ARHGEF6. Furthermore, in 2 MRXS insertion leading to expansion of polyamine tracts of the ARX genes mutations have been found in families with MRX: RSK2 and protein were identified. DNA binding assay showed that ARX binds MECP2. On average, each MRX gene is mutated in approximately to palindromic sites containing two core TAAT homeodomain sites. 1% of patients tested. The high heterogeneity in MRX makes it In contrast to the other genes involved in XMR, ARX expression is necessary to screen more than 100 probands per candidate gene. specific to the telencephalon and ventral thalamus, and completely In order to have access to such a large patient panel, the European lacking in cerebellum. The absence of detectable brain malformation Concurrent Sessions 64 65 in MR patients suggest that ARX has a specialized role in function. Furthermore, all three of these errors in creatine metabolism physiological processes underlying cognitive development. can be detected early and may be amenable to treatment. C17. Identification of a new MRX gene C19. Mutation In Neurotrypsin is Responsible For I. Meloni1, M. Muscettola1, M. Raynaud2, I. Longo1, M. Bruttini1, M. Autosomal Recessive Non-specific Mental Retardation Moizard2, M. Gomot2, J. Chelly3, V. des Portes3, J. Fryns4, H. Ropers5, F. Molinari, M. Rio, A. Munnich, L. Colleaux; B. Magi6, C. Bellan7, N. Volpi8, H. G. Yntema9, S. E. Lewis10, J. E. INSERM U393, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. Schaffer10, A. Renieri1; Mental retardation (MR) is the most common developmental 1University of Siena, Dept. of Molecular Biology, Medical Genetics, disability, affecting largely 2% of the general population. The causes Siena, Italy, 2Service de Génétique, Inserm U316, Tours cédex, of MR are diverse, but an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance France, 3Inserm U129-ICGM, CHU Cochen, Paris, France, may account for a significant proportion of mentally retarded 4University of Leuven, Genetics Department, Leuven, Belgium, individuals. The extreme genetic heterogeneity of idiopathic MR 5Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, and the unavailability of large family pedigrees of nonsyndromic 6University of Siena, Department Molecular Biology, Biochemistry, autosomal recessive MR has limited the use of genetic linkage to Siena, Italy, 7University of Siena, Pathology, Siena, Italy, 8University identify the disease causing genes. While a large number of X-linked of Siena, Department Biomedical Science, Siena, Italy, 9Department mental retardation genes have been found, none of the numerous of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 10Washington genes involved in autosomal recessive MR have been hitherto University, Departments of Internal Medicine, Molecular Biology & identified. Here we report the identification of the first gene involved in Pharmacology, St. Louis, MO. autosomal recessive isolated MR using homozygosity mapping in an X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is an inherited condition in inbred family. Genome-wide search provided evidence for linkage to which the failure to develop cognitive abilities is due to mutations a region of 13 Mb on chromosome 4q24 between markers D4S1564 in one gene on the X chromosome. In the last XLMR update up and D4S402. This interval encompasses the gene PRSS12 (also to 136 conditions leading to “syndromic” or “specific” MR (MRXS) known as BSSP-3) encoding a brain-specific serine protease named and 66 entries leading to “nonspecific” MR (MRX) are listed. For 9 neurotrypsin. We identified a 4 base-pair deletion (del ACGT1391- of the 66 MRX entries the causative gene has been identified. The 1394) within the coding sequence that segregates with the disease. recent discovery of the contiguous gene deletion syndrome ATS-MR, This mutation is likely a null allele as it is predicted to result in a characterized by Alport syndrome and mental retardation, pointed shortened protein lacking the catalytic domain. at Xq22.3 as a region containing one mental retardation gene. Our results provide the first evidence for an association between Comparison of the deletion extent between ATS-MR patients and cognitive impairment and a defect in proteolytic activity of brain serine patients with ATS alone allowed us to define a mental retardation protease. critical region of about 380 kb containing four genes. We report here the identification of two point mutations, one missense and one C 4. Cytogenetics splice site change, in the FACL4 gene in two families with nonspecific mental retardation. Analysis of enzymatic activity on lymphoblastoid C20. Prospective screening for cytogenetic anomalies, cell lines from both patients demonstrated a marked reduction in including subtelomeric rearrangements, in children with activity compared to normal cells, demonstrating that both mutations mental retardation of unknown etiology: The Amsterdam are null mutations. All carrier females with either FACL4 point experience mutations or genomic deletions showed a completely skewed X- C. D. M. van Karnebeek, C. Koevoets, R. C. M. Hennekam, J. M. N. inactivation, suggesting a role of the gene in survival advantage. Hoovers; FACL4 is the tenth gene mutated in MRX and the first involving a Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, fatty acid metabolic pathway. Amsterdam, Netherlands. The frequency of subtelomeric rearrangements in individuals with C18. Mutations in the Creatine Transporter Gene unexplained mental retardation (MR) is uncertain, as most studies (SLC6A8) in Xq28 Cause X-Linked Mental Retardation: have been retrospective and case retrieval often biased towards The Important Role of Creatine Metabolism in Brain cases more likely to have a chromosome anomaly. After a pilot Function study in a group of cases selected on the basis of suspicion for a C. E. Schwartz1, K. A. Hahn1, G. S. Salomons2, D. Tackels-Horne1, T. chromosome anomaly, to study the applicability of the technique C. Wood1, H. A. Taylor1, R. J. Schroer1, H. A. Lubs3, C. Jakobs2, R. L. (subtelomeric rearrangement in 5/30[16.7%]), a prospective study Olson1, K. R. Holden1, R. E. Stevenson1; was performed in a consecutive cohort of cases with unexplained 1Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, 2VU University Medical MR in an academic tertiairy center. Inclusion criteria: age<18 yrs Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3University of Miami School of at referral; IQ<;80; no etiologic diagnosis after complete work- Medicine, Miami, FL. up. In 266 karyotyped children, anomalies were detected in An X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) family with severe mental 22(8.3%;7 numerical,15 structural); of 39 cases analyzed by FISH retardation, speech and behavioral abnormalities and seizures in for specific interstitial microdeletions, anomalies were found in 8. affected males has been found to have a G1141C mutation in the FISH analyses for subtelomeric microdeletions were performed in creatine transporter gene SLC6A8 (GenBank NM_005629). This 184 children (44% moderate-profound MR;51% familial MR), and mutation results in a glycine being replaced by an arginine (G381R) 1(0.5%) rearrangement was identified in a non-familial MR female and alternative splicing since the G→C transversion occurs at the with mild MR (de novo deletion 12qter). The number of probable -1 position of the 5’ splice junction of intron 7. Two female relatives polymorphisms(n=11;6%) was considerable.A higher total number of who are heterozygous for the SLC6A8 mutation also exhibit mild malformations and minor anomalies were present in the cytogenetic mental retardation with behavior and learning problems. Males with anomaly group(n=29) versus the group without anomalies(n=183)( the mutation have highly elevated creatine in their urine and creatine p<0.05).We conclude that the frequency of cytogenetic anomalies uptake by fibroblasts from affected males was impaired reflecting the in this prospective tertiary center study was high(1 in 10). However, deficiency in creatine transport. the frequency of subtelomeric rearrangements was low. Possible Based on an observed 30% excess of males in the MR population, explanations are provided. Previously proposed selection criteria XLMR should result in a frequency of 15% of all cases of MR. for efficient subtelomeric screening were not effective in our cohort. However, many surveys report less than 5% of cases resulting from The low yield, heavy workload, and high costs of presently available XLMR. Numerous factors may be responsible for this discrepancy, screening techniques mandates development and application of new a major one being few XLMR entities have an associated metabolic techniques such as micro-arrays. abnormality, which might bring them to attention. The ability to measure elevated creatine in urine or serum makes it possible to C21. Screening Cryptic Telomeric Rearrangements In screen for SLC6A8 deficiency in males with MR of unknown etiology. Children With Idiopathic Mental Retardation Using An The SLC6A8 finding, in conjunction with the association of MR with Automated Fluorescent Genotyping Strategy. the creatine biosynthesis defects (AGAT and GAMT deficiencies), M. Rio1, F. Molinari1, S. Heuertz1, C. Turleau2, M. de Blois2, O. Raoul2, clearly indicates the importance of creatine metabolism in brain M. Prieur2, S. Romana2, M. Vekemans2, A. Munnich1,2, L. Colleaux1;64 Concurrent Sessions 65 1INSERM U393, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, specific PAC clones isolated by Flint ‘s group. Preliminary 2Department of Genetics, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, experiments with DNA from cell lines containing constitutional known France. chromosomal abnormalities showed that monosomic and trisomic Mental retardation is a common condition that affects largely 2 segments are reliably detected. % of the general population. However, its origin remains poorly To further validate the CGH-array approach, we perform a blind understood. Recent studies have demonstrated that cryptic test on a series of 18 DNA from patients with idiopathic mental unbalanced subtelomeric rearrangements contribute to a significant retardation. These patients have been previously tested for telomere proportion of idiopathic syndromic mental retardation cases. Because integrity using fluorescent genotyping at the Hopital Necker, Paris (L. of the limited sensitivity of routine analyses, we developed a novel Colleaux). strategy based upon automated fluorescent genotyping to search for Among the 10 first samples analysed, abnormalities found include non-Mendelian segregation of telomeric markers. Here we report a gains of 13 (13q telomere), gain of 18 (18p and 18q telomere), loss of 10 % rate of cryptic subtelomeric rearrangements in a large series 2q and gain of 3p plus several cases without aberrations. Sensibility of 150 probands with severe idiopathic syndromic mental retardation and specificity of the CGH array will be evaluated and compared with and normal RHG-GTG banded karyotype. Fourteen children were the results previously obtained using fluorescent genotyping. found to carry deletions or duplications of one or more chromosome telomeres and two children had uniparental disomy. This study clearly C24. Heterozygous submicroscopic inversions involving demonstrates that fluorescent genotyping is a sensitive and cost- olfactory receptor-gene clusters mediate the recurrent effective method that not only detects telomere rearrangements but t(4;8)(p16;p23) translocation also provides the unique opportunity to detect uniparental disomies. S. Giglio1, V. Calvari1, G. Gregato1, G. Gimelli2, S. Camanini1, Our results provide evidence for the prevalence of the paternal origin R. Giorda3, A. Ragusa4, S. Guerneri5, A. Selicorni6, M. Stumm7, of the rearrangements and emphasize the phenotypic variability H. Tönnies8, M. Ventura9, M. Zollino10, G. Neri10, J. Barber11, D. of these subtelomeric rearangements. Finally we suggest giving Wieczorek12, M. Rocchi9, O. Zuffardi1,13; consideration to systematic examination of subtelomeric regions in 1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, the diagnostic work-up of patients with unexplained syndromic mental Italy, 2Laboratorio di Citogenetica, Istituto Gaslini, Genova, Italy, retardation. 3IRCCS E. Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy, 4IRCCS Oasi Maria SS, Troina, Enna, Italy, 5Laboratorio di Genetica, Istituti Clinici C22. Screening of dysmorphic and mentally retarded di Perfezionamento, Milano, Italy, 6Clinica Pediatrica Università subjects with high resolution comparative genomic di Milano, Milano, Italy, 7Institut fur Humangenetik, Otto-von- hybridization Guericke-Universität, Magdeburg, Germany, 8Department of Human M. Kirchhoff1, H. Rose1, M. Dunø2, T. Gerdes1, C. Lundsteen1; Genetics, Charité, Campus Virchow, Humboldt-Universität, Berlin, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Germany, 9Institute of Genetics, Bari, Italy, 10Istituto di Genetica Denmark, 2Fertility Clinic, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. Medica, Universita Cattolica, Roma, Italy, 11Wessex Regional We have improved the sensitivity and specificity of comparative Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury Health Care Trust, Salisbury District genomic hybridization (CGH) by using dynamic standard reference Hospital, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 12Institut für Humangenetik, intervals instead of fixed thresholds. Universitaetsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 13IRCCS Policlinico In our clinical cytogenetics laboratory we use this high resolution San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. CGH (HR-CGH) as a diagnostic tool for screening of dysmorphic The t(4;8)(p16;p23) translocation, either in the balanced or and mentally retarded subjects with normal or apparently balanced unbalanced form, has been reported in more than 14 cases. The G-banded karyotypes. So far we found that among 207 patients with detection of this rearrangement in routine cytogenetics is difficult. a normal conventional karyotype 23 (11%) had small deletions or Its incidence, therefore, may be underestimated, and it could duplications, of which 18 were were interstitial and five were terminal. represent the second most frequent translocation in man, after the In addition one mosaic (47,XX+9/46,XX) was detected. Among t(11q;22q). Der(4) patients have the Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome 25 translocation carriers six deletions (24%) were detected in five whereas the der(8) subjects show a different spectrum of dysmorphic patients. Four had deletions at translocation breakpoints and two had features. We had recently reported an inversion polymorphism of deletions elsewhere in the genome. Our data indicates the existence two olfactory receptors (OR)-gene clusters at 8p23 triggering de of a large number of interstitial abnormalities which at present can novo chromosomal rearrangements. Two OR-gene clusters are also only be detected by screening the genome with HR-CGH. present at 4p16. We thus investigated whether OR polymorphisms By the use of an ABI 7000 we aim to characterize the abnormalities at 4p16 and 8p23 were involved in the t(4;8)(p16;p23). In one with regard to size and location. We have previously shown that balanced and six unbalanced cases, we demonstrated that the HR-CGH is capable of detecting deletions as small as 3 Mb. We translocation breakpoints fall at the OR-gene clusters. Heterozygous suspect that some of the abnormalities detected by HR-CGH in the submicroscopic inversions at both the 4p-OR- and 8p-OR-gene dysmorphic and mentally retarded subjects may be this small or even clusters were found in all the five mothers at whose meiosis the smaller, thus they may be close to the theoretical detection limit of translocation occurred. The heterozygous 4p16 inversion was found CGH which has been estimated to be about 2 Mb. in 12% control subjects. We have previously found 8p inversion We will present results of the screening of dysmorphic and mentally heterozygosity in 26% control subjects. In agreement with statistical retarded subjects with HR-CGH as well as results of the further expectation, 2.5% of the population was found double heterozygous. characterization of certain abnormalities. Our results suggest that rearrangements involving non-homologous chromosomes can occur as a consequence of specific genomic C23. Screening for telomeric rearrangements in mental polymorphisms. retardation patients using CGH-array. S. P. du Manoir1, R. Redon1, T. Hussenet1, S. Wicker1, L. Colleaux2, C25. Complex chromosome rearrangement with S. Struski1; neocentromere formation in a fetus with IUGR. 1INSERM U184, IGBMC, Illkirch, C.U. de Strasbourg, France, 2Inserm P. C. Warburton, J. Barwell, M. Splitt, D. Maxwell, C. Mackie Ogilvie; U393, Hopital NECKER-ENFANTS MALADES, Paris, France. Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. In about 7% of idiopathic severe or moderate children mental Neocentromeres are rare functional centromeres formed within retardation, cryptic subtelomeric rearrangements are found (Knight non-centromeric chromosomal regions. We present a case of J.L. et al, Lancet, 1999). neocentromere formation detected prenatally. The karyotype was: Several strategies to screen for subtle telomeric rearrangements 47,XY,del(4)(p15.3q21.1),+r(4)(p15.3q21.1).ish del(4)(D4S3360+ have been proposed as FISH or CGH on metaphases chromosomes, ,WHS+,D4Z1-,4qsubtel+),r(4)(D4S3360-,WHS-,D4Z1+,4qsubtel- automated fluorescent genotyping and MAPH telomeric assay. To )de novo. The fetus was missing a normal chromosome 4 but had date, it remains to be demonstrated that any of these approaches a ring chromosome, consisting of the pericentromeric region of is sufficiently reliable and efficient to detect low level gains such as chromosome 4, and a deleted chromosome 4, the reciprocal product trisomy in large scale studies settings. of the ring formation. In situ hybridization established that the To evaluate the efficiency of CGH-array to detect telomeric chromosome 4 pericentromeric heterochromatin sequences were anomalies, we generated a chip containing the set of telomere- located on the ring chromosome whilst the Wolf-Hirschhorn critical Concurrent Sessions 66 67 region and chromosome 4 subtelomeric regions were present on the at 16q23.2 and 5p15.3. Cloning of the 16q23.2 breakpoint identified deleted chromosome. A constriction was observed in band 4q21 of a break through the genomic control domain of MAF, a basic region the deleted chromosome 4, indicating that a neocentromere had been leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor, expressed in mammalian formed in this band, allowing stable segregation during cell division. lens development. This breakpoint transected the common fragile This chromosome abnormality was detected in cultured amniocytes site, FRA16D. Screening of other families and individuals with from a 20 week pregnancy presenting with intrauterine growth similar ocular phenotypes identified an R288P mutation in the highly retardation and echogenic bowel. The pregnancy resulted in evolutionarily conserved DNA-binding domain of MAF, in a three- intrauterine death at 33-34 weeks. On delivery, the baby weighed generation family with cataract, microcornea and iris coloboma. 640g (below the 0.4th centile) and was macerated. Anal atresia and The mutation co-segregated with disease in the family and was neck webbing were evident on clinical examination. The umbilical not present in 496 normal control chromosomes. The results in cord had two vessels. The placenta had a small infarct. Post these two families indicate that the lens development gene, MAF, mortem was not performed and no further tissue was available for is a human disease gene in congenital cataract and anterior karyotyping. segment abnormality. These findings further implicate MAF in lens The case will be presented and discussed in the context of current development and emphasise the importance of the lens in formation understanding of centromere structure and function and of previously of the ocular anterior segment. The presence of iris coloboma in one reported cases of neocentromere formation. of the families broadens the possible role of MAF in development of the anterior segment. C 5. Clinical Genetics 1 C28. Analysis of the phenotypic abnormalities in C26. Genotype and Phenotype analysis of 127 patients Lymphoedema Distichiasis Syndrome in 74 patients with with Noonan Syndrome. FOXC2 mutations or linkage to 16q24 A. Shaw1, I. van der Burgt2, H. G. Brunner2, K. Noordam2, K. Kalidas1, S. Mansour, G. Brice, V. Murday, S. Jeffery, P. Mortimer; A. H. Crosby1, A. Ion1, S. Jeffery1, M. A. Patton1, M. Tartaglia3, B. D. St George’s Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom. Gelb3; Lymphoedema-Distichiasis Syndrome (LD)(OMIM 153400) is a rare, 1St George’s Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom, primary lymphoedema of pubertal onset, associated with distichiasis. 2University Hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Mount Sinai School of Causative mutations have now been described in FOXC2, a forkhead Medicine, New York, NY. transcription factor gene. Numerous clinical associations have been Background. reported with this condition including congenital heart disease, ptosis, Noonan Syndrome (NS) is a multiple congenital abnormality varicose veins, cleft palate and spinal extradural cysts. In this paper syndrome characterised by short stature, typical facial appearance, we now report clinical findings in 74 affected individuals, from 18 pulmonary stenosis (PS), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), families and 6 isolated cases. All of these individuals were shown pectus deformities and cryptorchidism. It has previously been to have mutations in FOXC2 with the exception of one family who mapped to 12q24 but NS is known to be genetically heterogeneous. had two affected individuals with lymphoedema and distichiasis and Mutations in the non-receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase gene linkage consistent with the16q24 locus. PTPN11 have recently been shown to cause Noonan Syndrome The presence of lymphoedema was highly penetrant. Males had in some patients. Molecular analysis may be useful to identify an earlier onset of lymphoedema and a significantly increased affected individuals, allowing more accurate genetic counselling risk of complications. Lymphatic imaging confirmed the earlier and awareness of potential complications. Presence of the PTPN11 suggestion that LD is associated with hyperplasia of the lymphatics mutation may also predict the likelihood of specific features of NS. rather than the hypo or aplasia seen in other forms of primary Methods. lymphoedema. Distichiasis was 94.2% penetrant, but not always We reviewed the clinical and molecular findings of 127 patients who symptomatic. Associated findings included ptosis (31%), congenital fulfilled the diagnostic criteria of NS. The incidence of the mutation heart disease (6.8%) and cleft palate (4%). Other than distichiasis, was then compared with the presence of the major clinical features. the most commonly occurring anomaly was varicose veins of early Results. onset (49%). This has not been previously reported and suggests a Mutations were identified in 52 (41%) of the group and were mostly possible developmental role for FOXC2 in both venous and lymphatic concentrated in 2 exons. 70% of the mutation group had PS and systems. This is the first gene that has been implicated in the 4% had HCM compared to 47% and 23% of the non mutation group aetiology of varicose veins. (p=0.01 and 0.03) respectively. Frequency of short stature and pectus deformities was similar in the two groups. 76% of those with the C29. Mutations in the SIP1 gene cause a distinctive mutation attended a mainstream school as opposed to 67% of those dysmorphic syndrome with or without HSCR without and cryptorchidism was found in 84% and 68% respectively D. Mowat1,2, M. Wilson3, S. Worthington4, H. Kaarianen5, C. Curry6, (not significant). S. Aftimos7, J. Clayton-Smith8, D. Donnai8, S. Braddock9, C. Barrey10, Conclusions. F. Dastot-Le Moal11, V. Cacheux11, M. Goossens11; Mutations in PTPN11 have improved the phenotypic recognition of 1Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 2University of NS and are associated with a high incidence of PS. HCM appears to New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 3The Children’s Hospital be more common in other genetic forms of the syndrome. at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 4Genetic Services of Western Australia, Subiaco, Australia, 5The Family Federation of Finland, C27. A chromosomal translocation family and mutation Helsinki, Finland, 6Valley Children’s Hospital/UCSF, Madera, CA, detection identifies MAF as a new human disease gene in 7Northern Regional Genetic Service, Auckland, New Zealand, ocular anterior segment development 8St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 9University of R. V. Jamieson1,2, R. Perveen1, B. Kerr1, M. Carette1, N. Farrar1, D. Missouri-Columbia, Missouri, MO, 10Hopital Saint-Camille, Bry- Donnai1, F. Munier3, G. C. M. Black1,4; sur-Marne, France, 11INSERM u468 et service de Biochimie et 1St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Children’s Genetique, Hopital Henri Mondor, Creteil, France. Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 3Hopital Ophtalmique Jules In 1998 we delineated a new syndrome of characteristic facial Gonin, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Manchester Royal Eye Hospital, features- multiple congenital anomaly- mental retardation- Manchester, United Kingdom. Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) subsequently found to be caused Chromosomal rearrangements, particularly those that are balanced, by “new” dominant mutations in the ZFHX1B (or SIP1) gene. All can provide a vital clue to the localisation of a gene of functional the mutation positive cases from the literature (where photographs significance in the causation of the associated phenotype. There are are presented) and our series show the same distinctive facial many genes involved in the development of the anterior segment phenotype. The characteristic facial features may be used as an of the eye and this is reflected in the marked heterogeneity in the indicator for mutational analysis of the ZFHX1B gene in children. The genetic causation of hereditary congenital cataract and anterior initial cases were ascertained in the presence of HSCR as well as segment dysgenesis. We identified a three-generation family with mental retardation but it is now apparent that this is not an invariable cataract and Peters anomaly, where there was a chromosomal component of the syndrome. We illustrate this with the description of rearrangement in balanced and unbalanced forms with breakpoints two further mutation positive cases where HSCR is not present. We 66 Concurrent Sessions 67 also demonstrate the evolving facial features with age in our series enormous variability of expressivity. In one carrier of the 9-residue of fifteen mutation positive cases (ten previously unpublished) to aid expansion, abnormal flexion creases were the only visible trait other clinicians in recognition of this syndrome even in the absence affected, suggesting that inclusion of this trait may increase the of HSCR. A low recurrence risk can be given to the parents when penetrance in other SPD families. The access to a large number of mutation analysis is positive. probands and families with limb defects, which often can be traced We review the genotype-phenotype correlations in the 32 published and reinvestigated over many generations, and the nation-wide public cases and our 10 new cases with ZFHX1B mutations or deletions. health-care system with centralized registration of all individuals in All intragenic mutations so far reported have led to a premature stop Denmark provides a unique back-bone for identifying novel limb codon suggesting that the mechanism for the phenotype is haplo- defect genes and phenotypes. insufficiency with an altered gene dosage effect. It is important to test patients with Goldberg-Shprintzen syndrome (HSCR-mental C 6. Molecular Genetics 2 retardation-microcephaly), especially those reported with sibling recurrence, to establish whether this is a separate disorder. C32. Triallelic inheritance in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, a Mendelian recessive disorder. C30. A classification of disorders with abnormal vertebral N. Katsanis1, S. J. Ansley1, J. L. Badano1, E. R. Eichers1, R. A. segmentation Lewis1,2,3,4,5, B. Hoskins6, P. J. Scambler6, W. S. Davidson7, P. L. P. D. Turnpenny1,2, J. Duncan2, S. Ellard2; Beales6, J. R. Lupski1,3,5; 1Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2University 1Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom. of Medicine, Houston, TX, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor Abnormal vertebral segmentation (AVS) is an important diagnostic College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 3Department of Pediatrics, Baylor handle and occurs in a wide variety of syndromes, e.g. Goldenhar/ College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 4Department of Medicine, Baylor facio-auriculo-vertebral spectrum, VATER/VACTERL association, College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 5The Texas Children’s Hospital, trisomy 8 mosaicism and maternal diabetes. However, the use of Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 6Molecular Medicine Unit, terminology in clinical practice is not consistent and the literature Institute of Child Health, University College, London, United Kingdom, is correspondingly confusing for a wide variety of radiological 7Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser phenotypes. The identification of a number of murine somitogenesis University, Burnaby, BC, Canada. genes with important roles in normal development of the axial Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous skeleton makes it possible to approach this complex field disorder characterized by multiple clinical features that include systematically. In man, mutations in genes of the Notch signalling retinal dystrophy, polydactyly, obesity, developmental delay, and pathway are the first to enable a classification based on genotype- renal defects. Analysis of pedigree structures led historically to the phenotype correlation. Jagged1 is implicated in Alagille syndrome, hypothesis that this disorder is inherited in an autosomal recessive which includes butterfly vertebrae, and DLL3 in autosomal recessive fashion; subsequent positional cloning efforts identified the first spondylocostal dysostosis (SCD), in which a consistent pattern of three of at least seven BBS genes (BBS2, BBS4 and BBS6). We AVS throughout the spine occurs in association with rib fusions. have screened our cohort of 163 BBS families for mutations in We propose the designation SCD type 1 for cases due to mutated these genes and, when possible by family size, have constructed DLL3 and SCD type 2 for similar phenotypes not DLL3-linked. There haplotypes across all known BBS regions. We report the presence of is no definite evidence as yet that DLL3 is implicated in autosomal three mutant alleles in affected individuals in several BBS pedigrees. dominant forms of AVS. Mutations in ROR2 cause autosomal Patients in three pedigrees have two mutations in BBS2 and one recessive Robinow syndrome, whilst Jarcho-Levin syndrome mutation in BBS6, and the converse occurred in a fourth pedigree. (spondylothoracic dysostosis/dysplasia) has been mapped to In a fifth pedigree, the patient inherited two BBS2 and two BBS4 2q32.1. These are specific recognisable entities which are usually mutations. Finally, four pedigrees carried a single BBS2 mutation distinguishable from the many sporadic cases of AVS. We propose but have been excluded genetically from BBS2, whereas another a system of classification based on syndromic AVS, ‘pure‘ SCD due three pedigrees carry a single BBS4 mutation but have likewise been to disrupted somitogenesis, neural tube associated AVS, and a large excluded genetically from BBS4. We propose that BBS may not be a group of unknowns which will become the focus of new research from single-gene recessive disorder but a complex trait, possibly requiring murine derived candidate genes. the participation of multiple loci to manifest the phenotype. Consistent with this hypothesis, in two pedigrees segregating three BBS mutant alleles, we have identified unaffected individuals who carry two C31. A systematic study of limb defects in Denmark. BBS2 mutations but not a BBS6 mutation. This model of disease K. W. Kjaer1, J. Hedeboe2, M. Bugge1, C. Hansen1, K. Friis- transmission may be important in the study of genetic heterogeneity Henriksen1, J. M. Opitz3, N. Tommerup1; in recessive disorders and for modeling gene interactions in complex 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, traits. Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Næstved Hospital, Næstved, C33. A Mutation in ARH Gene and a Chromosome 13q Denmark, 3Department of Pediatrics (Medical Genetics), Human Locus Influence Cholesterol Levels in a New Form of Genetics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Utah, Salt Lake Digenic Recessive Familial Hypercholesterolemia City, UT. H. A. Al-Kateb1,2,3, S. Baehring4, K. Hoffmann4, K. Strauch5, A. We are establishing a national DNA/cell bank for congenital limb Busjahn4, G. Nurenberg4, M. Jouma2, E. Bautz3, H. Dresel3, F. C. defects together with the major hospitals in Denmark, including ~100 Luft4; families referred to genetic counselling at the Department of Medical 1Max-Delbruck-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, Genetics, University of Copenhagen. Among these are the families 2Damascus University, Damascus, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, reported by Thomsen (1927), Kemp and Ravn (1932) and Tage- 3Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Max-Delbruck-Center, Hansen (1938), and the 625 probands with reduction defects reported Berlin, Germany, 5Institute for Medical Biochemistry, Informatics and by Birch-Jensen (1949) in his doctoral thesis “Congenital Deformities Epidemiology, Bonn, Germany. of the Upper Extremities”. Thomsen and Kemp/Ravn in two classical The heterogeneity of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is being papers described two large families with autosomal dominant axial unravelled by the discovery of novel loci contributing to this disease. synpolydactyly (SPD) with remarkable phenotypic differences. Recently; mutations in a new gene, termed LDL receptor adaptor Presently, we have extended these families to 10 and 8 generations protein have been discovered in families with recessive FH. We (169 and 366 individuals), and identified the mutations as 9- and encountered a Syrian family in which the parents and 3 of their 7-residue polyalanine tract expansions of HOXD13, respectively. 6 children are apparently normal and have normal total and LDL The developmental field affected by the shorter expansion involves cholesterol levels. In contrast, the other three offspring have high digits 1-5 (including syndactyly 1-2 and duplication of the index total and LDL cholesterol levels and large xanthomas. The extended finger) whereas the 9-residue polyalanine expansion affects digits pedigree allowed us to examine another 64 members of the family. 3-4 (synpolydactyly). The large sizes of these two families permits We performed a wide-genome scan in the core family and found a a detailed genotype-phenotype study, which so far confirms an significant linkage to chromosome 1 p36-p35. Surprisingly, we also Concurrent Sessions 68 69 found a linkage to chromosome 13q32-q22 with the same power as effects of particular mutants on epidermal function and auditory on the chromosome 1 locus. We, therefore, performed an interaction transduction. analysis and found supportive evidence that mutations at both loci are indispensable to display the phenotype. We also genotyped our C36. Inherited glomuvenous malformations are caused twin panel for the informative markers at both loci and found that by the combination of a germline and a somatic “second both loci contribute quantitatively to both total and LDL cholesterol hit” mutation in the glomulin gene level. We also identified the exon-intron positions of the LDL receptor P. Brouillard1, M. Ghassibe1, L. Boon2, O. Enjolras3, J. Mulliken4, M. adaptor protein and sequenced the gene in our family. The mutation Vikkula1; in our family is a transversion mutation that affects the splice-accpetor 1Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology, Université site of intron 1 converting it from AG to AC. The gene on chromosome catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center for Vascular 1 locus has been already identified. Identifying chromosome 13 locus Anomalies, Division of Plastic Surgery, Université catholique de and elucidating the mechanisms by which these two genes act will be Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Consultation des Angiomes, Hôpital of a major importance. Lariboisière, Paris, France, 4Vascular Anomlies Center, Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical SChool, Boston, MA. C34. Large deletion of GJB6 gene in deaf patients Glomuvenous malformations (GVMs), localized defects of vascular heterozygous for GJB2 gene : genotype and phenotype morphogenesis, are single or multiple bluish-purple lesions that analysis occur mainly in skin. Histologically, the distended veins present S. Marlin1, F. Denoyelle2, D. Feldmann3, I. Del Castillo4, S. Odent5, A. smooth muscle-like “glomus cells” in the media. GVMs are usually Joannard6, F. Moreno4, N. Garabedian2, C. Petit7; dominantly inherited and, with the more common mucocutaneous 1Unité de Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants Armand Trousseau, AP- venous malformations, they are among the most frequent lesions in HP, Paris, France, 2Service d’ORL, Hôpital d’Enfants Armand centers that specialize in treatment of vascular anomalies (Vikkula et Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Service de Biochimie, Hôpital al., 1998). In another abstract submitted to this meeting, we describe d’Enfants Armand Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Unidad de the criteria for clinical differential diagnosis between common VM and Genetica Molecular, Hospital Jamon y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 5Unité GVM (Boon et al.). de Génétique, Hôpital de Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 6Service de Using positional cloning, we recently identified the causative gene Pédiatrie, CHU, Grenoble, France, 7Unité de Génétique des Déficits that we named glomulin (Brouillard et al., AJHG in press). As 13 Sensoriels, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. of the 14 mutations identified in 20 families cause premature stop Hearing loss is the most frequent sensorial defect. At birth, 1/ codons, GVMs are likely to be caused by loss-of-function of glomulin. 1000 child presents with a severe or profound hearing loss. 60% As these inherited vascular lesions are localized, we hypothesized of the prelingual hearing loss are presumed to have a genetic that haploinsufficiency is not enough for the development of origin. GJB2 gene represents the major genetic form of prelingual lesions, but a somatic second hit, leading to complete localized deafness as it accounts for 40% of the congenital hearing loss. lack of glomulin, is needed (Knudson’s double-hit hypothesis for GJB2 gene has been analysed in 206 independant patients with retinoblastoma). We have now screened for somatic mutations in non syndromic prelingual hearing loss. 60 of them have a biallelic GVM lesions, and report on the identification of a truncating mutation mutation in GJB2 (31 homozygous 35delG). Of the 36 deaf patients that was different from the patient’s inherited genetic alteration and heterozygous for a mutation in GJB2 (12 patients 35delG/+, one that was not seen in genomic DNA extracted from blood. Thus, it is V37I/+), 13 carry a deletion in trans implicating GJB6. In all families, a de novo somatic mutation in DNA of the GVM lesion. Other tissue the molecular anomalies in GJB2 and GJB6 segregate with the samples are being tested to confirm this promising finding. These hearing impairement. We have determined the phenotype of the 13 data support our hypothesis that GVMs are due to complete localized composite GJB2/GJB6 heterozygous patients and have compared it loss of glomulin function. (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be) to the clinical signs presented by the patient homozygous for GJB2 mutations. C37. Coding region mutations in three acyl-CoA dehydrogenase genes may have unforeseeable C35. Genetic and functional analysis of connexins in skin consequences due to disruption of potential splice disease and deafness. enhancer sequences J. E. A. Common, W. Di, I. M. Leigh, D. P. Kelsell; B. S. Andresen1, K. B. Nielsen2, T. J. Corydon2, L. D. Schroeder2, J. Barts and The London Queen Mary’s School of Medicine and Kjems2, N. Gregersen2; Dentistry, London, United Kingdom. 1Aarhus University, Aarhus N., Denmark, 2Aarhus University, Aarhus, Distinct mutations in four connexins, Cx26, Cx30.3, Cx30 and Cx31, Denmark. have been found to underlie sensorineural non-syndromic hearing It is becoming clear that coding region mutations do not always loss (NSHL) and/or three types of hyperproliferative epidermal exert their effect simply by changing the amino acid sequence of the disease: Vohwinkel’s syndrome, Hidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia (HED) encoded protein. In order to examine the frequency and mechanisms and Erythrokeratoderma variabilis (EKV). underlying missplicing caused by simple coding region mutations, Using PCR based analysis with dHPLC technology, we have we have analyzed cDNA from a large number of alleles with disease- identified a number of new mutations (both dominant and recessive) causing mutations in either of three acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD, and coding polymorphisms in these four connexin genes. These VLCAD and SBCAD) genes. In all three genes we have identified and previously identified mutations have been further characterised. missense mutations that despite the fact that they are located far GFP-tagged connexin fusion proteins have been used to study from the exon-intron junctions lead to exon skipping as the main mutant connexins particularly with respect to junction assembly and molecular defect. These mutations were always located in exons with channel function in keratinocytes and HeLa cells. After transfection, suboptimal splice sites indicating a requirement for splice enhancers. the wildtype GFP-Cx30 fusion protein was localised at the plasma Using transfection studies in CHANG- and COS-cells with wild-type membrane in a characteristic punctate pattern showing functional gap and mutant MCAD minigene constructs, we have so far reproduced junctions between adjoining cells. A similar localisation was observed the exon skipping caused by one of the missense mutations for the NSHL mutation Cx30Thr5Met. In contrast to the wildtype and (362C>T). Computer analysis indicated that this mutation disrupts Thr5Met, the HED associated Cx30Gly11Arg and Cx30Ala88Val an exonic splice enhancer (ESE) consensus sequence recognized fusion proteins were localised to the cytoplasm. Similar genotype- by SF2/ASF, and this was examined by mutagenesis of neighboring phenotype differences were observed when analysing Cx26 and positions. The missplicing could be corrected by cotransfection of the Cx31 mutations. splicefactor SF2/ASF, and other SR-proteins also had a correcting In summary, localisation data indicate that skin disease associated effect. Similarly, we are underway with minigene based analysis of mutations impair protein trafficking to the plasma membrane. In SBCAD and VLCAD missense mutations that are indicated to cause contrast, NSHL mutations are capable of forming gap junction like exon skipping as a result of splice enhancer inactivation. structures at the plasma membrane but preliminary dye transfer We conclude that it is not uncommon that simple coding region studies suggest defective channel activity. These data show that mutations lead to disruption of ESE sequences, which are necessary mutations in connexin molecules can result in distinct junctional for correct splicing of exons with suboptimal splice consensus assembly and channel properties that may account for the different sequences.68 Concurrent Sessions 69 C 7. Cancer Genetics mutation carriers. Based on the less typical clinical and molecular features linked to especially MSH6 but also to some MLH1 and C38. Implication of 9p21 deletion in 1p/19q-deleted MSH2 mutation carriers and their cancers, there is a cause to ask oligodendrogliomas what really is HNPCC syndrome. High MSI is a consequence of C. Godfraind1, E. Rousseau1,2, M. Ruchoux3, F. Scaravilli4, M. MMR defect in the cell and consistently, the pathogenicity of germline Vikkula2; mutations in HNPCC is linked to malfunction of MMR. To address 1Division of Neuropathology, Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, the question, we studied the functionality of mutated MMR proteins Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Laboratory of in an in vitro MMR assay. Our results are clinically relevant since Human Molecular Genetics, Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular they demonstrate that in the stable in vitro circumstances, when the Pathology, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, amounts of the proteins are adequate for repair, many mutations 3Department of Neuropathology, Hôpital R. Salingro, Lille, France, found from putative HNPCC families do not affect the repair function, 4Institute of Neuropathology, London, United Kingdom. whereas all the tested mutations found from typical HNPCC families Oligodendroglioma is a tumour originating from oligodendrocytes, impart a MMR deficient phenotype on the altered polypeptide. the myelin forming cells in the central nervous system. This glioma preferentially occurs in adults. It is mostly located in cerebral C41. CHK2 1100delC is a low penetrance breast cancer hemispheres with a predilection to the frontal lobe. This lesion susceptibility allele in non-carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 accounts for 5-33% of all gliomas. The wide range reported for mutations tumour occurrence reflects inter-observer discordance in histological N. Rahman1, H. Meijers-Heijboer2, M. Schutte2, N. Sodha1, D. F. diagnosis. Genetic analysis of oligodendroglioma has associated Easton3, M. R. Stratton and the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium1,4; 1p/19q-deletions to chemosensitivity. Recently, we and others have 1Institute of Cancer Research, Surrey, United Kingdom, 2Erasmus linked a specific histological definition to this subgroup of tumors, Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3CRC Genetic allowing the diagnosis to be made on histological criteria prior to any Epidemiology Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Wellcome Trust genetic analysis. Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Now, we have studied 9p21 deletions, p14 and p16 methylation Mutations in the two major breast cancer predisposition genes, as well as p14 and p16 mutations in a series of 21 1p/19q-deleted BRCA1 and BRCA2, confer a high risk of breast and ovarian cancer oligodendrogliomas. On 8 1p/19q-deleted oligodendrogliomas, but only account for a small fraction of breast cancer susceptibility. presenting angiogenesis and/or necrosis, 6 had a heterozygous As part of a search for additional susceptibility genes, we analysed and 2 a homozygous deletion of 9p21. Three of them also had CHK2, a cell cycle checkpoint kinase that is implicated in DNA repair methylation of p16, which in one case was associated with a p16 processes involving BRCA1 and p53. We show that CHK2 1100delC, mutation and in another to p14 methylation. These results illustrate a truncating variant that abrogates the kinase activity, has a the implication of 9p21-deletion in angiogenesis and tumor necrosis frequency of 1.1% in healthy controls. This indicates that this variant of 1p/19q-deleted oligodendrogliomas and the putative role of p16. cannot be acting as a high penetrance Li-Fraumeni predisposition (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be) allele, as previously postulated, because this syndrome is very rare. However, CHK2 1100delC is present in 5.1% of breast cancer cases C39. Cyclin L/Ania-6a, a Gene located at 3q25, is from 718 BRCA1/2 negative breast cancer families (p=.00000003), amplified and overexpressed in a Head and Neck Cancer including 13.5% of cases from families with male breast cancer cases Cell Line. (p=.00015). In contrast, the variant confers no increased cancer R. Redon1, T. Hussenet1, K. Caulee1, D. Muller2, J. Abecassis2, S. du risk in carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. This suggests that Manoir1; the biological mechanisms underlying the elevated risk of breast 1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2Centre Paul Strauss, Strasbourg, France. cancer in CHK2 mutation carriers are already subverted in BRCA1/2 DNA gains or amplifications on the long arm of chromosome 3 are mutation carriers, consistent with the participation of the encoded recurrent in solid tumors from various origins, i.e. head and neck, proteins in the same pathway. We estimate that CHK2 1100delC lung, uterine cervix and ovary. To systematically map 3q amplicons in confers an approximately two-fold increased breast cancer risk in these tumors, we designed a chromosome 3 BAC/PAC array for high women and 10-fold risk in men, and that approximately 1% of female resolution Comparative Genomic Hybridization (or CGH array). We breast cancer incidence, 9% of male breast cancer incidence and demonstrated, with cell lines containing constitutional chromosome 3 0.5% of the familial aggregation of the disease is attributable to CHK2 abnormalities, that CGH array allows the detection of low-level DNA 1100delC. copy number changes. By this method, we found a narrow (less than 6 Mb) high-level amplification at 3q25.3 in a head and neck cell line, C42. Heterozygosity for the NBS founder mutation in Cal 27. Further mapping of the amplification by semi-quantitative cancer patients of Czech origin. PCR showed a core amplicon of 3Mb. E. Seemanová1, P. Jarolím2, J. Janda1, J. Koutecký1, J. Starý3, P. We performed the transcriptional comparison of Cal 27 and Hs Seeman1, R. Varon4, K. Sperling4; 677.Tg, a normal head and neck cell line, with cDNA microarrays. 1Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Among 438 genes mapped on chromosome 3, the one showing the Haematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, greatest overexpression (10-fold increase) is located in the core 3University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Humboldt amplicon, and encodes a protein from the cyclin family, named cyclin University, Berlin, Germany. L/ania-6a. According to these results, we propose cyclin L/ania-6a as The chromosomal instability disorder Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome a new oncogene at 3q25.3. Its involvement in head and neck cancer (NBS) is associated with extreme susceptibility to lymphoid is currently evaluated by cyclin L expression measurement in a series malignancies due to a defect in DNA double strand break repair. of primary tumors. Based on the „index-test-method“ we accumulated evidence that not only the homozygous patients, but also heterozygote individuals C40. Functional analysis of MMR gene mutations linked have an increased cancer risk. In order to verify this observation in to hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer an independent study, we initiated an epidemiological investigation M. Nyström-Lahti, R. Kariola, T. Raevaara, K. Lönnqvist; to estimate the frequency of the major NBS1 mutation, 657del5, in University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. new-borns; adult blood donors; and elderly over 70 years of age To date, five mismatch repair (MMR) genes, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, in comparison to its frequency among oncological patients, both MSH3, and PMS2 are known to be involved in human MMR function. children and adults, all of Czech origin. Two of those, MLH1 and MSH2 are further the most common The incidence of NBS heterozygotes was as follows: new-borns susceptibility genes in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer 1:158 (4/630), adult blood donors 1:226 (4/908), elderly 1:400, (HNPCC), whereas MSH3 and PMS2 is not or only in few cases, children with benign tumours 1:178 and with malignant tumours 1: respectively shown to be involved in HNPCC. Although, the ever- 174 (2/348), and adult patients with malignancies 1:293. In addition increasing number of mutations is reported in the MSH6 gene, the to the 13 heterozygotes for the 657del5 mutation, we found one NBS mutations are mainly linked to putative HNPCC families. Especially, homozygote (5,5 years old) with ALL. The malignant tumours of the the early age at onset and high microsatellite instability (MSI) in two heterozygous children were medulloblastoma and osteosarcoma. tumors, the main hallmarks in HNPCC, are not typical for MSH6 The adult patient suffered from a non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Clearly, Concurrent Sessions 70 71 the differences in the frequency of heterozygotes among the throughout the study, and subset analysis of high-risk various groups are not significant. The number of individuals populations (age>35 and creatinine clearance<80ml) also revealed studied is sufficient to rule out that the general cancer risk in NBS stability heterozygotes is highly increased, however this does not exclude that at 18 months. The median percent reduction in plasma GL-3 was the risk for a subset of tumours might be increased. 100% after 12 months. GL-3 was also cleared/reduced in various Supported by IGA NH/6439-3, by GA UK 45/2000 and by VZ renal and skin cell types. Pain scores measured by the Short Form 11100003 McGill Pain questionnaire improved with therapy. Conclusions: Long term therapy with r-h-alpha-GalA is safe, well- C43. BCR/ABL D-FISH should be a mandatory tolerated, reverses the disease pathology, and is clinically beneficial. examination for primary diagnosis of CML H. C. Duba1, T. Kühr2, A. Mehringer1, M. Erdel1, G. Utermann1, J. C45. Genotype-phenotype relationships in Berardinelli- Thaler2; Seip congenital lipodystrophy 1Inst.f.Med.Biologie und Humangenetik, Innsbruck, Austria, 2IV. L. Van Maldergem1, J. Magré2, T. Gedde-Dahl Jr3, E. Khallouf4, M. Interne Abteilung, A.ö.Krankenhaus der Kreuzschwestern, Wels, Lathrop5, J. Capeau2, S. O’Rahilly6, and the Berardinelli-Seip Group1; Austria. 1Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Loverval, Belgium, 2Inserm Interferon-alpha alone or in combination with cytostatic drugs can U 402, Faculté de Médecine Saint Antoine, Paris, France, 3Institute induce major and durable cytogenetic responses in about 25% of of Forensic Medicine, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 4Hotel-Dieu de chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML) patients. Since these patients France, Beirut, LEBANON, 5Centre de Génotypage, Evry, France, have a significant survival benefit, frequent follow up investigations 6Department of Medicine and Clinical Biochemistry, Addenbrooke’s have become clinically important. It has recently been shown by Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Mühlmann et al. [Gene Chromosome Canc 21; 90-100; 1998] that Generalised lipodystrophy of the Berardinelli-Seip type (BSCL) is fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) on peripheral blood samples a rare autosomal recessive human disorder with severe adverse reveals results comparable with conventional cytogenetics and metabolic consequences. A locus on chromosome 9 (BSCL1) reduces the number of bone marrow aspirations. We therefore have has recently been identified, predominantly in African-American included a FISH examination in 3-monthly intervals in a prospective families. More recently, mutations in a previously undescribed gene CML study where patients are treated with Interferon-alpha and YNK1 of unknown function (BSCL2) on chromosome 11, termed seipin, (oral cytarabine). For FISH we have used a highly sensitive BCR/ABL have been found to be responsible for this disorder in a number D-FISH probe. It has recently been shown by Huntly et al. [Blood, of European and Middle Eastern families. We have studied the 98, 1732-1738, 2001] that with this probe deletions of the derivative genotype/phenotype relationships in 71 affected subjects from 45 chromosome 9 can be detected. These deletions provide a powerful apparently unrelated pedigrees. In all subjects, hepatic dysfunction, and independent prognostic indicator in CML. From 138 of the 150 hyperlipidaemia, diabetes mellitus and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients included in our study a total of 420 cytogenetic examinations were significant contributors to morbidity with no clear differences have been performed. The majority were FISH analyses on in their prevalence between subjects with BSCL1, BSCL2 and peripheral blood samples. Additionally GTG/QFQ-banding and those with evidence against linkage to either chromosomes 9 or 11 FISH on bone marrow samples have been performed in a subset of (designated BSCLX). BSCL1 appears to be a somewhat less severe patients. We have detected deletions in 12,6% (16/138) of patients. disorder than BSCL2 with a lower incidence of premature death A BCR/ABL sensitive D-FISH for detection of the Philadelphia and a higher frequency of subjects with partial and/or delayed onset chromosome and deletions of the derivative chromosome 9 should of lipodystrophy. Notably, subjects with BSCL2 had a significantly therefore be incorporated into future diagnostic strategies as well as higher prevalence of intellectual impairment (36/45) than those with management decisions of CML. BSCL1 (2/22) (p<0.001) or BSCLX (0/3). In summary, generalised lipodystrophy is heterogenous in nature encompassing at least C 8. Clinical Genetics 2 three autosomal recessive conditions. While the consequences for metabolic derangement, hepatic dysfunction and cardiac enlargement C44. Long-Term Efficacy and Safety of Enzyme appear similar between these three groups, subjects with seipin Replacement Therapy in Fabry Disease mutations (BSCL2) appear to have a markedly higher prevalence of D. P. Germain1, L. Caplan2, C. M. Eng3, N. Guffon4, P. Lee5, G. intellectual impairment and a higher incidence of premature death, Linthorst6, S. Waldeck7, W. R. Wilcox8, R. J. Desnick9; findings which have major implications for genetic counselling 1Hopital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 2Beath Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, 3Baylor College of C46. Lamin A/C mutations in Charcot-Marie-Tooth Medicine, Houston, TX, 4Hopital Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France, disorder identify a novel laminopathy in human and 5University College Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6Academisch mouse Medisch Centrum, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Hope Hospital N. Levy1, A. De Sandre-Giovannoli1, M. Chaouch2, S. Kozlov3, J. Salford, Manchester, United Kingdom, 8Cedars-Sinai Burns and Vallat4, M. Tazir5, N. Kassouri2, P. Szepetowski1, T. Hammadouche6, I. Allen Research Institute, Los Angeles, CA, 9Mount Sinai School of Boccaccio1, D. Grid7, C. L. Stewart3; Medicine, New York, NY. 1Inserm U491 : Génétique Médicale et Développement, Faculté de Background: Fabry disease, lysosomal alpha-galactosidase A médecine de la Timone, Marseille, France, 2Service de Neurologie, (alpha-Gal A) deficiency, results from progressive accumulation of CHU Ben Aknoun, Alger, Algeria, 3Cancer and Developmental globotriaosylceramide (GL-3), particularly in the microvasculature, Biology laboratory, NCI-Frederick, Frederick, MD, 4Service de leading to failure of target organs, and to ischemic complications neuropathologie, CHU Dupuytren, Limoges, France, 5Service de involving kidneys, heart and brain. Recombinant human alpha- neurologie, CHU Mustapha, Alger, Algeria, 6Institut Pasteur, Alger, GalA (r-h-alpha-GalA) enzyme replacement therapy was previously Algeria, 7Genethon III, Evry, France. evaluated in a randomized placebo-controlled, double-blind study Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is one of the most common of 58 Fabry patients who received r-h-alpha-GalA or placebo every inherited neurological disorders, affecting 1/2500 individuals. On 2 weeks for 20 weeks. The accumulated GL-3 was cleared in renal the basis of electrophysiologic criteria these motor and sensory (P<0.001), cardiac (P<0.001) and skin (P<0.001) capillary endothelial peripheral neuropathies have been divided into two main groups: the cells of the treated group (N Engl J Med 2001; 345: 9-16). demyelinating (CMT1), and the axonal types (CMT2). Homozygosity Methods: Of these patients, 55/58 (95%) have continued treatment mapping, performed on 23 consanguineous algerian families with r-h-alpha-GalA (1 mg/kg q 2wk) for an additional 12 months in an including patients affected with axonal autosomal recessive Charcot- open-label extension study. Marie-Tooth neuropathy, evidenced linkage to the 1q21.2-q21.3 Results: The drug was well tolerated except for minor, conservatively region in three families. The maximal pairwise lod score, was 4.14 managed infusion reactions, the incidence of which decreased over (q=0) at D1S2721 with the linkage interval extending from D1S305 time. The infusion reactions were associated with IgG antibody to D1S2635. By using a candidate gene approach, homozygous seroconversion that did not affect therapeutic effect. The IgG titers LMNA (lamin A/C) founder mutation (C892T) was identified in all in 50% of patients decreased by at least four-fold with time. Mean affected patients, causing an Arg>Cys subsitution at the highly infusion time decreased to 2.25 hr. Renal function remained stable conserved residue 298 (R298C). C892T is a founder mutation 70 Concurrent Sessions 71 arisen on an ancestral haplotype that we identified as covering a brain and the node. Sequence analysis in affected individuals of 1.7 cM genetic distance. This change, predicted to impair protein- eight PCD-families with randomization of LR asymmetry identified protein interactions, affects all 4 isoforms derived from the gene. mutations resulting in non-functional DNAH5 proteins. The ultrastructural analysis of sciatic nerves from Lmna null mice evidenced a peripheral axonopathy highly resembling to AR-CMT2, C49. Maternal apo E genotype is a modifier of the Smith- while the heterozygous knock out mice nerves were unaffected Lemli-Opitz Syndrome. or harboured only minor changes such as slight neurofilaments M. Witsch-Baumgartner1, M. Gruber1, P. Clayton2, N. Clusellas3, D. accumulation. We will present genetic, histopathologic, and functional Haas4, R. Kelley5, M. Giros3, H. Kraft1, M. Krajewska-Walasek6, G. data regarding lamins involvment in peripheral nerve structure and Utermann1; function. The responsability of LMNA, encoding lamin A/C nuclear 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, envelope proteins, in the pathogenesis of myopathic phenotypes 2Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, (Emery-Dreifuss myopathy, Limb Girdle Muscular Distrophy and United Kingdom, 3Institut Bioquimica Clinica, Barcelona, Spain, Dilated Cardiomyopathy) and, now, of autosomal recessive axonal 4Department of Neuropediatrics and Metabolic Disease, University of CMT, gives new important clues to the comprehension of nerve- Marburg, Marburg, Germany, 5Kennnedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, muscle interactions and relationships. MD, 6Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warszawa, Poland. C47. Mutational Spectrum in the PEX7 Gene and The Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome (SLOS; MIM 270400) is an Functional Analysis of Mutant Alleles in 78 Patients with autosomal recessive malformation/mental retardation (MR) Rhizomelic Chondrodysplasia Punctata Type 1 syndrome which ranges in clinical severity from mild dysmorphism H. R. Waterham, A. Motley, P. Brites, L. Gerez, E. Hogenhout, J. and moderate MR to severe congenital anomalies and intrauterine Haasjes, R. Benne, H. F. Tabak, R. J. A. Wanders; death. SLOS is caused by mutations in the delta 7 sterol-reductase Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, gene (DHCR7; E.C. 1.3.1.21) which impair endogeneous Netherlands. cholesterol biosynthesis making the growing embryo dependent Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is a genetic from exogeneous (maternal) sources of cholesterol. We here have heterogeneous, autosomal recessive disorder of peroxisomal investigated whether the apo E gene which is a major component of metabolism, clinically characterized by symmetrical shortening of the the cholesterol transport system in humans is a modifier of the SLOS. proximal long bones, cataracts, periarticular calcifications, multiple Common apo E genotypes and DHCR7 genotypes were determined joint contractures, and psychomotor retardation. Most patients with in 103 biochemically characterized SLOS patients and in 47 of RCDP have mutations in the PEX7 gene encoding peroxin 7, the their mothers. The SLOS patients clinical severity score correlated cytosolic PTS2 receptor protein required for targeting a subset of significantly (p = 0.009) with the maternal but not the patients apo enzymes to peroxisomes. These enzymes are deficient in cells of E genotype. In line with their effects on cholesterol levels the apo RCDP patients due to their mislocalisation to the cytoplasm. e4 allele was associated with a mild and the e2 allele with a severe Here, we report the mutational spectrum in the PEX7 gene of 78 SLOS phenotype (p = 0.023). The correlation of apo E genotype with patients (including 5 pairs of sibs) clinically and biochemically disease severity persisted after stratification for DHCR7 genotype diagnosed with RCDP type I. We found 22 different mutations but disappeared when cholesterol concentrations were considered. including 18 novel ones. Furthermore, we show by functional The data suggest that apo E is involved in the transport of cholesterol analysis that disease severity correlates with PEX7 allele activity: from the mother to the embryo and expand the role of apo E and it´s expression of 8 different alleles from severe RCDP patients failed disease associations to embryonic development and malformation. to restore the targeting defect in RCDP fibroblasts, while two alleles found only in mild patients complemented the targeting defect upon C 9. Gene Function & Large-scale Analyses overexpression. Surprisingly, one of the mild alleles comprises a duplication of nucleotides 45-52 predicted to lead to a frameshift C50. Knockout mice carrying a deletion of the Mental at codon 17 and no functional peroxin 7. The ability of this allele to Retardation gene Gdi1 show impaired associative complement the targeting defect in RCDP cells suggests that frame memory and altered social behavior restoration occurs resulting in full-length functional peroxin 7, which D. Toniolo1, P. D’Adamo2, H. Welzl3, H. Lipp4, P. Chapman5, C. leads to amelioration of the predicted severe phenotype. This was Tiveron6, D. Bottai1, F. Valtorta7, F. Valtorta7, F. Valtorta7, F. Valtorta7; confirmed in vitro by expression of the 8nt-duplication-containing 1IGBE-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 2Dept. of Anatomy, University of Zurich, sequence fused in different reading frames to the coding sequence of Zurich, Switzerland, 3Dept. of Anatomy, U.of Zurich, Zurich, firefly luciferase in COS cells. Switzerland, 4Dept. of Anatomy, U. of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 5University of Cardiff, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 6Regina Elena C48. Mutations in DNAH5 cause primary ciliary Institute, Rome, Italy, 7DIBIT-HSR, Milano, Italy. dyskinesia and randomization of left-right asymmetry Genes for non-specific mental retardation (NSMR) are thought to H. Olbrich1, K. Häffner1, K. Andreas2, A. Völkel1, G. Sasmaz1, R. be responsible for development of cognitive functions. One of the Reinhardt3, S. Hennig3, H. Lehrach3, N. Konietzko4, M. Zariwala5, recently identified genes, GD1, encodes aGdi, one of the proteins P. G. Noone5, M. Knowles5, H. M. Mitchison6, M. Meeks6, E. M. K. controlling the activity of the small GTPases of the Rab family in Chung6, F. Hildebrandt1, R. Sudbrak3, H. Omran1; vesicle fusion and intracellular trafficking. It was suggested that, in 1University Children’s Hospital, Freiburg, Germany, 2Medizinische brain, the main role of aGDI was to interact with Rab3A, the Rab Hochschule, Hannover, Germany, 3Max-Planck Institute for Molecular protein participating in synaptic vesicle fusion and neurotransmitter Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4Ruhrland-Klinik, Essen, Germany, release. 5University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, 6Royal Free and To establish how lack of aGDI could cause mental retardation, we University College, London, United Kingdom. generated mice carrying a deletion of Gdi1 resulting in complete loss Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD, MIM 242650) is characterized by of aGDI. The mice were viable and fertile. Histological analysis of recurrent infections of the lower and upper respiratory tract due to brains revealed trilamination of the infrapyramidal mossy fibers and reduced mucociliary clearance. Other manifestations of the disesae disorganized CA3 pyramidal cells in the hippocampus of mutants, as are reduced fertility. Half of the affected off-spring exhibit a situs the only visible defect. inversus because of randomization of left-right asymmetry. We The Gdi1 deficient mice were normal in many tasks to assess previously localized a PCD locus to chromosome 5p, containing learning capacity and emotional behavior. They were impaired in DNAH5 encoding a protein highly similar to the Chlamydomonas tasks requiring formation of temporal associations suggesting defects gamma- dynein heavy chain (DHC). We characterized the full-length in short term memory. They also show lowered aggression and 14-kb transcript of DNAH5. DNAH5 encodes a DHC containing a altered social behavior. Our results show that in mice, as in humans, motor domain with six tandemly linked AAA (ATPases associated with lack of Gdi1 spares most CNS functions and preferentially impairs diverse cellular activities) modules. Computational analysis identified only a few, involved in the coordination and interaction between three domains with strong prediction for coiled-coil domains in the associative forebrain structures. Biochemical and electrophysiological c-terminal portion of the protein. Using in situ hybridization we show analysis showed that altered behavior of the mutant mice is not that the mouse ortholog Dnahc5 is expressed in respiratory epithelia, dependent on Rab3A whose level and intracellular distribution are Concurrent Sessions 72 73 not changed in the KO mice. It more likely depends on steps of exo/ Each produces a distinct clinical syndrome with considerable endocytosis involved in synaptic vesicle recycling. variability in the severity and pattern of associated malformations, which cannot be accurately predicted by the karyotype. We perform C51. The role of different mutations found in Opitz BBB/G transcriptome analyses using mRNA extracted from human trisomy syndrome patients on MID1 protein function 21 and 13 primary amniocytes. These cells are of fetal origin and S. Schweiger1, A. Trockenbacher2, T. Lehmann1, J. Winter1, V. easily available following routine diagnostic testing. A commercial Suckow1, S. Krauß1, F. Majewski3, J. L. Whittaker4, H. H. Ropers1, R. microarray system with ~9000 different human cDNAs was Schneider2; used. A subset of the microarray-derived gene expression ratios 1Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, were also confirmed using the LightCycler system. Compared 2Institute of Biochemistry, Innsbruck, Austria, 3University of to normal amniocytes relatively few (0.7-3.2%) genes show Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 4Addenbrooke’s NHS Trust, substantial misregulation and these differ between the trisomies. Cambridge, United Kingdom. Remarkably, when all the ratios were averaged by chromosome Opitz BBB/G syndrome (OS) is a malformation syndrome of the (“transcriptosome”) only the relevant trisomic transcriptosome ventral midline. The protein encoded by the MID1 gene, which showed significant differences. The levels of these up-regulations is responsible for X-linked OS, comprises five separate domains were 1.14 for trisomy 21 and 1.06 for trisomy 13. The majority of common to the RING finger protein family, i.e. the RING finger itself, altered expression is, however, secondary and scattered around two B-Boxes, a coiled-coil domain and a fibronectin III domain. The the genome. We then used the bioinformatics tool PubGene to C-terminal B30.2 domain is found in a subset of these proteins. arrange expression data into potentially interacting gene networks. Most of the mutations identified to date cluster in this part of the For example, several different matrix metalloproteinases (MMP10, MID1 protein. We have previously shown that MID1 associates with MMP7, MMP1, TIMP3) are >1.7-fold upregulated in trisomy 21 microtubules. MID1 proteins carrying a mutation in the C-terminal whereas several insulin-like growth factor binding protein-associated domain do not associate with microtubules but form cytoplasmic clots genes (IGFBP4, IGFBP5, SERPINE1, EDN1, CTGF & THBS1) were instead. Recently we found that MID1 is involved in targeting the >1.7 fold down-regulated. We believe that transcriptome analysis ubiquitination machinery towards microtubule-associated PP2A by holds great potential for unravelling the molecular basis of phenotypic binding to its regulatory subunit a4. Binding of the a4 protein to MID1 variation and embryopathology in chromosomal disorders. is clearly restricted to the B-Box 1 of the protein. Now we have identified a missense mutation in this protein domain C54. Expression Atlas of the mouse orthologues of the in a patient with Opitz BBB/G syndrome. Immunoprecipitation human chromosome 21 genes experiments show that the binding affinity of a4 to the MID1 protein A. Reymond1, V. Marigo2, M. Yaylaoglu3, A. Leoni2, C. Ucla1, N. with this particular mutation is significantly reduced. Interestingly Scamuffa1, S. Banfi2, R. Lyle1, C. Caccioppoli2, G. Eichele3, S. E. this contradicts the crystral structure-based model of Freemont et al. Antonarakis1, A. Ballabio2; which proposes that the loop carrying the respective B-Box mutation 1Division of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva Medical School, is not directly involved in protein-protein interaction. In addition Geneva, Switzerland, 2TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 3Max Planck Institute, we found a missense mutation in the coiled-coil domain which Hannover, Germany. is essential for MID1 homodimer formation and protein function. Down syndrome (DS), due to an extra copy of human chromosome Preliminary observations indicate that a MID1 protein that carries the 21 (HC21), is the most common genetic cause of mental retardation. respective mutation in fact can no longer homodimerize. To define where HC21 genes exert their function and identify their possible role in the DS phenotypes we performed a systematic C52. ATRX and CBP gene silencing in human neuronal analysis of the expression profile of 170 murine genes which precursor cells by RNA interference represent (almost all) the orthologues of the HC21 genes. To obtain F. Megiorni, P. Indovina, B. Mora, M. Mazzilli; an high resolution expression pattern several complementary Dept. of Experimental Medicine and Pathology - University ‘La methods were combined: RT-PCR on a mouse cDNA panel of 12 Sapienza’, Rome, Italy. adult tissues and 4 developmental stages; wholemount in situ of The ATR-X (α-thalassaemia/mental retardation-X linked) and E9.5 and E10.5 embryos and section in situ of E14.5 embryos. Rubinstein-Taybi syndromes are two examples of mental retardation These stages correspond to mid and late embryonic and fetal human and multiple congenital malformation disorders caused by mutations periods, when the major organs and body regions are organized. in transcription regulators (ATRX and CBP, respectively). The Genes showing interesting and/or restricted expression pattern were presence of a determinate spectrum of affected tissues indicates analyzed further on appropriate sections at more developmental that both the ATRX and CBP mutations modify the expression of a timepoints. 91% of the tested genes showed a clear expression restricted class of genes, but these genes are as yet unidentified. pattern during murine development. In 37% of the cases expression A general tool to recognize the target genes of a transcriptional was ubiquitous while 50% of the cDNAs showed a differential modulator could be the silencing of the regulator and the subsequent expression pattern in the embryonal tissues. research of the genes that present altered expression. Since the The topographical catalogue of expression of the murine orthologues main clinical feature of both syndromes is the mental retardation, we of human chromosome 21 genes will be instrumental to the performed the gene silencing experiments in NT2 cells that provide a understanding of the pathogenesis of trisomy 21 as well as of other model of the human neuronal differentiation. To block ATRX and CBP chromosome 21 linked disorders. Some of analyzed genes display a gene function, we have chosen the new strategy of RNA interference. pattern of expression relevant to the congenital heart disease and/or The NT2 cells were separately transfected with two small interfering to the mental retardation observed in DS. The entire data set will be RNAs, one for ATRX knock out and one for CBP blocking. The ATRX made available to the scientific community via a web site. expression was specifically reduced of about 90% by the cognate siRNA, but not by the siRNA directed against CBP. Similarly, a CBP C55. Human mitochondrial DNA diversity in the protein reduction of more than 90% was observed only when the CBP Near and Middle East and in northeastern Africa: a siRNA was used. The ATRX or CBP depleted NT2 cells represent phylogeographic approach an in vitro model system to study the pathogenetic mechanisms of E. Metspalu1, M. Reidla2, J. Parik2, T. Kivisild3, K. Tambets3, E. the two syndromes by the identification of the ATRX and CBP target Usanga4, R. Villems3; genes that could be involved in neuronal differentiation. 1Tartu University and Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, C53. Transcriptome and Transcriptosomes: Gene 4University of Kuwait, Kuwait, Kuwait. Expression Analysis in Human Autosomal Aneuploidy It is now well established that virtually all mtDNA variants outside D. R. FitzPatrick1, N. McGill1, M. Shade2, A. Carothers1, N. Hastie1; Africa derive from a single sub-Saharan African mtDNA lineage 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Lothian L3. Descending from L3 internal nodes of the phylogenetic tree, Regional Cytogenetics Laboratory, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. primarily M and N, and a derivative of the latter, R, seem to give rise Autosomal trisomies are common causes of early pregnancy loss, to all extant branches of human maternal lineages outside Africa, neonatal death and multiple congenital anomalies. In postnatal life except the effects caused by more recent migrations. Yet it is still only trisomies of chromosome 21, 13 or 18 are consistently detected. unclear where and when this initial diversification arose, including a 72 Posters - Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 73 question whether largely African-specific haplogroups like M1 and P0002. Longitudinal Analysis of Heteroplasmy Levels in U6 have arisen initially in Africa, or do they reflect selective human Families with Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON) migrations back to Africa. We have analysed 1519 mtDNAs from A. Puomila1, T. Viitanen1, M. Savontaus1, E. Nikoskelainen2, K. Egypt, Ethiopia, Oman, Yemen, Saudi-Arabia, Jordan, Lebanon, Huoponen1; Syria and Kuwait, as well as 1263 mtDNAs from Anatolia, South 1University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Turku University Central Caucasus and Iran. Detailed phylogeographic mapping of mtDNA Hospital, Turku, Finland. haplogroups was carried out together with coalescence age Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a maternally calculations, using an additional knowledge about the European, inherited ocular disease characterised by acute or subacute Central Asian, Siberian and Indian populations. It became clear that bilateral loss of central vision. It is associated with point mutations individual lineage clusters within universally present basic western in the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). 14 % of LHON families are Eurasian mtDNA haplogroups may have very different spread heteroplasmic, with a mixture of wild-type and mutant mtDNA in this geographically contiguous area, likely explained by deep existing within the same individual. To study whether there is any Palaeolithic isolation, including yet poorly understood effects of the preferential selection of either the wild-type or the mutant mtDNA LGM to the human presence in this region. Several western Eurasian within individuals over time, an extensive longitudinal analysis of haplogroups (subgroups thereof) that are present universally, display the segregation of the primary LHON mutations ND1/3460 and systematically their deepest, pre-LGM coalescence ages in Egypt, ND4/11778 was accomplished. Blood samples from 9 heteroplasmic Ethiopia and in Anatolia and in the South Caucasus, not in the Middle individuals from 4 LHON families were studied over a time period East or peninsular Arabia. Diversification in internal nodes N, R and of 4 to 12 years. In addition to blood samples, hair follicle and HV is discussed. urinary tract epithelium samples of one patient were also analysed. The quantification of heteroplasmy was performed using the solid- Posters phase minisequencing method. In one individual, the proportion of the mutant mtDNA decreased from 47 % to 42 % (p=0,034*) in 12 P 1. Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance years. In 8 individuals, only minor changes were observed but they did not reach statistical significance. The changes did not occur in a P0001. An association study of schizophrenia and the systematic manner, suggesting absence of any simple and general human cadherin G-type receptor Celsr1 selection mechanism for or against the mutant mtDNA in LHON. The L. N. Georgieva1, N. Poriazova2, I. Nikolov1, G. Jones3, D. Toncheva1, various outcomes of the segregation processes can be explained by M. J. Owen3, G. Kirov3; random genetic drift and/or thus far unknown nuclear control ruling 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University Sofia, the segregation of the mtDNA in each individual. Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Psychiatric Dispensary, Higher Medical Institute, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 3Neuropsychiatric Genetics Unit, Department of P0003. No evidence for association between a TSSP Psychological Medicine, University of Wales College of Medicine, polymorphism and coeliac disease in French population. Cardiff, United Kingdom. F. Clot1, J. Hugot2, M. C. Babron1, F. Clerget-Darpoux1; Cadherins play a critical role in morphogenesis and maintenance 1INSERM U.535, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 2CEPH, Paris, France. of neuronal connections in the adult brain. We examined a member Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the of the non-classic type seven-pass transmembrane cadherins, the gut resulting from ingestion of gluten, occurring in genetically human homologue of Drosophila Flamingo gene - Celsr1. It maps susceptible individuals. The strong genetic association of CD with to chromosome 22q13.31, a region of positive linkage results in HLA heterodimers is well known, but there is evidence for the schizophrenia and manic-depressive illness. The gene contains involvement of additonal genetic risk factors in the HLA region. Lie nine cadherin ectodomain repeats-seven EGF-like repeats, two et al (1999) suggested that a gene in the vicinity of D6S2223 could laminin A G-type repeats coupled to a seven-pass transmembrane play a role in the pathogenesis of the disease. The TSSP gene domain. Celsr1 is a neural-specific gene that plays a role in early (Thymus Specific Serine Protease), located in this region, is a good embryogenesis, cell adhesion and signal transduction. candidate because it is expected to play a role in antigen processing The first exon is 3,544nt in length and encodes for the signal peptide and presentation pathway in cortical thymic epithelial cells where it is and all nine ectodomains in the protein. We screened this exon in 24 specifically expressed. We sequenced the 12 exons of the gene and schizophrenic patients with dHPLC followed by sequencing. Three we identified 1 exonic polymorphism, a deletion of 15 bp in exon 12, amino-acid changes were identified and submitted to HGBASE: at 8 bp before the stop codon (1520-1544delAGAGCCAGATTAAGG). CTG1665GTG (L555V, SNP001026397), TCG1989TGG (S663W, We developed a genotyping method based on the electrophoresis SNP001026398) and CGC3375TGC (R1125C, SNP001026399). on an agarose gel (2%) of PCR products and we analysed 130 An R119G SNP from public databases (TSC0242402) was not French CD trios using the transmission disequilibrium test. Among polymorphic in this population. The three SNPs were genotyped 89 heterozygous parents, the deletion was transmitted in 55% of using primer extension on ABI373 sequencers on a sample of 243 the cases (chi2=0.91, p=0.34). This result does not indicate a role of Bulgarian schizophrenic parent-offspring trios from 243 nuclear TSSP gene in the predisposition to CD. However, the identification families, as well as 179 schizophrenics and 163 matched controls of this deletion may be useful in the study of other auto-immune from UK. The three SNPs were in complete LD. There was no disorders. preferential transmission of alleles from heterozygous parents to This study was funded by the Commission of the European affected offspring when analyzed with TDT. In the UK population Communities (QLRT-1999-00037). the rare alleles were even more common in controls, the difference almost reaching statistical significance. We conclude that variations P0004. Study of CARD15/NOD2 gene in the susceptibility in the nine ectodomains of Celsr1 do not increase susceptibility to to Celiac Disease schizophrenia. J. P. Hugot1, F. Clot2, S. Lesage1, H. Zouali1, M. C. Babron2, F. Clerget-Darpoux2; Frequencies for the rare alleles (%) 1CEPH, Paris, France, 2INSERM U.535, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. Celiac Disease (CD) is a gluten-sensitive enteropathy characterized Parents of SZ Controls, by malabsorption and mucosal injury of the small bowel. The disease SZ patients, SZ patients, patients, BG UK is associated wih both genetic and environmental risk factors. BG (N = 243) UK (N = 179) (N = 466) (N = 163) Recently, the CARD15/NOD2 gene, encoding a member of the CED4/APAF1 family of apoptosis regulators, was reported to be 3.9 3.1 2.8 3.7 L555V involved in Crohn’s disease susceptibility, a chronic inflammatory disorder of the gastrointestinal tract which is associated with CD. 7.7 7.2 4.5 7.7 We therefore tested the involvement of CARD15/NOD2 gene in the S663W susceptibility to CD. Three main variants associated with Crohn’s 7.9 7.5 4.5 8.0 disease were genotyped in twenty five simplex celiac families for R1125C the R702W and G908R variants and in 71 simplex celiac families for the 1007fs variant. The genotyping methods were an allele-specific Posters - Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 74 75 PCR assay for R702W, a HhaI enzyme digestion of PCR products We conclude that SS genotype of NFH gene, probably, is associated for G908R, and an electrophoresis on an acrylamide gel of labelled with the pathogenesis of ALS. PCR products for 1007fs. Genotyping data were analysed using the transmission disequilibrium test. The frequencies of the R702W, P0007. Broad phenotype of child speech disorder shows G908R and 1007fs alleles were respectively 0.06, 0 and 0.01 in strong evidence of linkage at candidate gene region 7q31 CD patients. These frequencies were not different from a control J. H. Schick1, A. M. Kundtz1, H. K. Tiwari1,2, H. G. Taylor3, L. A. population. For R702W, only 5 parents were heterozygous and the Freebairn3, L. D. Shriberg4, B. A. Lewis3, S. K. Iyengar1; allele was transmitted in 60% of the cases. For G908R, there were no 1Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve heterozygous parents. For 1007fs, only 4 parents were heterozygous University, Cleveland, OH, 2Department of Biostatistics, University of and the insertion was transmitted in 50% of the cases. Altogether, Alabama Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 3Department of Pediatrics, these observations do not indicate that the CARD15/NOD2 gene is a Rainbow Babies & Childrens Hospital, Case Western Reserve major risk factor for CD. University, Cleveland, OH, 4Waisman Center on Mental retardation & This study was funded by the Commission of the European Human Development, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI. Communities (QLRT-1999-00037). Although the etiologies of many child speech-sound disorders are largely unknown, family and twin studies have indicated a P0005. Association Analysis Of The Loricrin Gene In significant genetic component for one of the more rare subtypes. A Italian Patients With Psoriasis locus (SPCH1) with an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance for E. Giardina1, F. Capon1,2, A. Tacconelli1, S. Chimenti1, G. Zambruno3, developmental apraxia of speech in combination with a grammatical G. Novelli1; deficit was previously localized to chromosome 7q31. We tested 1Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2University of Leicester, the hypothesis that a candidate locus on 7q31 also segregates for Leicester, United Kingdom, 3IDI-IRCCS Institute, Rome, Italy. more common subtypes of speech disorder in 89 families (n = 196 Psoriasis, (PS, OMIM 177900) is an inflammatory skin disorder sib pairs) ascertained through pre-school probands with moderate- affecting approximately 2% of Caucasians. PS is widely regarded to-severe speech-sound disorders of unknown origin. Our analysis as a complex trait and genome-wide scans have mapped a number included 18 markers spanning a 25.66 cM region on 7q31 positioned of loci (PSORS 1-7) contributing to disease susceptibility. We have by using a map from the Weizmann Institute (http://bioinformatics. assigned the PSORS4 locus to chromosome 1q21, and have recently weizmann.ac.il). We conducted an affected sib-pair analysis using refined the susceptibility interval to 100 kb. This minimal region SIBPAL2 (S.A.G.E.© 4.0). Speech disorder was treated as a binary contains the gene for loricrin (LOR), a keratinocyte structural protein. trait and adjusted for age and socio-economic status. Multi-point LOR is homologous to corneosdesmosin (CDSN), an extensively linkage results suggest speech disorder locus located near a 5 kb investigated positional candidate for the PSORS1 locus. Interestingly, region containing markers D7S1812 (p < 0.006), D7S821 (p < 0.002), both LOR and CDSN genes show an altered expression in psoriatic and D7S1796 (p < 0.003). This study provides support for the earlier lesions. hypothesis that a putative gene for speech disorders localizes to We performed a genetic analysis of the LOR gene in a sample of 7q31. Our studies are now being expanded to include continuous Italian psoriatic trios. We first re-sequenced the LOR coding region phenotypes based on a suite of metrics obtained from conversational and its 5’/3’ UTRs in 8 patients and identified 2 novel SNPs and a speech samples. The next research phase will be to perform SNP 6bp in-frame duplication. We therefore analysed these variants, analyses and radiation hybrid mapping to isolate the first putative as well as a previously published 12 bp duplication, in 90 trios, gene for the most common type of child speech-sound disorder. each including an affected offspring and both parents. We tested Supported by NIH grants NIDCD-00528 and NIDCD-04005-01. for association using the Transmission Disequilibrium Test and by assessing deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE). This P0008. Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis latter test identified a significant heterozygote excess (p = 1.8 x 10-4 (CRMO): evidence for a susceptibility gene located on ) for a coding SNP in exon 2. The analysis of 40 unrelated healthy chromosome 18q21.3-18q22 controls confirmed that the SNP is in equilibrium among unaffected, A. Golla1, A. Jansson2, J. Ramser3, H. Hellebrand3, T. Meitinger4, B. indicating that the deviation from HWE observed in patients is likely H. Belohradsky2, A. Meindl5; to be disease-related. 1IMBIE, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Dr. von Hauner´sches Work funded by the Italian Ministry of Health Kinderspital, University of Munich, München, Germany, 3Abteilung Medizinische Genetik, University of Munich, München, Germany, P0006. An association between ALS and the NFH gene 4Institut für Humangenetik, TU Munich and GSF, Neuherberg, polymorphism München, Germany, 5Abteilung Mediznische Genetik, University of M. Shadrina1, E. Kondratyeva1, P. Slominsky1, G. Levitsky2, V. Munich, München, Germany. Skvortsova2, S. Limborska1; Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO) is characterized by 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, recurrent inflammatory lesions in the metaphyses of long bones and 2Russian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. usually affects children and adolescents. Similarity with an autosomal At present the cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) recessive mouse disorder (cmo, chronic multifocal osteomyelitis) remains uknown. The main known ALS-causing gene is the CuZn- prompted us to perform a family based association study with two superoxidedismutase gene. However, ALS is complex disease and markers on chromosome 18q in the region homologous to the cmo other genetic systems may be involvement in the pathogenesis localisation of the mouse. We found a significant association of of this disease.Autopsy studies have revealed aggregation and CRMO with a rare allele of marker D18S60, resulting in a haplotype abnormal assembly of neurofilaments (NF) in the perikarya and relative risk (HRR) of 18. This suggests the existence of a gene proximal axon of motor neurons in ALS. The potential importance in this region contributing in a significant manner to the etiology of of NF is underscored by the observation abnormal accumulation CRMO and concomitantly demonstrates evidence for a genetic basis NF in ALS patients with various mutations in CuZn-SOD. There are of CRMO for the first time. This gene is not identical with RANK, the tail domains of neurofilament subunits of medium and heavy which is mutated in familial expansile osteolysis (FEO), because no molecular weight (NFM and NFH), which contains a repeated amino mutations were detected in RANK. Mutation search in RANK and the asid motif. In human, there are two common variants of the NFH genes PIGN and KIAA1468 lead to detection of two variants (one in tail, one with 45 repeats and named long (L) allele, another with 44 RANK and one in PIGN), which are in linkage disequilibrium with the repeats and named short (S) allele. Previous studies have been rare D18S60 allele, but not independently associated with CRMO. shown that NFH tail may be involved in the pathogenesis of ALS. To investigate whether L and S allele genotype associated with ALS, P0009. LDL receptor-related protein (LRP) expression we study allelic frequency in 52 patients with SALS in Moscow and pattern in male coronary patients: Inverse regulation on control unrelated population from Russia. We have found 17 patients transcriptional and translational level with LL genotype, 18 patients with LS genotype and 17 patients S. Schulz1, G. Birkenmeier2, P. Greiser1, T. Süß1, D. Rehfeld1, A. SS genotype, compared with 14 SS, 28 LS and 3 SS in unrelated Nordwig1, U. Schagdarsurengin1, K. Werdan3, C. Gläser1; controls. Sufficient differences in SS genotype frequency between 1MLU, Inst. of Human Genetics, Halle, Germany, 2Inst. of control population and patients were observed (X2=9.97, p< 0.005). 74 Posters - Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 75 Biochemistry, Univ. Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 3MLU, Dep. of Internal disorders. We have collected 608 parent-offspring trios where the Med., Halle, Germany. proband had a diagnosis of Schizophrenia (SZ), Bipolar Affective LRP is a multifunctional cell receptor which internalizes a variety of Disorder (BP) or Schizoaffective Disorder (SA). Diagnoses were important ligands and is therefore considered to be a candidate gene made on the basis of clinical records and structured clinical interviews for complex diseases like atherosclerosis. Materials and methods: of probands. In 40 families (6.5%) the proband had a parent who had We investigated the individual LRP-mRNA and protein expression one of the above diagnoses. We used age at onset (AO) as the main in native monocytes from 72 male probands, 36 patients with variable for assessment of anticipation. A well-known bias operates angiographically proven severe coronary atherosclerosis (age 51.7 in such studies, because psychiatric patients are less likely to have years) and 36 healthy long-standing blood donors (age 47.3 years). children after they get ill, so that affected parents of probands are The investigations on transcriptional level were carried out using a likely to have a later AO. An additional bias operates in our sample, competitive RT-PCR. For specific detection of LRP protein expression as all patients were quite young (all their parents were still alive). In we applied a macro array analysis. As a reference we used a order to reduce the bias, we looked at two subsamples: a) families commercially available LRP standard protein (Biomac). Results: We where parents became ill before their child was born, and b) families measured a significantly 1.82 fold higher LRP-mRNA expression in where the affected offspring has children. The results were analysed coronary patients in comparison to healthy controls (223ag/cell vs. with paired-samples T-test. The offspring had an earlier AO not only 122.3ag/cell, p<0.001). However the investigation of LRP-protein in the general sample, but also in a) and b) subsamples (Table 1). expression revealed an inverse pattern: Whereas the expression of This study adds to the evidence that anticipation might be a true the coronary patients amounted to 1.6pg/cell the controls showed a phenomenon in major psychiatric disorders, as a difference was still significant higher protein expression of 6pg/cell (p<0.001). Obviously present after these corrections. a high LRP-mRNA expression was associated with a low protein Table 1. Results expression, and vice versa. These results suggest a complex regulatory mechanism of the LRP at transcriptional and translational Mean level. The detected lower protein expression in coronary patients may BP SZ SA AO [SD]paired Significance be due to a severe unbalanced metabolism in atherosclerosis. This (years) difference could lead to a diminished receptor-mediated endocytotic pathway in [SD] (years) coronary patients which may then be compensated by increasing the mRNA expression. These findings supply evidence for the importance General sample, N=40 of the expression pattern of the receptor in the assessment of 33.7 Parents 20.0% 65.0% 15.0% atherosclerosis development. [11.2] t = 6.21, 12.4 [12.6] 21.4 p=0.000 Offspring 25.0% 55.0% 20.0% P0010. Power of genomic variants of TNFα and TNFß as [5.0] major risk factors for coronary macroangiopathies Subsample a), N=14 T. Süß1, S. Schulz1, U. Schagdarsurengin1, P. Greiser1, D. Rehfeld1, 22.6 A. Nordwig1, A. Kabisch2, U. Müller-Werdan3, K. Werdan3, C. Gläser1; Parents - 78.6% 21.4% [3.9] t = 1.65, 1MLU, Inst. of Human Genetics, Halle, Germany, 2MLU, Bloodbank, 2.8 [6.3] 19.9 p=0.123 Halle, Germany, 3MLU, Dep. of Internal Med., Halle, Germany. Offspring 14.3% 42.9% 42.9% [4.8] The cytokines TNFα and TNFß are important cytokines in the complex signaling pathways involved in the development of Subsample b), N=12 atherosclerosis. Materials and methods: We studied three 33.9 Parents 33.4% 50.0% 16.7% polymorphisms located in functional important regions (TNFα- [12.2] t = 3.28, 12.2 [12.9] promoter: G-308A, TNFß: exon2, T492C, Cys→Arg; exon3, C720A, 21.8 p=0.007 Offspring 33.3% 41.7% 25.0% Thr→Asp) in 198 patients with angiographically confirmed coronary [5.3] diagnosis (49.7y, SD 8.5; 136 males). The patient group consists of 99 CAD-patients and 99 patients without any coronary afflictions P0012. High complexity in the genetic basis underling as a control group (age- and gender-matched random probands). Factor VII deficiency in two Spanish families. Results: The analysis of the TNFα-polymorphism (G-308A) showed M. Sabater-Lleal, J. M. Soria, E. Martinez-Marchan, E. Martinez- an increased number of the homozygous mutation-carriers AA among Sanchez, I. Coll, C. Vallvé, J. Mateo, J. C. Souto, J. Fontcuberta; CAD-patients (6 vs. 1, n.s.). Investigating the genotype frequencies of Unitat d’Hemostasia i Trombosi. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant the exon2-polymorphism of TNFß we detected more mutation-carriers Pau, Barcelona, Spain. in the control group (0.56 vs. 0.48, n.s.). However, the examination Factor VII (FVII) is a vitamin k-dependent serine protease enzyme of the TNFß-C720A-polymorphism resulted in significant differences essential for initiating the coagulation cascade via the extrinsic in the two subgroups for the A-recessive model: the homozygous pathway. Reduced FVII levels cause bleeding disease, whereas mutation-carriers were more often found among CAD-patients (0.18 increased levels are associated with thrombosis. Some mutations vs. 0.07, p<0.004). Regression analysis including 5 major risk factors have been described which modulate levels of this protein. of CAD (smoking, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, low LDL, We have studied two different assymptomatic patients with FVII Diabetes mellitus) showed a significant 3.6 times higher coronary levels lower than 3% of normal values. We have sequenced the risk for AA-carriers (95%-CI: 1.131-11.633; p<0.035). Conclusions: entire FVII gene (promotor, exons, introns and 3’-UTR: 15kb) to For the investigated polymorphisms in the promoter region of TNFα identify mutations of this gene in families. as well as in exon2 of TNFß no significant relation to the occurrence A Gln100Arg mutation located in exon 5 was detected in one patient of CAD could be determined. However the polymorphism in exon3 in the homozygote state. In this patient, we also identified a novel G of TNFß was shown to be significant associated with the risk of the to A substitution at nucleotide 3294. In another patient, we identified development of a coronary macroangiopathy and increased the two different mutations: Met298Ile and Gly331Ser in exon 8. This power of the investigated major clinical coronary risk factors. patient was heterozygous for both of these mutations. Moreover, other FVII genetic variants that influence FVII levels, are co- P0011. Anticipation in major psychiatric disorders segregating in these families. I. Nikolov1, D. Toncheva1, P. Blagoeva2, V. Sekoulov3, R. Although some of these mutations have been described as closely Vladimirova4, G. Kirov5; related with bleeding disease, the presence of several putative 1Dept. Medical Genetics, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, functional genetic variants could be responsible for the high variability 2Plovdiv Psychiatric Dispensary, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 3Sofia Psychiatric in phenotype observed in the family members with the same Dispensary, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Dept. Psychiatry, Medical University mutation. These results clearly show the complexity of FVII deficiency Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Neuropsychiatric Genetics Unit, UWCM, and the importance of a global effect of multiple quantitative trait Cardiff, United Kingdom. locus (QTLs) in determining FVII levels. Further investigation should Anticipation refers to an earlier age at onset and increased severity help to identify other QTLs that influence variation in FVII levels of illness in offspring, compared to parents. It is usually caused by and may help to quantify the relative risk for thrombosis or bleeding dynamic mutations. Anticipation has been observed in psychiatric disease.Posters - Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 76 77 P0013. Polymorphism in Serotonin Transporter Gene in definition of dyslexia. We have tested for the presence of a dyslexia Autism gene in this region on chromosome 1p in a sample of 100 Canadian P. Levy, J. Ferreira, L. Breitenfeld, M. Bicho; families using both qualitative and quantitative definitions of the Genetic Laboratory, Medical School, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, phenotype. With the qualitative phenotype, parametric linkage Portugal. analysis produced a maximum lod score of 1.7 (θ = 0.3) at D1S1597 The serotonin transporter gene is a likely candidate in autistic under a recessive model with incomplete penetrance. Multipoint disorder, based on efficacy of potent serotonin transporter inhibitors analyses using GENEHUNTER generated a maximum HLOD of in reducing rituals and routines and of elevated serotonin levels 2.6 between markers D1S1597 and D1S3669 under the same been consistently found in 30%±50% of autistic patients. The aim model. Non-parametric analysis of a sub-sample of 351 sib-pairs of this study is to determine a possible association between the indicated strongest linkage to D1S3669 (SIBPAL p = 0.00015). The polymorphism in serotonin transporter gene and autism. multipoint NPL score for all the families maximized over a 15cM Materials and Methods: Blood samples were obtained from forty-eight region spanning D1S1597 – D1S3669 – D1S199 – D1S552 (lowest individuals with autism (DSM-IV) with no associated disorders, thirty- p = 0.017). We also used quantitative measures of the phenotype two mothers, twenty-seven fathers (twenty-three nuclear families) (spelling and phonological coding) to test for linkage by the variance and 49 normal controls. components method (GENEHUNTER). Using a model with QTL Each family was seen for a developmental assessment, and also by a additive and dominance variance and polygenic additive variance, clinical geneticist for identification of eventually associated aetiology. the multipoint lod score maximized over the 15cM region with a peak Ages ranged between 3.6 and 41 years. of 3.11 near D1S3669 for spelling. In conclusion, our study confirms Genotyping were performed by PCR methods. Chi-square analysis and strengthens evidence for a dyslexia susceptibility gene on was applied to the results. chromosome 1p. Results: Within the three main possible alleles (9, 10, 12), we only observed 10 and 12. There were no differences between the P0016. Sib similarity in Danish families frequencies distribution of autistic individuals and control group. J. H. Edwards1, H. Eiberg2; In autistic individuals there was no prevalence of any specific 1Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Medical genotype. There was no difference in allele frequency between the Biochemistry and Genetics, Copenhagen, Denmark. autistic group versus mothers, fathers, or mothers and fathers. Penrose introduced sib-pair analysis in 1935: an essential feature We observed a preferential 12/12 genotype in patients with mothers was ascertainment for one or more affected sibs providing controls carrying the same genotype. This characteristic was not observed data against unrelated sib-similarity. (www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/anhumgen/ regardind fathers genotype. ). Conclusions: In this study we did no found any association of autism Most recent sib-pair studies are restricted to affected sib pairs with the polymorphism in serotonin transporter gene . and assume the parental gametes present at ascertainment are It seems to exist a preferential 12/12 genotype in autistic individuals representative of those present before fertilisation, each allele having with mothers carrying the same genotype. an equal chance of both achieving fertilisation and surviving birth. Such equality is not to be expected in view of the strong preference P0014. Examination of KIAA1327 on chromosome for gametic differences in plants, with evolutionary advantages likely 4p15.33 for association with bipolar affective disorder to be exploited in other species, and losses between conception and birth from embryonic lethals. Both would lead to excess sib-similarity G. Kirov, M. J. Owen; at neighbouring loci. There are few data relating to sib-similarity in University of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom. normal sibs. The region on chromosome 4p15-p16 has been implicated in the The Danish set of normal families, occasionally supplemented by aetiology of bipolar affective disorder (BP) through several linkage families with Mendelian disorders, was started in 1972 and has findings. One family collected at our department showed lod=1.96. provided key information on several assignments, including CF We saturated a 9cM region on 4p with 32 microsatellites and and Batten’s disease. It includes over 6000 typed individuals in 850 genotyped them on sets of pooled DNA from 110 BP patients and families with about a million genotypes. their parents, as well as 178 patients and 184 controls. One marker We present estimates of the same:different ratio of paternal and was significant in the trios pool and the association was confirmed maternal alleles passed from parents who were heterozygous and by individual genotyping. The closest gene to this marker is 170kb differed in genotype from the other parent. away: hypothetical protein KIAA1327. We screened the 17 exons, as Similar displays from affected sib-pairs with may be seen on well as 3,000bp of 5’ flanking sequence which showed high homology www.bioch.ox.ac.uk/~jhe or www.angis.org.au/medvet with mouse. We used DHPLC on 15 individuals, including three key members from the linked family. We sequenced the fragments with shifts and every fragment from the key individuals. P0017. A putative molecular genetic susceptibility allele We found five SNPs, but none of them was unique to the disease for idiopathic scoliosis chromosome in the linked family. Four of the SNPs, including the A. Czibula1, M. Morocz1, A. Csiszar1, C. Bachrati1, E. Olah2, F. only amino-acid change (Pro>Ile in exon 1) were genotyped in the Szeszak3, E. Morava4, L. Szappanos5, I. Rasko1; 110 trios. None of the results reached statistical significance when 1Institute of Genetics,Biological Research Center of Hungarian analysed with TDT. The Ile allele of the Pro>Ile was transmitted 34 Academy, Szeged, Hungary, 2Department of Pediatrics, University times and not transmitted 21 times, p=0.08. The result could not Medical School of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 3Department of be replicated in a set of 110 trios collected in Bulgaria: 38 parents Human Genetics, University Medical School of Debrecen, Debrecen, transmitted and 37 did not transmit that allele. Hungary, 4University School of Pecs, Department of Medical Genetics An interesting finding is that this SNP was in strong LD (D’=0.5) with and Child Development, Pecs, Hungary, 5County Hospital of Mezotur, the microsatellite that produced the original association, despite a Mezotur, Hungary. distance of 170kb. Idiopathic scoliosis (IS) is a complex disease, with a strong genetic influence. This is supported by the familiar accumulation of the P0015. Confirmation of a dyslexia susceptibility gene on disease. It is the most frequent spine deformity of adolescence. chromosome 1p. The etiology is unknown, however difference in sex incidence was J. Tzenova1, B. J. Kaplan2,3, T. L. Petryshen4, L. L. Field1; observed, the girls being affected 10 times more likely than boys. 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2University The genetic susceptibility loci of IS have not been identified so far. of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 3Alberta Children’s Hospital, We accidentally were able to reveal a possible susceptibility allele Calgary, AB, Canada, 4Whitehead Institute, Cambridge, MA. for IS, in the bromodomain PHD finger transcription factor (BPTF). Two alleles with different size could be obtained with a simple PCR Dyslexia is a common and complex genetic trait that manifests as a reaction. A 8.3 kb in homo- and heterozygotes and a 3.5 kb long in specific reading disability independent of intelligence and educational heterozygotes. No homozygotes were detected for the shorter allele. opportunity. Rabin et al. (1993, Lancet 342:178-79) found suggestive The 3.5 kb allele possibly resulted via a deletion in the last intron of evidence for linkage of dyslexia to Rh on chromosome 1p34-36. BPTF and it appears more frequently in IS (p=0.29) than in control More recently, Grigorenko et al. (2001, AJMG 105:120-29) reported groups (p=0.16). According to a recent publication the BPTF is the significant linkage to the same region, but using a quantitative 76 Posters - Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 77 human ortholog of Drosophila Nurf301, which is the largest subunit of Phonological coding dyslexia (PCD) is a specific language disability a chromatin remodeling NURF complex. Malfunction of BPTF in early that is independent of general intelligence and educational ontogenesis, together with intense growth rate during adolescence opportunity and is highly heritable. Because the 7-repeat allele of and other environmental factors could influence the development of the dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) exon III has been implicated in IS. attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and there is known comorbidity between ADHD and dyslexia, we investigated DRD4 P0018. Deletions of 22q13 Region in Pervasive as a candidate gene for PCD. In our 2-point screen (FASTLINK) Developmental Disorders of the 11p15.5 region in 100 families with at least two siblings F. Gurrieri, L. Russo, T. Giordano, E. De Vincenzi, G. Neri; affected with PCD, we found highly suggestive evidence of linkage Catholic University, Rome, Italy. to markers D11S1363 (LOD=2.31, theta=0.2), DRD4-exon III Pervasive Developmental Disorders (PDD) represent an repeat (LOD=2.75, theta=0.2), and HRAS (LOD 2.53, theta=0.2) . heterogeneous group of behavioural deficits, including autism and Allowing for heterogeneity (HOMOG), the HLOD for DRD4 was 3.10 atypical autism, characterized by impaired communication and social with alpha=0.85. Using non-parametric affected sib-pair analysis interaction, restricted interests and stereotyped behaviours. PDD (SIBPAL) on 254 nuclear families derived from our dataset, we also affect around 1:2500 individuals within the first three years of life with found significant linkage to DRD4 (p=0.0007) and HRAS (p=0.0011) a sex ratio M:F = 4:1. . With multipoint linkage analysis (GENEHUNTER), we obtained a A strong genetic basis has been recognized and several genomic maximum between D11S1363 and DRD4 (HLOD=2.14, alpha=0.75, studies, as well as cytogenetic observations, have identified at least NPL 2.37, p=0.009). QTL analyses (SOLAR) also demonstrated a 12 candidate loci for genes predisposing to PDD. Among these multipoint maximum near the DRD4 locus with spelling (MLOD=3.61) regions, 15q11-q13, 7q31 and, recently, 22q13, have been most and phonological coding traits (MLOD=2.51). However, preliminary frequently reported in association with PDD. analysis using family-based association studies (AFBAC and ETDT) In order to identify the prevalence of 22q13 rearrangements did not show significant association of PCD with the DRD4-7 repeat (deletions) in PDD we have genotyped, by microsatellite markers allele. It is possible that the DRD4-7 repeat allele is not pathogenic analysis, 110 patients selected through a collaboration with various in dyslexia, but other mutations in the DRD4 gene not in linkage italian Child Neuropsychiatry centers. We detected a deletion at the disequilibrium with the repeat are involved. Alternatively, it is possible D22S1169 locus in two patients (one paternally and one maternally that another gene closely linked to DRD4 in the 11p15.5 region derived) and a maternally derived deletion at the D22S1170 locus influences susceptibility to dyslexia. in a third patient. These patients presented with an Angelman-like phenotype, characterized by hypotonia, developmental delay and P0021. Candidate Genes Study of autoimmune Thyroid absent speech. However, they did not show epilepsy. Although Diseases in a Large Tunisian Family the pathogenicity of these rearrangements needs to be confirmed N. Elleuch-Bougacha1, A. Maalej2, H. Makni3, M. Bellasouad3, J. by further studies, our results suggest that deletions within the Jouida4, F. Ayadi5, A. Rebaï6, M. Abid7, H. Ayadi8; 22q13 region might play a role in determining PDD in 2.7% of 1Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Faculty of patients. Considering the marked genetic heterogeneity of PDD, this Medicine Sfax, Tunisia, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Hédi Chaker Hospital, Sfax, percentage appears to be relatively high. Tunisia, 4Bir El Hfay Hospital, Sidi Bouzid, Tunisia, 5Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia, 6Center of Biotechnology, Sfax, Tunisia, 7Hedi P0019. Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Detection and Chker hospital, Sfax, Tunisia, 8Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia. Association Results - Exclusion of ITGb7 and VDR The autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) include two related disorders, Graves’ disease (GD) and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT). (Chromosome 12q) as Candidate Genes for Asthma The pathogenesis of the AITDs involves a complex interaction C. Vollmert1, T. Illig1, J. Altmüller1, S. Klugbauer1,2, S. Loesgen1, M. between genetic and environmental factors. Recently, five potential Wjst1; susceptibility loci for AITD have been mapped to chromosomes 1GSF Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of 14q31, Xq21.33, 20q11.2, 2q33 and 18q21 in different populations. Epidemiology, Neuherberg, Germany, 2current address: Biomax In this study, we have investigated a large consanguineous Tunisian Informatics AG, Martinsried, Germany. family affected with AITDs. The search for susceptibility genes in this The human genes coding for the integrin b7 (ITGb7) and the family was undertaken by means of both linkage and association vitamin D receptor (VDR) are two of several candidate genes for analyses. To perform linkage study, a genome screening was done asthma and related phenotypes in a promising candidate region on using microsatellite markers. A single marker located on chromosome chromosome 12q pointed out in several genome-wide screens and 2 (D2S171) showed evidence of linkage with a MMLS-c score of candidate gene approaches. Therefore we screened the promoter 3.03. However, no evidence of linkage was found for some candidate region as well as all exons of the ITGb7 gene, including parts of regions covering MHC, Ig VH, Cß TCR and as well as the five the neighbouring introns for common polymorphisms in 32 German reported loci (Maalej et al. Genes and Immunity. 2001 Apr;2(2): probands. Moreover we then tested single nucleotide polymorphisms 71-5). Since association analysis is more powerful than linkage (SNPs) for linkage/association with asthma and related traits (total analysis to detect minor susceptibility genes of complex diseases, serum IgE level, eosinophil cell count, peak flow and SLOPE of such studies were performed on HLA loci and the CTLA-4 gene the dose-response curve after bronchial challenge) in a Caucasian polymorphisms. Using the TDT, we have reported genetic association sib-pair study (187 families with at least two affected children). We of GD with HLA-B*3701 (chi2= 6.12; p=0.0134), (Bougacha et al. also analysed one already described SNP in the human VDR gene. Clinical Endocrinology 2001, 55: 1-3) and lack of association for We could identify three new single nucleotide polymorphisms in the the intragenic CTLA-4 (AT)n and (A/G) dimorphism using the FBAT ITGb7 gene. Two of them are non-coding (intron 2 and intron 6) while approach (p=0.406 and p= 0.466 respectively) (Maalej et al. Human the SNP in exon 3 causes an substitution of the amino acid GLU to Immunology 2001, 62:1245-1250). In conclusion, our data showed VAL. linkage of AITDs with the D2S171 microsatellite marker, and genetic None of the SNPs neither of the ITGb7 nor the VDR gene showed association between GD and HLA-B*3701 allele. significant linkage/association with asthma or related phenotypes in this family study. From these findings we conclude that both the human ITGb7 and the VDR gene seem not to influence the P0022. Gender and Strain Differences in Rhythm pathogenesis of asthma or the expression of atopic asthmatic Parameters phenotypes as eosinophilia and changes in total IgE levels. Y. Weigl1, L. Peleg2, A. Dotan3, I. E. Ashkenazi3; 1The Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 2The Danek P0020. Significant linkage of phonological coding Gertner Genetic Institute, Ramat-Gan, Israel, 3The Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel. dyslexia to dopamine receptor type 4 (DRD4) on Three month old BALB/c, c57BL/6J mice and their F1 offspring were chromosome 11p15.5 exposed, for three weeks, to 12:12 light:dark illumination. Then, G. R. Hsiung1, B. Kaplan2, T. Petryshen3, S. Lu1, L. Field1; over a period of 30 hours at nine equidistant times, three male and 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2University female mice of each group were sacrificed and WBC count, kidney of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 3Whitehead Institute, Cambridge, creatine phosphokinase (CPK) and alkaline phosphatase (AP) MA.Posters - Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 78 79 activities and kidney urea (U) were determined. Rhythms significance heavy chain gene (MYH7) with the LVH phenotype. Pyrosequencing and parameters like Period, acrophase (Peak time) and amplitudes was used for the analysis. The SNP is a silent T/C transition in codon were analyzed (by Curvefit). Results: Comparison among rhythms 989. Allele frequencies in EH (n=43) and HCM patients (n=23) did revealed Gender dependent differences which in turn were also not differ significantly (EH: C=0.32, T=0.68; HCM: C=0.26, T=0.74). strain dependent. For example, WBC-count rhythm acrophases The left ventricular mass index (in g/m2) was calculated based on differed between c57BL/6J genders but not in BALB/c. The periods echocardiographic assessments. The following index values were of AP activity rhythms differed only among c57BL/6J genders while obtained for CC and CT: 140 ±9.5 and 166±51 g/m2, resp.; and acrophases of AP activity rhythms differed only among BALB/c for TT: 253±58 g/m2 (significant difference by ANOVA: F=4.02, gender. The amplitude of CPK activity rhythm was significantly higher P=0.02). Outflow obstruction in HCM patients as documented by in females of BALB/c then in males while the reverse was observed Doppler echocardiography was virtually absent in carriers of the among c57BL/6J Genders. Gender differences were recorded also C allele (CC or CT; n=10). However, in carriers homozygous for in the F1 groups. Depending on the examined variable, the rhythm T (n=13) both obstruction (n=8) and non-obstruction (n=5) were differences between F1 genders may resemble those shown by one observed. The difference between CC/CT carriers and TT carriers of the strains or exhibited a new difference range which didn’t follow was significant as was deduced from crosstabulation tables (Pearson any of the gender differences (or similarity) exhibited in the parental χ2=8.06, P=0.0045). Conclusion: we take these results to suggest stains. Conclusions: 1. Gender dependence differences exist in that TT homozygosity is in two different clinical conditions a marker variable rhythms even under normal identical conditions. 2. The associated with LVH in EH patients, and with obstruction in HCM range of the differences among genders is strain dependent. 3. The patients, respectively. Conversely, the presence of the C allele may inheritance mode suggests that each rhythm parameter is individually protect against LVH or left ventricular outflow obstruction. controlled (inherited). P0025. Lack of association between a G-protein P0023. Genetic mapping of malignant hyperthermia in an beta3-gene C825T polymorphism and attention deficit Israeli extended pedigree hyperactivity disorder I. Greenbaum1, Y. Weigl2, V. Glauber, Dr.3, A. Pearl, Prof.3, G. B. Zagradisnik1, N. Potocnik Dajcman2, M. Gajsek2, N. Kokalj Barkai2, E. Gak2; Vokac1; 1Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Ramat-Gan, Israel, 1General Hospital Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Primary Health Centre 2Danek Gertner Genetic Institute of Human Genetics, Ramat-Gan, Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. Israel, 3Department of Reanimation and Anesthesiology, Ramat-Gan, G-proteins are important elements in the regulation of cellular Israel. responses where they conduct signals between receptors and Malignant Hyperthermia (MH) is clinically and genetically effector proteins. A recently identified polymorphism C825T of a heterogeneous disorder. At least six distinct chromosomal loci G-protein beta3 subunit (GNB3) has been shown to be associated have been associated with this condition, among them RYR1 gene with increased signal transduction and ion transport activity. In encoding calcium-channel accounts for about 50% of MH cases. patients with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) signal In this study we focused on a unique Israeli family, where MH transduction through several neurotransmitter systems is known to be segregated along three living generations and 8 out of 10 family altered. The C826T polymorphism in the GNB3 gene might contribute members were tested in a skeletal muscle contractility in-vitro to the change in neurotransmitter activity. The aim of this study was assay (IVCT). A comparative genetic analysis of MH susceptible to establish an association between C825T polymorphism of the (MHS and MHE) versus normal (MHN) family members was based GNB3 gene and ADHD. A group of 52 Slovenian children affected on polymorphic markers from two major loci linked to MH, RYR1 with ADHD was genotyped using PCR-RFLP method. The distribution on chromosome 19 and DHPR on chromosome 1. Four markers of genotypes was not significantly different in ADHD patients and within 2Mb interval spanning RYR1 gene, D19S191, D19S224, in healthy controls (0.403, 0.462, 0.135 vs. 0.468. 0.468, 0.064, chi D19S228 and D19S897, were conclusive as to the linkage of MH square = 4.51, p = 0.1047). Also, haplotype-based haplotype relative to chromosome 19 RYR1 gene localization. Sequence analysis of risk analysis of 46 ADHD families (father, mother and affected child) RYR1 exons 11, 17, 39, 40, 45 and 46, where mutations have been showed no significant association between T allele and ADHD (chi previously reported in Caucasian MH pedigrees, did not reveal square = 2.0588, p = 0.1513). Therefore, the C825T polymorphism any variation from wild type. A potential functional polymorphism of the GNB3 gene is unlikely to be an important genetic susceptibility comprising non-perfect trinucleotide repeat within exon 35 was factor for ADHD. detected by sequencing and fragment analyses. Further studies on a population scale are needed to assess the population frequency P0026. Lack of association of myo-inositol and phenotypic significance of this variation. Moreover, two markers monophosphatase 2 (IMPA2) polymophisms and bipolar from chromosome 1, D1S2853 and D1S2683, were consistent with affective disorder MH susceptible (MHS) versus MH equivocal (MHE) family members, A. Z. Dimitrova1, I. Nikolov1, C. Kostov2, D. Toncheva1, M. J. Owen3, suggesting possible involvement of DHPR gene on a refined MH G. Kirov3; phenotype. 1Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2First Psychiatric Clinic, Sofia, This family might represent a unique case of complex inheritance of Bulgaria, 3University of Wales, College of Medecine, Cardiff, United two genetic loci involved in predisposition to MH. Kingdom. Lithium is used as a mood-stabilizing drug in the therapy of bipolar P0024. A single nucleotide polymorphism in exon affective disorder (BP). The IMPA2 gene codes for an enzyme in the 24 of the MYH7 gene may be associated with left phosphatidylinositol signalling system, which is inhibited by lithium. ventricular hypertrophy in essential hypertension and The IMPA2 gene is located on 18p11.2, a region implicated as a BP with left ventricular outflow obstruction in hypertrophic susceptibility locus by several linkage studies. We examined SNPs cardiomyopathy identified within this gene in 123 Bulgarian patients affected with K. V. Puzyrev1, M. V. Golubenko2,3, E. N. Pavlukova1, V. P. Puzyrev2,4, BP and their parents. We tested 3 SNPs implicated as a disease H. P. Vosberg3, O. V. Makeeva2, C. Selignow3, R. S. Karpov1; haplotype in schizophrenia in a study by Yshikawa et al., (Mol Psych 1Research Institute of Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2001, 6:202-210) and an amino-acid change (Arg148Glu ) identified 2Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, by Sjoholt et al., (Mol Psych 2000, 5:172-180). All four SNPs were 3Max-Plank Institute for Physiological and Clinical Research, Bad genotyped in a multeplex assay using primer extension. Nauheim, Germany, 4Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, The 558C>T and 490+13-14insA (reported in the study on patients Russian Federation. from Japan) were found to be much rarer in our population, (f of Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is known to occur as a cardiac the rarer alleles = 2.4% and 0.8%, respectively). This made them complication of essential hypertension (EH) or as a typical structural unsuitable for LD mapping and we stopped genotyping after the first change in dominantly inherited hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). 30 trios. The remaining two SNPs were genotyped in 123 BP trios In minority of HCM patients hypertrophy isfor unknown reasons from Bulgaria. 58 parents were heterozygous for the 97-15G>A of associated with obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract. We whom exaclty 50% transmitted allele A to their affected offspring. have investigated the association of an exon 24-SNP in the ß-myosin The Glu allele of Arg148Glu was present in seven parents (f=1.4%). 78 Posters - Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 79 Four of them transmitted and three did not transmit it. We genotyped Table 1.- Distribution of Gc genotypes at codons 416 and 420 in a further 120 BP trios recruited in the UK. There were 8 heterozygous control and patients parents (f=1.7%) but only 2 transmitted the mutation. We cannot find codon 416 Genotypes codon 420 genotypes support for the involvement of IMPA2 in bipolar disorder. Groups N (%) N (%) considered AspAsp AspGlu GluGlu ThrThr ThrLys LysLys P0027. Autistic Spectrum Disorder: A Case Study Using Controls High-Resolution Microarray-Based CGH 23(16) 83 (60) 33 (24) 65 (47) 61 (44) 13 (9) S. Shah1, M. Mohammed1, S. Damani1, R. Locker1, W. Yu1, J. Gregg2; (N=139) 1Spectral Genomics, Inc., Houston, TX, 2University of California at Dialysis Davis, Davis, CA. Patients 31(20) 72 (47) 52 (33) 80 (51) 57 (37) 18 (12) Autism is a severe developmental disorder characterized by (N=155) impairment in social interactions and in language and communication High PTH 4(11) 18 (52) 13 (37) 21 (60) 12 (34) 2 (6) skills, and by restricted repetitive behaviors and activities. Group (N=35)# The etiology of this disorder is poorly understood, although a Low PTH variety of etiologic mechanisms have been suggested, including Group (N=39)# 11 (28) 19 (49) 9 (23) 18 (46) 14 (36) 7 (18) genetic, immunologic, infectious, neurologic and gastrointestinal #Serum PTH levels in “high” PTH group were higher than 60 pmol/L abnormalities. Family and genetic studies support a strong genetic and in “low” PTH group were lower than 12 pmol/L susceptibility to autistic spectrum disorders and a high incidence in family members of nonautistic PDD variants. These studies have been completed using karyotypic analysis which is limited Table 2.- Distribution of Gc genotypes and alelles defined by to detecting chromosomal aberrations greater than ~ 5 Mb (<650 polymorphisms at the two codons band resolution). With this low-resolution scan of the genome, Gc Alelles , N Groups Gc Genotypes, N (%) there is a high likelihood that smaller disease associated deletion (%)* considered and duplication events are being missed. A modified CGH to BACs FF SS 22 FS F2 S2 F S 2 immobilized on a glass slide (instead of metaphase chromosomes) Controls (N= 3 33 13 29 7 54 42 149 87 can provide a much higher resolution, potentially resolving to 139) (2) (24) (9) (21)) (5) (39) (15) (54) (31) the size of individual BACs. We developed a human genomic Dialysis Patients 1 52 18 27 12 45 41 176 93 array in which BACs are spaced at ~ 1 Mb intervals, on average, (N= 155) (1) (34) (12) (17) (8) (29) (13) (57) (30) throughout the genome. Clinical specimens and established cell lines with a broad spectrum of known chromosomal abnormalities High PTH group 0 13 2 (6) 8 (23) 2 10 10 44 16 were tested. Test and reference genomic DNAs were differentially (N= 35)# (0) (37) (6) (29) (14) (63) (23) labeled with fluorochromes. After co-hybridization of labeled test Low PTH group 1 9 7 3 11 13 37 28 8 (21) and reference genomic DNAs, the BAC arrays were scanned and (N= 39)# (3) (23) (18) (8) (28) (17) (47) (36) analyzed with software developed specifically for this purpose. * F = haplotype 416Asp-420Thr, S = haplotype 416Glu-420Thr and 2 Control hybridizations with normal male-to-male, male-to-female and = haplotype 416Asp-420Lys female-to-female reference samples were performed and showed #Serum PTH levels in “high” PTH group were higher than 60 pmol/L the expected results. This study details the results identified in the and in “low” PTH group were lower than 12 pmol/L screening of over 25 autistic patients. P0029. Lack of evidence for association of the P0028. Variations in the vitamin-D binding protein (Gc endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphism in locus) and parathyroid cell function in dialysis patients intron 4 and progression to end stage renal disease in with end-stage renal disease Greek population J. Fibla1, L. Piedrafita1, G. Nieto1, A. Velasco1, E. Fernandez2; P. Zirogiannis1, H. Psara2, G. Staikos2, C. Deltas3, K. Lamnissou2; 1Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Lleida, Lleida, 1Dept of Nephrology, “G. Gennimatas” Hospital, Athens, Greece, Spain, 2Nephrology Service. Universitary Hospital Arnau de Vilanova, 2Dept of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 3Dept of Lleida, Spain. Molecular Genetics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Vitamin-D inhibits both PTH expression and proliferation of Nicosia, Cyprus. parathyroid cells. Patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) Nitric oxide (NO) is thought to be an important factor in the show low levels of vitamin-D due to renal dysfunction. Limiting deterioration of renal function. A variable number tandem 27-bp amounts of vitamin-D do not allow a normal regulation of parathyroid repeat in intron 4 of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (ecNOS) function and predisposes patients to either adynamic-bone disease gene has been found to affect the plasma levels of NO metabolites. (ABD) or secondary hyperparathyroidism (2HP). Vitamin-D binding- Two alleles are of varied frequencies in different populations (a protein (DBP) (Gc locus) is the major carrier protein for vitamin-D and b). The shorter allele, a, has been associated in Japanese metabolites. Two variants at codons 416(Asp-Glu) and 420(Thr- populations with the progression of renal disease. We studied the Lys) of the exon-11 of the Gc gene define the three common association of this polymorphism in a Greek population of patients electrophoretic variants of the DBP protein (Gc1F, Gc1S and Gc2). with end stage renal disease (ESRD) by studying the genotypes of We have studied exon-11 alellic variants as risk factors for ABD and 108 ESRD patients and 105 healthy subjects. The frequencies of 2HP predisposition and parathyroid function in dialysis patients. A aa, ab, bb were 0.69, 0.28, 0.03 in the control group and 0.70, 0.26, population of 155 patients with more than 1 year in haemodialysis 0.04 in the patient group. The dada between the two groups were were recruited and genotyped for exon-11 polymorphisms. Alelle analyzed by chi-square test. Our results from controls show that the frequencies at both codons do not differ between patients and frequencies of these three genotypes in the Greek population are controls. Distribution of the genotypes at both codons and the similar to those observed in some other Caucasian populations. But genotypes defined by the combination of the two codons were the results from the patient group showed that the frequency of aa also similar in patients and controls (tables 1&amp;amp;amp;2). genotype in the patient population was not significantly different than After applying excluding criteria for treatment and time on dialysis, in the control group. This work indicate that ecNOS4 polymorphism genotype and alelle frequencies of patients grouped as “high” and do not show any association with the development of end stage renal “low” PTH do not differ from those observed in control subjects. disease in the studied European population. Differences for PTH levels were observed between homozygous 420LysLys and homozygous 420ThrThr patients (48.8 [95%CI:35-62] P0030. SNP Scanning in Pooled DNA – A Chance for vs. 18.8 [95%CI:2.6-34.9] pmol/L, respectively, P=0,045). Variability Rapid Case-Control-Studies at exon11 of the Gc locus seems to be not related to predisposition M. Werner, J. Altmüller, N. Herbon, M. Wjst; to ABD and 2HP. In contrast, variability at codon 420 seems to affect GSF National Research Center for Environment and Health, PTH levels. München-Neuherberg, Germany. SNP Scanning in Pooled DNA - A Chance for Rapid Case-Control- StudiesPosters - Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 80 81 Chromosome 6p21-22 is a commonly discussed region for candidate a region that has been linked to asthma and atopic responses. genes concerning autoimmune diseases. One possibility to find the We investigated whether 1 polymorphism located in the promoter responsible genes is to compare SNP frequencies in case-control- of the CD14 gene (-159C/T) was associated to allergic asthma or studies. intermediate phenotypes such as skin prick test positivity to common In a “proof of principle’ approach we tested 550 SNPs in a region allergens (SPT), bronchial hyperresponsiveness to methacholine of 20 Mbp on chromosome 6p. All SNPs were selected from public challenge (BHR), and total serum elevated IgE (IgE), in a sample of available databases (NCBI dbSNP, TSC Consortium). SNP allele 182 asthmatic families. frequencies were determined by a previously validated MALDI-TOF Non parametric linkage analysis in affected sib-pairs did not reveal MS based pooling approach. any significant result. Our first sample comprised 288 individuals from the Southern The transmission disequilibrium test revealed a positive association German population. Only SNPs with a frequency between 5% and of the polymorphism with asthma (-159C p:0.0005 ), SPT (-159C p: 50% were tested. The estimated frequencies f were distributed as 0.013 ), BHR (-159C p:0.0001), IgE (-159C p:0.0.009 ). follows: 7,8% of all SNPs (f<10%), 21,4% (10%<f<20%), 22,4% A multivariate analysis performed on family founder members (20%<f<30%), 26,3% (30%<f<40%) and 22% (40%<f<50%). only, did not show any significant association between the gene In a second sample of 122 German/Swedish DNAs the same 550 polymorphisms and any of the phenotypes investigated, suggesting SNPs were tested and differences between SNP frequencies were that the CD14 gene might be an allergy susceptibility factor during calculated. The mean difference was 5,4%. Only 5% of all tested childhood. SNPs differed more than 15% in both samples. In conclusion, we confirmed the association of polymorphism - The distribution of the mean allele difference will allow the 159C/T in CD14 gene with allergic asthma phenotypes in an Italian assignment of possible disease associated loci. Based on this population. experience, we would suggest that SNP frequency differences between two samples of a case-control-study should not exceed P0034. CTLA-4 gene polymorphism in coeliac patients 5-7%. This may be a strict threshold but seems practicable as large stratified by the presence of the HLA-DQ2 heterodimer study sizes are common practice in studies of complex diseases. B. Mora1, M. Bonamico2, P. Indovina1, F. Megiorni1, M. Ferri2, M. Mazzilli1; P0031. Immune response to Hepatitis B and A 1Dept. of Experimental Medicine and Pathology - University ‘La vaccination - estimating heritability and assessing Sapienza’, Rome, Italy, 2Dept. of Pediatrics - University ‘La Sapienza’, different sources of variation in twins Rome, Italy. C. M. Freitag1, E. Reuss2, N. Evers2, N. Dietrich2, J. Vollmar3, P. M. Coeliac disease (CD) is a gluten sensitive enteropathy with Schneider4, C. Rittner4, R. Fimmers1, T. Höhler2; multifactorial aetiology. Susceptibility to CD is strongly associated 1Institute for Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, Friedrich- with particular HLA class II alleles, while genetic factors other than Wilhelms University, Bonn, Germany, 2Medizinische Klinik und HLA remain to be determined. The cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen Poliklinik, Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany, 4 (CTLA-4), a downregulator of T cell activation, has been reported 3GlaxoSmithKline, Munich, Germany, 4Institute for Legal Medicine, both in linkage and association with CD in French and Scandinavian Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. populations. We performed case-control and family-based The immune system is highly influenced by genetic and association studies to investigate if the polymorphism at position 49 environmental factors. Prototypic genetic markers are the different of the CTLA-4 exon 1 was associated with the development of CD alleles and loci of the HLA system. We estimated heritability in the Italian population. The +49 A/G dimorphism was analysed in and different sources of variation (genetic, environmental) of the 195 CD patients, 318 relatives and 144 ethnically matched controls immune response to Hepatitis B and A vaccination and assessed its by PCR-RFLP method. The A allele frequency resulted increased in association with several HLA-DRB1*alleles. patients compared with healthy controls (75.6% vs. 65.6%; p=2.9x10- Methods: 96 monozygotic (MZ) and 95 dizygotic (DZ) antibody 3), mostly in the homozygous form (57% vs. 45.8%; p=2.8x10-2). negative twin pairs were vaccinated with a combined HAV/HBsAg The segregation analysis showed a preferential transmission of the vaccine. Anti-HAV and anti-HBs were measured 4 weeks after the A allele to the probands (61%; χ2 =4.15). In order to test for an TDT last vaccination. All twins were typed for HLA-DRB1*alleles using interaction between CTLA-4 and HLA, the patients were stratified sequence specific PCR amplification. according to the presence of the high risk HLA-DQ2 heterodimer. Heritability was estimated based on intrapair variances. Generalized The CTLA-4 AA genotype raised to 81.5% in the DQ2 negative group estimating equations were calculated to assess the impact of BMI, showing a difference statistically significant versus both controls age, gender, smoking , alcohol, and HLA-DRB1*alleles. A sex (p=5.2x10-4) and DQ2 positive patients (p=4x10-3). In the families limitation structural equation model was fitted to evaluate different where the affected child was DQ2 negative, the A allele resulted sources of variation. transmitted in 8 out of 9 informative cases (χ2 =5.4). In conclusion TDT Results: HBsAg vaccine response was weaker with increasing our study confirms CTLA-4 as predisposing gene for CD, with a age, body mass index and among male subjects. Several HLA- prominent role in patients without the high risk HLA-DQ2 molecules. DRB1*alleles showed a positive correlation with the response. Heritability was 0.61. A model of additive genetic and environmental P0035. The potassium-chloride cotransporter 3 components best explained the observed variances. Anti-HAV gene (KCC3) is excluded from a newly defined 10.9 response was weaker among male subjects and heritability was centiMorgan candidate region for chromosome 15 related lower (0.35). schizophrenia (SCZD10) Conclusion: Our data suggest a major genetic contribution to J. Meyer1, K. Schraut1, G. Ortega1, F. Rüschendorf2, G. Nürnberg2, G. the immune response to the Hepatitis B, and a minor one to the Stöber1, R. Mössner1, K. Saar3, T. F. Wienker4, A. Reis2, K. P. Lesch1; Hepatitis A vaccination. The appropriate statistical assessment of the 1University of Wuerzburg, Department of Psychiatry and contribution of the HLA-DRB1*alleles will be discussed. Psychotherapy, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Max-Delbrück-Centrum for Molecular Medicine, Gene Mapping Center, Berlin, Germany, 3Max- P0032. Family based association and linkage analysis of Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4University the CD14 gene with allergic asthma in Italian familes of Bonn, Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, G. Malerba1, E. Trabetti1, M. Lauciello1, R. Galavotti1, C. Migliaccio1, Bonn, Germany. L. Pescollderungg2, A. L. Boner3, P. F. Pignatti1; Despite the fact that schizophrenia is commonly regarded as 1DMIBG, Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, a complex disorder, a seperate entry in the Online Mendelian 2Institute of Paediatrics, Hospital of Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy, 3DMIBG, Inheritance in Man Database (OMIM) has been created for Paediatrics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. chromosome 15 related, hereditary, catatonic schizophrenia The receptor for bacterial lipopolysaccharides (CD14) appears (SCZD10, OMIM 605419), which is inherited in an autosomal to be involved in APC-mediated Th1/Th2 cell differentiation. A dominant manner. A possible role of the chromosome 15q14-15 polymorphism in the flanking region of the gene has been recently region in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia and manic depressive described to be associated with circulating soluble CD14 levels and disorder has recently been reported by several scientific groups. with total serum IgE. The CD14 gene maps on chromosome 5q31, Our group is currently investigating two large families with catatonic 80 Posters - Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 81 schizophrenia, both families support strongly the chromosome 15 exon 3 two polymorphism, silent mutations P39P and I178I, and an locus. Genotyping of family members did lead to the definement of insertion of a C in position 938 of the cDNA that leads to a stop codon a 10.9 centiMorgan region between genetic markers D15S1042 and three codons ahead in position 20 of the protein. In exon 6 we found D15S659, respectively. A number of genes expressed predominantly the two polymorphism described R517C and G532V and an insertion in the brain, and localized adjacent to this chromosomal region, of a G in position 2557 of the coding region that leads to a stop codon are excluded from the candidate gene panel by mutational analysis 547nt. and the new fine mapping data. These include genes encoding For the family M523, we found the same allele of the later family in the nicotinic alpha-7 receptor subunit, the potassium-chloride exon 6 with R517C, G532V and 547stop codon. In exon 4 we found cotransporter 3, the ryanodine receptor 3, and connexin 36. All these another change in the intronic region of exon 3 a transition of a proteins are important factors for brain development and function. adenine to guanine . Other genes, like the gene encoding the NOTCH ligand DLL4, remain potential candidates. We are currently narrowing down the region P0038. Chromosome 22 investigation in rheumatoid of interest by investigating more families and defining the gene(s) arthritis using GenScore, a tool for candidate gene responsible for the disease by mutational analysis. ranking in complex diseases. J. Osorio y Fortea1, E. Petit-Teixeira1, G. Bana1, S. Cailleau- P0036. Association between TNFR2 and familial but not Moindrault1, P. Dieude1, C. Pierlot1, C. Sardou1, S. Lasbleiz2, L. sporadic rheumatoid arthritis provides evidence for Michou2, S. Faure3, O. Alibert4, M. Martinez5, T. Bardin2, F. Clerget6, B. genetic heterogeneity. Prum7, F. Cornelis1; P. Dieude1, E. Petit-Teixeira1, S. Cailleau-Moindrault1, J. Osorio y 1GenHotel/Laboratoire de Recherche pour la Polyarthrite Fortea1, C. Pierlot1, M. Martinez2, O. Alibert3, S. Lasbleiz4, S. Faure5, Rhumatoide, 91000, Evry, France, 2Centre Viggo-Pertersen, Hôpital T. Bardin4, B. Prum6, F. Cornelis1; Lariboisière, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris 75010, 1GenHotel/Laboratoire de Recherche pour la Polyarthrite Paris, France, 3Généthon, 1, rue de l’internationale 91002, Evry, Rhumatoide, 91000, Evry, France, 22 Institut National pour la Santé France, 4Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique, 2, rue Gaston Crémieux et la Recherche Médicale U358, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France, CP 5722 91057, Evry, France, 5Institut National pour la Santé et la 3Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique, 2, rue Gaston Crémieux Recherche Médicale U358, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 75010, Paris, France, CP 5722 91057, Evry, France, 4Centre Viggo-Pertersen, Hôpital 6Hôpital Kremlin Bicêtre 78-80 rue du Général Leclerc, 94276, Lariboisière, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris 75010, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 7Laboratoire Statistique et Génôme, Paris, France, 5Généthon, 1, rue de l’internationale 91002, Evry, Génopole, tour Evry2 , 91000, Evry, France. France, 6Laboratoire Statistique et Génôme, Génopole, tour Evry2 , Multifactorial diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the most 91000, Evry, France. frequent autoimmune disorder, involve several susceptibility genes. Background. Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa), involved in Typically, genome scans only provide suggestive loci, resulting rheumatoid arthritis (RA) binds TNFR1 and TNFR2 receptors. in a large number of candidate genes. The aim of this work was Genome scans have suggested the TNFR2 locus as a candidate RA to develop GenScore, a new tool for candidate genes ranking locus. A case-control study in a UK Caucasian population has shown in complex disease studies, integrating functional and linkage an association between a TNFR2 genotype (196R/R in exon 6) and data. Equal weights were given to both components, producing a familial, but not sporadic RA. Objective. To test this association in the GenScore ranging from 0 through 16. RA GenScore was determined French Caucasian population. for the 247 chromosome 22 genes which function was known, using Methods. To test for an association in sporadic RA, 100 families were our 3 cM resolution linkage data (22 microsatellites typed in 88 ASP genotyped for the 196M/R polymorphism and analysed using the families). The 5 prioritized genes were IL17R, MIF, IL2RB, CG12-1 transmission disequilibrium test and the haplotype relative risk (HRR). cytokine and IGL gene-segment (GenScores ranking from 6 through To test for an association in familial RA, RA index cases from affected 7). We propose GenScore as a new tool for candidate genes ranking sib pair (ASP) families (n = 100) were genotyped for 196M/R. Linkage in multifactorial diseases. Results obtained on chromosome 22 for RA analysis was performed with 3 TNFR2 microsatellite markers. will be posted at www.GenHotel.com. Results. The TNFR2 196R/R genotype was not associated with sporadic RA (P= 0.72), but with familial RA (P= 0.026). The P0039. Linkage disequilibrium mapping and sequence analysis association was most marked in the context of TNFR2 “twin-like” of a psoriasis locus, PSORS5, on chromosome 3q21. RA sibs (affected sibs sharing both TNFR2 haplotype) (P= 0.0017). L. M. Samuelsson1, C. Lawer1, T. Martinsson1, A. Inerot2, J. Linkage analysis was consistent with the association, the subgroup of Wahlstrom1 families with 196R/R ASP index cases provided most of the TNFR2 1Dept Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital /East, linkage evidence. Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Dept of Dermatology and Venereaology, Conclusion. This study represents the first replication of the Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden involvement of TNFR2 in RA genetic heterogeneity. Our data refine Psoriasis is a chronic skin disorder affecting 2% of the population in the initial hypothesis, to suggest that a TNFR2 recessive factor, in northern Europe. The disease is characterised by hyperproliferation linkage disequilibrium with the 196R allele, plays a major role in a of keratinocytes and inflammatory infiltration. Psoriasis is today subset of families with multiple RA cases. regarded to be a multifactorial disease with a complex genetic background. P0037. Mutations in MKKS gene in two Spanish families In order to identify genetic alterations rendering predisposition to with Bardet-Biedl Syndrome psoriasis several genome scans have been performed. This has led D. Valverde1, S. Bernal2, I. Lorda3, A. Giménez3, M. Baiget2, C. to the identification of several candidate loci but as of today, no single Ayuso3; gene have been identified as disease-causing. 1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona, The psoriasis susceptibility locus PSORS5 on chromosome 3q21 was Spain, 3Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. identified by our group in a genome-wide screen using a Swedish Bardet-biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically and clinical nuclear family set of 134 affected sib-pairs. Linkage was mainly found heterogeneous disorder/>Until now six BBS loci have described; in families originating from south-west Sweden and the disease locus BBS1 on 11q13, BBS2 on 16q21, BBS3 on 3p112, BBS4 on 15q22.2- is likely to be caused by a founder mutation. q233, BBS5 on 2q31, and BBS6 on 20p1122 with evidence for at In order to fine-map the PSORS5 locus an SNP map spanning 900- least one more locus. For locus BBS6, the gene has been described 1200 kb was created. A total of 26 SNP markers were genotyped for and characterized as a chaperonin protein, with a suggested role a large number of Swedish families. The transmission/disequilibrium for protein processing in limb, cardiac, and reproductive system test (TDT) was used to assess linkage disequilibrium between marker development. Mutations in this gene are responsible for Mc Kusick and disease. Five of the 26 SNPs showed significant association (p > Kauffman disease and Bardet Biedl syndrome. 0.05). All five markers are located within a 160 kb region. Recently a new hypothesis has been proposed, a model of triallelic This region have been screened for disease-involved polymorphisms inheritance, in wich three mutant alleles segregate with the disorder. by direct sequencing of coding regions, association analysis and We found three families out of 20 (15%) with anormal electrophoretic expression studies of candidate genes. pattern in the SSCP. For family M-176 we found several variations, in Posters - Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 82 83 P0040. Mutational analysis of CARD4/NOD1 gene and P0042. CARD15 mutations in families with “mixed” Inflammatory Bowel Disease Inflammatory Bowel Disease H. Zouali1, S. Lesage1, F. Merlin1, M. Chamaillard1, J. Cézard2, J. S. Lesage1, H. Zouali1, F. Merlin1, M. Chamaillard1, J. Cézard2, J. Belaiche3, S. Almer4, C. Tysk5, C. O’Morain6, M. Gassull7, V. Binder8, Belaiche3, S. Almer4, C. Tysk5, C. O’Morain6, M. Gassull7, V. Binder8, Y. Finkel9, R. Modigliani10, C. Gower-Rousseau11, J. Colombel12, G. R. Modigliani9, C. Gower-Rousseau10, J. Colombel10, G. Thomas11, J. Thomas1, J. Hugot2; Hugot2; 1Fondation Jean Dausset-CEPH, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Robert 1Fondation Jean Dausset/CEPH, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3CHU, Liège, Belgium, 4Hospital, Linkôping, Debré, Paris, France, 3CHU, Liège, Belgium, 4IHM, Linköping Sweden, 5Hospital, Orebro, Sweden, 6Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, Universitet, Linköping, Sweden, 5örebro Medical Center Hospital, 7Hospital, Badalona, Spain, 8Hospital, Herlev, Denmark, 9Hospital, Örebro, Sweden, 6Adelaide&Meath Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, Stockholm, Sweden, 10Hôpital Saint Louis, Paris, France, 11Hôpital 7Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Baladona, Spain, 8Herlev Calmette, Lille, France, 12Hôpital Claude Huriez, Lille, France. Hospital, Herlev, Denmark, 9Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France, Background : IBD are complex genetic disorders of unknown etiology. 10Hôpital Calmette, Lille, France, 11Dondation Jean Dausset/CEPH, We have recently identified CARD15/NOD2 as being a susceptibility Paris, France. gene for Crohn’s disease (CD). Introduction: Recently, the IBD1 locus on chromosome 16 has been Aim : Because CARD4/NOD1 shares many structural and functional identified as CARD15, which encodes an intracellular protein involved similarities with CARD15/NOD2, we tested its putative role in in NFkB activation and apoptosis. It has been shown that mutations Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD). in the CARD15 gene have been associated with Crohn’s disease Patients and methods : The IBD families were recruited through (CD) but not with Ulcerative Colitis (UC) or in controls. a large European consortium. The 11 exons and intron-exon Aim: To assess the relative importance of CARD15 mutations in « boundaries of CARD4/NOD1 were screened for the presence of mixed families » where CD and UC co-existed. variants in 77 unrelated IBD patients (62 CD and 15 UC patients) Patients and methods: The entire coding sequence of CARD15 gene using direct sequencing. The genotyping of identified variants in was screened either by sequencing or by dHPLC in an European IBD families was carried out using a PCR-RFLP procedure and cohort of 167 patients (85 CD and 82 UC) from 78 mixed families and the Transmission Disequilibrium Test (TDT) was computed by 103 healthy controls (HC). Allele frequencies in CD and UC groups GENEHUNTER 2.0 program. were compared with those in HC using the chi-square test. Results : Nine sequence variations were identified in the coding Results: Twenty-six variants were identified, including the 3 main CD- sequence of the CARD4 gene. Five of them (E266K, D372N, associated variants (R702W, G908R and 1007fs) in the CD and UC R705Q, T787M and T787K) were non conservative variants but groups. Ten rare mutations identified in both groups were considered only one (E266K) was present in more than one IBD patient. This as potential disease causing mutations. The allele prevalence of the variant was genotyped in 373 IBD families including 235 CD, three main variants R702W, G908R and 1007fs was 4.1%, 4.7% 57 Ulcerative Colitis (UC) and 81 mixed families. TDT failed to and 8.8% for CD patients; 1.8%, 4.3% and 3.0% for UC patients and demonstrate any association between the E266K variant and any 4.4%, 1.0% and 1.9% for controls, respectively. of the three phenotypes : IBD, CD and UC (p>0.05). The analysis Conclusion: In the « mixed » families, the G908R variant was of the phenotype-genotype relationship do not show any specific associated to both CD and UC (p=0.03 and p=0.04, respectively), characteristics neither in patients who are homozygous for E266K, whereas the variant 1007fs was only associated to CD (p=0.002). In nor in those carrying the 4 other non synonymous variations (D372N, contrast, the allele frequency of R702W which was found associated R705Q, T787M and T787K). to CD did not differ significantly in the CD group and the controls. Conclusion: These results suggest that CARD4/NOD1 do not play a major role, if any, in IBD genetic susceptibility. P0043. Haplotypic and cladistic analyses revealed a marked dispersion of CD-predisposing nucleotide P0041. Interactive effect of DQA1*0101 and the variations in CARD15/NOD2 HB*14 AChRα subunit polymorphism on anti-AChR M. Chamaillard1,2, H. Zouali2, S. Lesage2, J. Cézard3, J. Belaiche4, S. autoantibodies in autoimmune Myasthenia Gravis. Almer5, C. Tysk6, S. Montague7, M. Gassull8, V. Binder9, Y. Finkel10, M. Giraud, B. Eymard, C. Tranchant, P. Gajdos, H. J. Garchon; P. Puig11, C. Gower-Rousseau12, J. Macry13, J. Colombel12, M. INSERM U25, Paris, France. Sahbatou2, G. Thomas14,2,11, J. Hugot3,2,11; The HB*14 microsatellite allele located within the CHRNA gene, 1INSERM, Paris, France, 2Fondation Jean Dausset, Paris, that encodes the alpha subunit of the muscle acetylcholine receptor France, 3PEWG-IBD, Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, (AChR), the HLA classe II DQA1*0101 allele and the DR3 haplotype Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 4GETAID, Department were previously associated with an increased risk of acquired of Gastroenterology, CHU de Liège, Belgium, 5Division of autoimmune generalized Myasthenia Gravis (MG) using a case- Gastroenterology and Hepatology, IHM, Linköpings Universitet, control design. We looked for an influence of these three markers Linköping, Sweden, 6Department of Gastroenterology, Örebro on anti-AChR antibody titers of 480 seropositive MG patients by Medical Center Hospital, Örebro, Sweden, 7Department of ANOVA. We took thymus histopathology into account since it Gastroenterology, Adelaide & Meath Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, markedly influences anti-AChR antibody titers. Their distribution 8Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital Universitari Germans was normalized by logarithmic transformation. A synergistic effect Trias i Pujo, Barcelona, Spain, 9Department of Gastroenterology of HB*14 and DQA1*0101 on autoantibody titers was observed Herlev Hospital, Herlev, Denmark, 10Department of Gastroenterology, (P<0.03). In DQA1*0101+ patients, the increase in autoantibody Karolinska Children’s Hospita, Stockholm, Sweden, 11INSERM U434, titers associated with the presence of HB*14 was 10-fold in average Paris, France, 12Registre EPIMAD, Hopital Calmette, Lille, France, in the subgroup of thymectomized patients with thymus hyperplasia 13INSERM U458, Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 14Department or with a normal thymus (P=0.0006). Consistent with these findings, of Gastroenterology, Hopital Saint Louis, Paris, France. HB*14 was preferentially transmitted to DQA1*0101+ MG patients Crohn’s disease (CD) is a worldwide early-onset complex condition of this subgroup (P=0.031). This effect of HB*14 was enhanced in of uncontrolled inflammation of the gastrointestinal mucosa. We haploDR3+ patients, with a 18-fold increase of their autoantibody have recently identified three dominating CD‘s predisposing variants titers (P=0.0006). Moreover, patients with high levels of autoantibody (Arg702Trp, Gly908Arg, Leu1007fs) within CARD15/NOD2 gene titers (>100nM) had an increased frequency of these three markers (Nature, 411 : 599-603, 2001). CARD15 is a new member of the (OR=15.71 ; P=0.0032). Our data strengthen the hypothesis of an CED4/Apaf1 superfamily. The more drastic mutation, Leu1007fs, has immunological role of the CHRNA gene product in MG predisposition. been established as a causative variant with a loss of LPS-induced HB*14 would influence the immunogenicity of the alpha subunit of the NFkappaB activation. The role in pathogenesis of 32 others non- AChR, perhaps through presentation of a novel epitopic variant by conservative amino acid changes are currently investigated. the DQA1*0101 gene product. This effect would be enhanced in the In order to explore the origin and dispersion of CD-predisposing context of the DR3 haplotype, that would provide non-antigen specific alleles, a total of 232 CD families were recruited through a large immune dysregulation. European consortium : France (n=128), Belgium (n=23), Scandinavia (Sweden and Denmark, n=17), Mediterranean area (Italy, Spain, Portugal and North of Africa, n=37), Ireland (n=2), Poland (n=2), 82 Posters - Cancer Genetics 83 originating from France and another country (n=20), and from Within sporadic early-onset breast cancer cases no disease-causing India (n=1), Sri-Lanka (n=1) and Iran (n=1). All these families were mutation was found. genotyped for 15 markers in and nearby NOD2/CARD15 including Conclusion: Germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are the three non-synonimous sites described above. Haplotypes were responsible for a significant fraction of familial breast and ovarian built using Haplodump implemented in the GeneHunter package. cancer cases in the Czech Republic. We report herein a distinct origin of Arg702Trp, Gly908Arg, Contract grant sponsor: Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: Leu1007fsinC. The allele frequency of Arg702Trp, and Leu1007insC MZ00020980501; is partitioned within Europe (p=0,05 and p=0,02 respectively), which and Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of Health of the Czech is consistent with recent and possibly multiple recurrent mutations Republic: NC5561-3 and NC6396-3. events. Susceptibility haplotype distribution in Scandinavian CD families is statistically marked (p<0.05), which could reflect by genetic P0046. Screening of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in heterogeneity. In addition, we make optimal use of flanking SNPs to western Sweden perform cladistic analyses illustrating the importance of phylogenetic Y. Engwall1, M. Nordling1, J. Lundberg1, A. Bergman1, T. Martinsson1, analyses and present-day haplotypes complexity for gene-mapping Z. Einbeigi2, P. Karlsson2, A. Wallgren2, J. Wahlström1; strategy. 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska Univ. Hospital/East, Göteborg, Sweden, 2Dept. of Oncology, Sahlgrenska Univ. Hospital/ P0044. GenHotel, a new approach for candidate gene Sahlgrenska, Göteborg, Sweden. studies in multifactorial diseases applied to rheumatoid Germline mutations in the hereditary breast/ovarian cancer arthritis. causative genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 are considered to constitute L. Michou1, J. Osorio2, E. Petit2, C. Pierlot2, T. Bardin1, S. Lasbleiz1, approximately 6-10% of these cancers. The frequency of female F. Cornélis for ECRAF2; mutation carriers with breast/ovarian cancer depends on the 1Unité de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, population studied, and display considerable variation in coincidence 2GenHotel/Laboratoire de Recherche Européen pour la Polyarthrite with ethnic and geographical diversity. Mutations are mainly found Rhumatoïde, ECRAF-Université Paris VII, Evry-Genopole, France. as small insertions, deletions or substitutions, but also as exon-wide Introduction : Genome scans in multifactorial diseases result in deletions. We performed mutation analyses in 116 patients, selected a large number of candidate genes. To facilitate candidate gene under informed consent, from the Sahlgrenska University Hospital, investigation for rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the most common Gothenburg, Sweden. The genes were initially screened using the autoimmune disease, we set up GenHotel : the invitation to come and Protein Truncation Test (PTT) on genomic DNA (BRCA1 exon 11, test hypotheses on a common resource (www.GenHotel.com). BRCA2 exon 10, 11) and cDNA from RT-PCR (all other exons) for Aim of the study : to illustrate the GenHotel approach with the test of truncating mutations. All mutations but one was detected with PTT; RA associated HLA-DRB1 alleles. the remaining one with dHPLC. Automated DNA sequencing of the Patients and methods: DNA of 100 caucasian French families with detected mutations revealed seven different frameshift mutations, one RA patient and both parents were two nonsense mutations and one large deletion. Four of these have genotyped for HLA-DRB1. Analysis was performed with the haplotype not been reported earlier: BRCA1 409-410delCA; 2229-2230delAA; relative risk (HRR) and the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT). P 3029delA; 1912 T>G. BRCA mutations were found in 34% of the < 0.05 was considered suggestive and < 10-6 demonstrative. screened.families; this is comparable to frequencies reported in other Results: European studies. Notably, a western Swedish founder mutation HRR : the allele frequency of RA-associated alleles (A) was 57% in (BRCA1 3171ins5) accounted for 27 of the 37 mutations detected in transmitted chromosomes versus 28% in non-transmitted, chi 2 = the 116 families. Our results are furthermore in accordance with the 35,6 (P<10-7) observation that frameshift mutations in the first two-thirds of BRCA1 TDT : out of 97 heterozygous parents A/X, the A allele transmission are associated with a higher risk of ovarian relative to breast cancer was 79%, versus 50% under Mendel’s lawx, chi 2 = 33,5 (P<10-7) than are truncating mutations in the last one-third of the gene. Conclusion: The results demonstrated the HLA-DRB1 contribution to RA. The GenHotel appoach advantages include genotype quality P0047. An investigation into the methylation status of control, increased robustness from familial based analysis and ability oestrogen receptor beta and its subsequent expression to test complex hypotheses involving haplotypes, inprinting and gene in human breast cancer interactions. F. J. Cooke1, P. Balfe1, A. H. McCann2, P. Dervan3, M. Kennedy3, M. Kerin1; P 2. Cancer Genetics 1Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin / Mater Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, P0045. Germline Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes 2Conway Institute for Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, in the Czech Hereditary Forms of Breast / Ovarian Cancer University College Dublin, Ireland, 3Department of Pathology, Mater E. Machackova, M. Navratilova, H. Pavlu, D. Valik, M. Hruba, L. Misericordiae Hospital, Eccles St, Dublin 7, Ireland. Foretova; Since the discovery of the novel oestrogen receptor beta (ERß) Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic. much investigation has centered on the role of this new marker in Background: It is estimated that 5-10% of all breast cancers can be the prognosis of breast cancer and response to adjuvant tamoxifen. of hereditary origin. Germline mutations in highly penetrant cancer The aim of this study is to assess the methylation status of the ERß susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 could cause genetic promoter with respect to ERß expression by immunohistochemistry in predisposition to breast and ovarian cancers. a preliminary cohort of 25 primary human breast tumors. In addition Material and Methods: Molecular genetic analysis of BRCA1 and we sought to correlate ERα, ERß and c-erbB2 status with tumor BRCA2 genes was performed in 150 high-risk breast and breast/ staging and prognosis. ovarian cancer families and in 25 women diagnosed with early-onset Fresh tissue was prospectively collected from screen detected sporadic breast cancers below 40 years. Protein truncation test and and symptomatic palpable breast tumors managed in the Mater heteroduplex analysis followed by sequencing was carried out on Misericordiae and Mater Private Hospitals. DNA was extracted from genomic DNA isolated from blood samples. The genetic counseling the frozen tissue using the standard phenol-chloroform approach. and preventive clinical follow-up of gene carriers is part of the genetic The DNA was subsequently quantified by spectrophotometry and its program. integrity verified on a 1% agarose gel. To allow Methylation Specific Results: A germline disease causing mutation was found in 63 PCR, the DNA was modified by a sodium bisulphate procedure and screened high-risk unrelated families (42%), 41 mutations (12 amplified using methylation specific primers. Resultant products were different) in BRCA1 gene and 22 mutations (15 different) in BRCA2 analysed on an 8% PAGE and confirmed with sequencing. gene. The most frequently detected mutations in BRCA1 gene were Table 1. Histological diagnosis and immunohistochemical status 5385-5386insC (14 families) and 3819-3823del5 (7 families). Two ERα status ERß status novel frame shift mutations were detected in BRCA1gene: 2616- Diagnosis Total (% positive) (% positive) 2617ins10; 3761-3762del2. Three novel frame shift mutations were Invasive Ductal 22 20/22 (91%) 16/22(73%) detected in BRCA2 gene: 5073-5074del2; 6677-6678del2; 6866delC. Invasive Lobular 3 3/3 (100%) 2/3(66%) Posters - Cancer Genetics 84 85 With the establishment of this novel MSP approach to analyzing the P0050. Selective genetic screening in 250 Belgian breast methylation status of the ERß promoter in human breast cancer, we and ovarian cancer families identifies BRCA1 or BRCA2 intend to correlate the findings with the immunohistochemical results mutations in 20% of cases obtained with the 14C8 monoclonal antibody. These studies are G. Michils, K. Minner, B. Vankeirsbilck, E. Legius, G. Matthijs; of special importance in the context of epigenetic reversibility as a Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. potential therapeutic option. Germline mutations of the BRCA genes are associated with familial breast and/or ovarium cancer, or with early onset of breast cancer P0048. Analysis of mutations in the BRCA2 gene in (<35y) in the absence of a familial history. In families attending a Chilean families with breast cancer cancer genetic clinic mutations are typically identified in 15-20% of M. Carvallo1, L. Palma1, M. Gallardo1, C. Rousseau2, M. King2; the analysed families. Most mutations are truncating and spread all 1Universidad Catolica de Chile, Santiago, Chile, 2University of over the coding regions, but at a higher frequency in the large exons Washington, Seattle, WA. (exon 11 of BRCA1 and exons 10 and 11 of BRCA2). We chose to Two genes have been described until today as responsible for analyse these large exons together with exons with Belgian founder familiar breast cancer, BRCA1 and BRCA2. Several studies have mutations, Ashkenazi mutations, hot spots and exonic deletions. demonstrated that the frequency of mutations in either gene is DNA samples of a cohort of 250 unrelated affected patients were variable depending on the population analysed. Since this effect included in this study: 140 samples were analysed by Enzymatic may be due to the ethnic origin of the families selected, we were Mutation Detection (EMD), while 110 samples were screened by interested in knowing the incidence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC). in Chilean families. We previously reported a very low frequency Exon deletions were analysed by amplification across breakpoint of mutations in the BRCA1 gene (10%). This study shows the junctions. analysis of BRCA2 mutations in the same group of families. The By screening selected exons of BRCA1 and BRCA2, 21 germline families were selected by standard criteria. All exons encoding the truncating mutations and one exonic deletion were found in 48 of 250 BRCA2 gene were PCR amplified and analysed through SSCA, families. In addition, one pathogenic missense mutation has been heteroduplex and DNA sequencing. We found in one family the identified in BRCA1: M1V. DHPLC has advantages in comparison 6174delT mutation in exon 11, which has been extensively reported to EMD, mainly because it is semi-automatable. This study shows in families with Ashkenazi-Jewish ancestors. The patient carrying the that a limited screening of BRCA1 and BRCA2 results is a high yield mutation informed about Ashkenazi-Jewish ancestors in her family. of mutations in our clinical sample (20%). This screening could be The second mutation found is 6857delAA, also present in exon 11. offered to a large group of females while an exhaustive screening This is a very interesting mutation for our study, since it has been could be performed in a more selected group. Analysis of additional described previously in three families from Spanish origin. Due to exons by DHPLC is going on in such a selected group. high percentage of admixture of the Chilean population with Spanish colonisers during the XVI and XVII centuries, it is highly probable that P0051. RAD6 and breast cancer the mutation has a common ancestor. Also it is interesting to note A. Lyakhovich1,2, M. Shekhar1; that the incidence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in the Spanish 1Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, 2Institute of Molecular Biology population is below 20% each. (Financed by FONDECYT 1011076) and Biophysics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. Treatment with DNA damaging drugs is commonly used to localize P0049. Telomerase enzyme activity and chromosome breast cancer. It causes DNA damage and leads to genomic abnormalities detected by combined G-banding and instability and/or apoptosis as a result of mutation or altered comparative genomic hybridization in primary breast expression of genes associated with DNA repair, in particular RAD6. cancer RAD6 (Ubch2) protein is present at low amounts in cytoplasm of A. Papadopoulou1, T. Trangas1, H. Tsarouha1, M. Texeira2, E. normal human breast cells, while in metastatic breast cancer cells it Dimitriadis1, P. Ioannidis1, S. Heim3, N. Pandis1; is up-regulated and localized in the nucleus. We have demonstrated, 1”G. Papanikolaou” Research Center, “Saint Savvas” Oncological that overexpression of exogenous RAD6 cDNA in MCF10A Hospital of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Portugese Oncology Institute, human breast epithelial cells induced cell-cell fusion generating Porto, Portugal, 3The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway. multinucleated cells, centrosome amplification, abnormal mitosis and Several structural and numerical chromosomal abnormalities have aneuploidy. We found that exposure of MCF10A cells with cisplatin been recorded in breast cancer. It has been suggested that some or adriamycin resulted in enhancement of RAD6 mRNA/protein level chromosomal aberrations may be the result of telomere dysfunction which was post-transcriptionally regulated and post-translationally in rapidly proliferating cells. The de novo activation of telomerase stabilized. RAD6 protein is predominantly expressed during late in cancer possibly provides a survival mechanism curtailing further S/G2 phases. Its localization in cells at specific stages of mitosis chromosomal aberrations. In order to investigate the relation of reveals the lack of association of RAD6 with condensed chromatin. telomerase level of expression and the extent of chromosomal Co-localization of RAD6 protein with γ-tubulin on centrosomes is aberrations, 62 primary breast carcinomas were studied. Telomerase maintained throughout the interphase and mitotic stages of the cell activity was measured using a PCR based TRAP assay and 92% of cycle. We were able to show for the first time that in drug-treated the tumors were found to express Telomerase with relative activity cells RAD6 is associated with p53-p14ARF-MDM2 in the nucleus. ranging from 0 – 3839.6. Genetic alterations were determined by The expression of RAD6 correlates with human breast cancer stage G banding and Comparative Genomic Hybridization analysis. 97% and can be used as a marker to predict response to chemotherapy. of the tumors exhibited chromosomal aberrations ranging from Our findings suggest that RAD6 at low levels may play a significant 0-45. The average number of genetic alteration recorded by G- role in the maintenance of genomic integrity of mammalian cells, high banding and CGH was 10.98. No correlation was observed between levels of RAD6 probably over a certain threshold may cause genomic Telomerase activity levels and the number of genetic alteration in instability. the overall sample population. However when tumor samples with below average genetic alteration numbers were considered as a P0052. Elevated CA-125 serum level as an example of separate group, a statistically significant positive correlation was correlation between cell biology, carcinogenesis, positive recorded between Telomerase activity levels and number of genetic family story. A case of woman from the breast/ovarian alterations (R=0.339, p=0.032). This relationship was inversed in cancer family, with mutation in BRCA1 gene. the sample group with above average genetic alterations but it K. Kaczanowska; was not statistically significant (R=-0.127; p=0.574). These results Children`s University Hospital, Lublin, Poland. suggest that Telomerase may be activated in the initial steps of Characteristic feature of the neoplasm evolution is long-lasting carcinogenesis perhaps to maintain chromosomal integrity of the process. The priority of oncology is to diagnose cancer in its rapidly proliferating tumor cells while at the later stages alternative pre-clinical stage of development. It is extremely important in survival mechanisms have evolved. families, which have positive family story. The point is searching for substances, presence of which in the blood would give evidence to the presence of cancer. In case of CA-125, its production in tumor is significantly higher than in a normal cell. Level depends on mass of 84 Posters - Cancer Genetics 85 the living tumor cells. frequencies (P < 0.04) with odds ratio equal 3.3 in favor of AA among Here we report a case of patient, whose family was affected by three patients. The reason for observed frequency difference may be breast and one ovarian cancer. Because strong aggregation breast the mutation - haplotype A linkage. But it is interesting that a ratio and ovarian cancer- the woman performed genetic test. It showed of genotype AA and AB frequencies under the mutation is different mutation in BRCA1 gene, exon 20-5382insC. The next two mutations in patients and control individuals. This may suggest on operation were proven in her sister daughters. of other factors in addition to linkage. It should be noted that the In all performed clinical examinations (mammography, haplotypes A and B frequencies in Russian and West-European ultrasonographic examination of the breasts, transvaginal patients with 5382insC were the same (P = 0.40). ultrasonography) there were no pathology. But the serum level CA- The frequency of 5382insC mutation revealed in Russia is highest 125 was highly increased, accordingly:108 and 125 IU/L ( normal: among investigated populations. The proportion of this mutation 30 IU/L). She underwent prophylactic oophrectomy, and at the time is next highest in East-European countries and common in West- of surgery tumor was suspected. Histopathology gave the final Europe. These data jointly with the same SNP haplotypes found in solution: poorely diffrentiated adenocarcinoma, only in one site of Russia and West-Europe are suggestive on East-European origin of the left ovary. As a consequence, the woman started few courses of 5382insC mutation. chemotheraphy. We want to conclude, that we should perform BRCA1 and BRCA2 P0055. BRCA2 mutations and polymorphisms in Russian tests in families with strong aggregation of breast and ovarian cancer. patients with familial breast/ovarian cancer We should have a high suspicion of cancer, when serum level of E. V. Khomich1, N. I. Pospekhova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, A. N. Ca-125 is highly increased. We want to undreline the strategy of Loginova1, I. V. Kuzmina1, A. V. Budilov3, V. M. Zakharyev3, E. K. prevention. Ginter1, R. F. Garkavtseva2, A. V. Karpukhin1; 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian P0053. Androgen Receptor CAG Repeat Length in Jewish Federation, 2Cancer Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation, Israeli Women who are BRCA1/2 Mutation Carriers: 3Engelgardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Association with Breast/Ovarian Cancer Phenotype Federation. E. Dagan1, E. Friedman2, T. Paperna1, N. Carmi2, R. Gershoni- BRCA1 mutations were found in 40% of a sample of breast/ovarian Baruch1; cancer families in Russia. In present study BRCA2 gene sequence 1Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2Sheba Medical Center, Tel- variations among cancer families of the rest part of the sample were Aviv, Israel. investigated. BRCA1/2 mutation carriers are at increased lifetime risk for There were only 11% of the probands with deleterious BRCA2 developing breast and/or ovarian cancer. Yet, the genetic or mutations. Two deleterious mutations - 2001del4 and 4816insG - are environmental factors that govern the phenotypic expression of new. Missence mutations of unclear significance were revealed in mutant BRCA1/2 alleles remain elusive. The CAG repeat, within exon 19% of the cases. One of that (N1808K) and two single nucleotide 1 of the Androgen Receptor (AR) gene is reportedly associated with polymorphisms (SNPs) are revealed for the first time. The gene breast cancer phenotype in BRCA1 mutation carriers. To extend this variant S384F that was thought to be unclear significance mutation observation, we genotyped 227 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers for the is evidently polymorphism because was found in common with polymorphic AR CAG repeat, and correlated allele size with breast/ deleterious mutation of BRCA2 gene. SNPs of 12 types on an extent ovarian cancer morbidity parameters. Of 227 BRCA1/2 carriers, 169 of BRCA2 gene were found. Six of those were in coding regions were BRCA1 mutation carriers and 58 carried a BRCA2 mutation. of the gene. A variant N372H that known as confers an increased Seventy-nine women had unilateral breast cancer, 15 - bilateral breast cancer risk under HH homozygote, in 12% of the cases was breast cancer, 41 - ovarian cancer, 14 - breast and ovarian cancer homozygosis on HH with allele frequency equals 0.31. At the same and 78 were asymptomatic mutation carriers. Mean age at diagnosis time, a variant IVS11+80del4 with the similar allele frequency was in women with either or both neoplasms was 46.7±11.2 years, and not found as homozygote. It is interesting that we found a frequency that of the asymptomatic group - 45.8±9.4 years, a statistically of 203G/A polymorphism significantly higher in comparison with insignificant difference. The AR CAG repeat ranged from 8-28 in all results in BIC data base, although the frequencies of other frequent tested women. Mean number of AR CAG repeat was not statistically SNPs were not so different. BRCA2 SNPs of control group are under different between affected (18.3±2.4) and asymptomatic mutation investigation at present. carriers (18.6±2.1). AR CAG repeat among patients with early onset (<42 years) breast cancer was significantly shorter (17.5±2.3) P0056. Prevalence of BRCA1 gene 5382insC mutation in compared with asymptomatic individuals (18.6±2.1) (p<0.01), and the St.Petersburg patients with familial breast cancer. shorter allele - the younger the age at diagnosis. This study does not N. A. Grudinina1, E. P. Lamber2; provide conclusive evidence of association between AR CAG repeat 1Insitute for Experimental Medicine, Saint Petersburg, Russian size and breast or ovarian cancer risk. However, a small effect of a Federation, 2Institute for Experimental Medicine, Saint Petersburg, short AR CAG allele size on breast cancer penetrance at early age Russian Federation. was noted. The BRCA1 gene mutation are the common cause of familial breast cancer. The risk of breast cancer development in women with P0054. Association of 5382insC Mutation with SNPs of germline BRCA1 gene mutations approaches 90% during life span. BRCA1 Gene and the Mutation Frequency in Russia We have created the DNA collection from St. Petersburg familial A. N. Loginova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, E. V. breast cancer patients and demonstrated nearly the same frequency Khomich1, I. V. Kuzmina1, A. V. Budilov3, V. M. Zakharyev3, E. K. of BRCA1 gene 5382insC mutation in both Slavic and Ashkenazi Ginter1, R. F. Garkavtseva2, A. V. Karpukhin1; Jewish patients with familial breast cancer. 5382insC mutation of the 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian BRCA1 gene was found in 1 Ashkenazi Jewish family with familial Federation, 2Cancer Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation, breast cancer out of 9 studied and in 3 Slavic families with familial 3Engelgardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian breast cancer out of 20 studied. 5382insC mutation was found neither Federation. in Ashkenazi and Slavic patients with sporadic breast cancer, nor in A high predominance of 5382insC in BRCA1 gene mutation spectrum control group, that consists of 50 Slavic and 50 healthy Ashkenazi (80% of all mutations) of patients with familial breast/ovarian patients unselected in respect of familial breast cancer. Previously cancer and a set of 11 SNPs on an extent of the gene were found. 5382insC mutation of the BRCA1 gene was reported in number This set of SNPs in strong linkage disequilibrium and consensus of familial ovary cancer patients from Moscow and thus 5382insC sequence defined two most frequent haplotypes (named B and mutation of the BRCA1 gene may be the common cause of familial A). The haplotype frequencies in cancer patients and in control breast and ovary cancer in whole Russia. However, the mutation individuals were not different significantly. However, the haplotype A spectra specificity from other countries in BRCA1 gene is expected to the haplotype B ratio in genomes with the 5382insC mutation was in Russian population and some new BRCA1 gene mutations are approximately three times higher than these haplotypes ratio in the in process of characterization now. The elucidation of BRCA1 gene population (P < 0.04). The same difference between patients under mutation spectra in St. Petersburg familial breast cancer will help to 5382insC mutation and control group was observed for genotype provide genetic counseling in breast cancer families and improve Posters - Cancer Genetics 86 87 treatment patients with high risk of breast cancer in the future. The APC, beta-catenin and E-cadherin gene loci. current research was supported in part by RFBR grant 01-04-49627. DNAs were used for PCR, RFLP, VNTR and LOH analysis. To analyze LOH at the APC gene loci we used three RFLP intragenic P0057. Altered expression of the candidate tumor markers (exon 11 RsaI, exon 15 MspI, and exon 15 AspHI). The suppressor gene, WWOX, in human breast tumors presence of the mutations in the amplicon 15H of the APC gene, and K. Driouch1, H. Prydz2, R. Lidereau1, E. Frengen2; APC gene mutation in codon 1309 were analyzed as well. To analyze 1INSERM E0017/Oncogénétique, Centre René Huguenin, F-92211 mutations in the beta-catenin gene we amplified exon 3 and the St-Cloud, France, 2Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, intronic sequences flanking it from tumor DNAs. For the LOH analysis N-0316 Oslo, Norway. of E-cadherin gene locus we used D16S752 polymorphic marker. The presence of putative tumor-suppressor genes on chromosome The informativity for all three APC intragenic markers was 53.3 16q23.2-24.1 has been suggested by LOH analysis in breast cancer % (32 of 60 assayed), and 25 % of tumors (8 of 32 informative) as well as other cancer types. This region overlaps with the fragile demonstrated LOH. We found two APC gene mutations in our tumor site FRA16D and the region of homozygous deletions found in samples: a deletion in codon 1309, and an insertion in the amplicon various cancers. We have previously constructed a 1.2 Mb contig 15H of the APC gene. In 3.3 % of tumor samples (2 of 60 tested) the map and used this resource to assign transcripts to the LOH region. mutation of the beta-catenin gene was found. The informativity of This resulted in the identification of the WWOX/FOR gene. D16S752 E-cadherin gene polymorphic marker was 75% (45 of 60 The mouse homologue of the WWOX protein has been defined tested) and 28.8 % of tumors (13 of 45 informative) demonstrated as an apoptogenic protein and an essential partner of p53 in cell LOH. death. Thus WWOX is a strong candidate tumor-suppressor gene. We have performed an expression study of the WWOX gene in a P0060. Genetic analysis of APC gene and the diagnostics series of human breast tumors and breast cancer cell lines, and of familial adenomatous polyposis in pediatrics detected altered WWOX expression at high frequency in cancer H. Kapitanovic Vidak, T. Cacev, K. Pavelic, S. Kapitanovic; cells. Furthermore, identification of two distinct alternative WWOX Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. transcripts expressed at high levels in human tumors suggests an Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant involvement of the WWOX gene in cancer progression. We have inherited disease. Patients with FAP develop hundreds to thousands initiated functional studies of WWOX in human cells in order to of adenomatous polyps in the colon and rectum during their second characterize the role of the WWOX protein in normal as well as or third decades and one or more of them can progress to cancer. cancerous cells. Children of affected individuals are at 50% risk of inheriting the This work was supported by the Research Council of Norway, the disease. Because FAP patients have a very high risk of colorectal Norwegian Cancer Society, the Ligue Nationale de Lutte Contre le cancer, identification of the individual risk in family members is Cancer (LNCC), and the Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer important to prevent cancer deaths. For these at risk members of the (ARC). family, annual endoscopy is recommended. The method of providing such accurate presymptomatic diagnosis is to determine whether P0058. Investigation of APC mutations of a patient with a family member has inherited the particular germ-line mutation of FAP and her family members by heterodublex analyses the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene carried by the affected B. Tunca1, M. Menigatti2, P. Benatti2, G. Cecener1, M. Pedroni2, A. parent. Scarselli2, F. Borghi2, E. Sala2, T. Yýlmazlar3, A. Zorluoglu3, U. Egeli1, Genomic DNAs were isolated from peripheral blood of patients and O. Yerci4, M. Ponz de Leon2; their relatives. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed 1University of Uludag, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology using specific pairs of primers. PCR products were analyzed by and Genetics, Bursa, Turkey, 2Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, electrophoresis on a Spreadex EL 300 gels. Universita di Modena, Modena, Italy, 3University of Uludag, Medical The genetic analysis confirmed the APC gene codon 1309 germ-line Faculty, Department of General Surgery, Bursa, Turkey, 4University of mutation in two children not yet having colorectal adenomas, but Uludag, Medical Faculty, Department of Pathology, Bursa, Turkey. having inherited APC gene mutation from their mother who died from Familial adenomatous polyposis coli (FAP) is an autosomal dominant colon carcinoma. APC gene mutation analysis also confirmed the disease characterised by the presence of 100 or more colorectal diagnosis of FAP in one child having colorectal adenomas as a first adenomatous polyps. Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis gene case of FAP in that family. (APC) gene primarily responsible for the development of this disease. We use APC gene mutations analysis in presymptomatic diagnostics In this study, we examined one patient with FAP and 21 family but also to confirm the diagnosis of FAP. Children confirmed as a members including one effected person from FAP and 20 gene mutation carriers can be early included in surveillance program nonsemptomatic persons. Our proband case who have a retinal and treatment. lesions (congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, called CHRPE) and hundreds adenomatous polyps on all colon and P0061. Germline mutations of the APC gene in Czech FAP rectum is a 36 years old woman. We isolated DNA from pheripheral families blood samples of proband and her family members by proteinaz K M. Kohoutová1, J. Stekrová1, V. Jirásek2, J. Kotlas1, V. Kebrdlová1; incubation and phenol-chloroform extraction. We studied E,D, F, 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of and G segments of exon 15 of APC gene by heterodublex analyses Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, (HDA). For staining, we used non-radioactive silver staining method. Czech Republic, 21st Medical Department of the First Faculty of We determined mutation in 5 person from this family in segment Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, F of exon 15 of APC. Two of them were patients with FAP (one is Czech Republic. ourproband case) and another three persons were non semptomatic Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominantly family members. Result of sequencing analysis of these cases, we inherited disease characterised by the development of hundreds to determined T deletion at position 3554 causing a frameshift mutation thousands of colorectal adenomatous polyps and by the progression in APC gene. to carcinomas. Causative germline mutations have been described in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. In the present study the P0059. Involvement of APC/beta-catenin signalling and entire APC coding region has been screened for germline mutations E-cadherin in sporadic colon cancer in 45 unrelated Czech FAP families. Using PCR, DGGE analysis T. Cacev1, R. Spaventi2, K. Pavelic1, S. Kapitanovic1; and DNA sequencing we found 30 mutations, twelve of which were 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Pliva d.d., Zagreb, found to be novel: seven frameshift mutations (exon 9 and 15), two Croatia. nonsense mutations (exon 9 and 11) and three splicing mutations Activation of APC/beta-catenin signalling pathway by mutation in the (intron 11 and 14). In previously reported mutations we identified ten APC or beta-catenin gene contributes to colorectal carcinogenesis. frameshift mutations in exon 15 and six nonsense mutations (exon E-cadherin is involved in control of intercellular adhesion and acts as 5, 9 and 15). The common 5 bp deletions at codons 1309 and 1061 an invasion supressor. We examined 60 cases of human sporadic were identified in five families (16,6%) and substitution 2805C>A colon cancer and corresponding normal tissue samples to evaluate was found in three cases (10%). Identified mutations result in the the loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and presence of mutations at the classical form of FAP except the 1 bp deletion at codon 409 (exon 9), 86 Posters - Cancer Genetics 87 which caused the attenuated form of FAP. In addition, one missense P0064. Complete characterization of the colon cancer cell mutation was revealed in exon 3 although missense mutations line HT29 clone 19A by multicolor banding (MCB) are rarely observed in FAP. It remains to be determined whether A. Kuechler1,2, A. Weise1, S. Michel1, B. Pool-Zobel3, A. this substitution represents the disease-causing mutation. Two Schaeferhenrich3, A. Heller1, H. Starke1, T. G. Wendt2, U. Claussen1, samesense variations were detected in exon 15. The presence of T. Liehr1; one of them correlates with disease occurrence in the affected family. 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany, Thus the clinical significance of this mutation cannot be excluded. 2Department of Radiotherapy, Jena, Germany, 3Department of Supported by the grant project MS CR:CEZ:J13/98:111100004. Nutritional Toxicology, Institute of Nutrition, Jena, Germany. The human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line HT29 subclone 19A P0062. Denaturing High-Performance Liquid was recently characterized by M-FISH (Eur J Hum Genet 2001, Chromatographie (DHPLC) in Screening for Mutations in Vol 9/S1, p138, P0193) and the following composite karyotype was Exon 15 of the APC (Adenomatous Polyposis Coli) Gene established: W. Heinritz, A. Kujat, S. Strenge, K. Peisker, U. G. Froster; 64~69,XX,+del(Xp),+1,+der(1)t(1;11;16),+2,+der(2)t(1;2),+der(3)ins(3 University of Leipzig, Department of Human Genetics, Leipzig, ;12),+der(4)t(2;4),+5,+del(5q),+7,+7,-8,+dup(8),+del(9),+der(9)t(6;9;X Germany. ;9),+10,+11,+11,+del(11p),+del(11q),+12,-13,-13,+i(13q),+i(13q),+der FAP (OMIM: *175100, McKusick 1986) is a rare form of hereditary (13)t(5;i(13q)),+15,+16,+17,+del(18),-19,+del(19),+der(19)t(5;19),+d colorectal cancer. Germline mutations of the APC gene were reported er(19)t(17;19),+20,+20,+22,+22[cp10]. Using M-FISH, it was possible in patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP). Inactivation to identify the chromosomes involved in aberrations, but not to define of the APC gene plays a significant role in the development of their exact breakpoints. In order to further clarify the translocation early onset colon cancer based on polyposis of the colorectum. breakpoints and to characterize possible iso-chromosomes, The location of germline mutations in the APC gene appears to multicolor banding (MCB) was applied at the 400 band level correlate with the clinical phenotype (number of colorectal adenomas, according to Mrasek et al. (Cytogenet Cell Genet 93:242-248). concomitants like occurence of further adenomas in other digestive MCB-analyses were performed on all aberrant chromosomes of this organs, desmoid tumors and Congenital Hypertrophy of the Retinal composite karyotype, i.e. on the following eighteen chromosomes: Pigmental Epithel [CHRPE]). To provide a fast mutation screening we #1, #2, #3, #4, #5, #6, #8, #9, #11, #12, #13, #16, #17, #18, #19, #20, analyzed the region of the APC gene where more than 40% of the #22 and X. Where necessary for exact definition of rearrangements, mutations in FAP are described (exon 15-4 to 15-8). We established MCB-probes were combined with centromere specific and whole DHPLC (Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chromatography) chromosome painting probes. The resulting karyotype is as follows: mutation analysis followed by automated sequencing of suspicious 64~69,XX,+del(X)(p11.2 qter),+del(1)(p35--qter),+2,+der(2)t(1;2) fragments. We investigated 9 patients with a clinical diagnosis of (1q32→1qter;2pter→2q11),-3,+i(3)(q10),+der(3)ins(3;12)(3pter→ FAP. Three sequence variations could be identified: 1 polymorphism 3p12::12p12::3p12→3qter),+der(4)t(2;4)(2q35→2qter;4pter→ and 2 mutations (3597del2A at codon 1199 with termination of 4q11),+5,+del(5)(pter→q11.2),+dic(6;9)t(6;9;X;9)(6pter→6q10;9q10→ protein translation at amino acid position 1206; 3949GàC at codon 9q21;Xp21.1→Xp11.3;9q21→9qter),+7,+7,-8,+dup(8)(qter→q10:: 1317, E1317Q). We describe the optimized conditions for DHPLC q10→q24::hsr::q24→qter),+10,+11,+del(11)(p13→qter),+der(11)t(1 for this gene. According to our results DHPLC is an efficient and 1;?)(11pter→11q24;?),+12,-13,-13,+i(13q),+i(13q),+der(13)t(5;13)( fast screening method to identify mutations in the APC gene which 13qter→13q10::13q10→13q21::5q31→5qter),+15,+del(16)(pter→ can be applied to the other exons of the APC gene for a fast and q13),+der(17)t(19;17)(19pter→19p11;17p11→17qter),+i(18p),- cost reducing mutation screening. The rapid mutation screening will 19,+der(19)t(5;19)(5pter→5p11;19q10→19qter),+20,+20,+22,+der(22 optimize further diagnostic and therapeutic strategies in families with )t(17;22;17) [cp10]. hereditary colon cancer. In summary, the MCB-technique was suitable to define all translocation breakpoints apart from one (i.e. der(22)t(17;22;17) P0063. NF1 tumor suppressor gene in sporadic colon which consists of only very little chromosomal material). Thus, MCB is a very useful tool for detailed analyses of chromosomal cancer rearrangements. S. Kapitanovic1, T. Cacev1, K. Pavelic1, R. Spaventi1,2; Supported by DFG (PO284/6-1), Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung (99.105.1) 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2PLIVA d.d., Zagreb, and EU (ICA2-CT-2000-10012 and QLRT-1999-31590). Croatia. Colorectal carcinomas are characterized by multiple genetic P0065. Optimization of DHPLC experimental conditions alterations that occur during tumorigenesis. Several tumor suppressor genes associated with colorectal carcinoma have been identified: for mutation analysis of the hereditary non polyposis MCC and APC on chromosome 5q, p53 on chromosome 17p, nm23- colon cancer (HNPCC) genes hMLH1 and hMSH2 H1 on chromosome 17q, and DCC and DPC4 on chromosome M. Schmitt1, M. Gribba2, J. M. Limacher3, S. Olschwang4, J. L. 18q. We examined 60 cases of human sporadic colon cancer Mandel2; and corresponding normal tissue samples to evaluate the loss of 1Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique, Strasbourg, France, 2IGBMC, heterozygosity (LOH) at the NF1 gene loci. The purpose of this study Illkirch, France, 3Service d’Oncologie, Hopital Civil, Strasbourg, was also to evaluate whether the LOH at the NF1 gene is associated France, 4CEPH Diagnostics - Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, with clinicopathological characteristics in sporadic colon cancer. Paris, France. DNAs were used for PCR, RFLP, VNTR, and LOH analysis. PCR Denaturating high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) is was performed using specific pairs of primers. PCR products were an efficient method for the detection of point mutations in disease- analyzed by RFLP analysis, and VNTR analysis. To analyze LOH at related genes. the NF1 gene loci we used three polymorphic markers: one RFLP Colorectal cancer is one of the most common cancers, and mutations marker (exon 5 RsaI) and two VNTR markers (IVS27AAAT2.1 and in the genes for hereditary non polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC), IVS38GT53.0). hMLH1 and hMSH2 represent the major cause of hNPCC. Using these three polymorphic markers 50 (83.3%) patients were We have recently applied the DHPLC mutation detection to the 16 found heterozygous and informative for LOH analysis. DNA from exons of hMSH2 and 19 exons of hMLH1 genes. To test sensitivity 9 (18%) tumors exhibited LOH at the NF1 locus. The majority NF1 and reproducibility of DHPLC, we have first determined the best gene LOH was observed in Dukes’ A (56%), in the well differentiated DHPLC conditions on the wild type sequences, followed by the tumors (43%), and in the tumors that were smaller than 5cm (67%). study of 35 sequence variants previously found by sequencing DNA Conclusion: Our results support the view that malignant progression samples of HNPCC patients. All of the 35 mutations were detected is a consequence of more than one genetic change and suggest that using DHPLC (sensitivity 100%). inactivation of NF1 gene plays a role in a multistep process of colon We then used DHPLC to analyse 18 patients with colorectal tumor progression as an early event. cancer not fulfilling all the Amsterdam criteria. We have found two mutations : Y43C in exon 1 of hMSH2 (unpublished yet) affecting a highly conserved residue and a 790+1G to A in intron 9 of hMLH1 (previously described), one of them did not fulfill the Amsterdam criteria. This low mutation yield could be due to the patients inclusion Posters - Cancer Genetics 88 89 criteria. We have also found many polymorphisms, with a much Muir-Torre syndrome (MTS) is an autosomal dominant higher frequency than previously published. genodermatosis characterized by skin tumors associated with In conclusion, DHPLC is a rather rapid and inexpensive technology visceral malignancies. MTS shares many clinical similarities with that may be used to screen for mutations colorectal cancer patients Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC), and germ-line where HNPCC may be suspected but who do not fulfill stricter mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes have also been criteria. found in MTS families. We present monozygotic sisters with MTS caused by a point mutation (IVS5+3A>T) in the 3’ splice site of exon P0066. Unusual Findings Of APC Gene Analyses In 5 of MSH2 resulting in the deletion of this exon from the mRNA, thus suspected FAP Cases From The Republic Of Macedonia encoding a truncated protein. One sister developed her first squamos A. J. Dimovski1, A. M. Stefanovska1, T. Josifovski2, M. Panovski2, D. cell carcinoma at 50 years, and at age 53 had two sebaceous Jashar3, G. Zografski3, G. D. Efremov1; carcinomas and one adenoma removed. The second sister had 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, RCGEB, Skopje, The uterine cancer at age 40, metastatic colon cancer at 43, thyroid Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Clinic for Abdominal cancer at 45, and sebaceous adenoma at 49 years. Their mother Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic is deceased at the age of 41 from uterine and liver cancer, and the of Macedonia, 3Institute of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, maternal grandfather was diagnosed with colon cancer at 50 years. The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Kindreds with this same MMR mutation are described in the literature, AIM: Characterization of the molecular basis of FAP in Macedonia. and the types of cancers represented in these families were quite SUBJECTS: Patients with multiple adenomatous polyposis of the varied and included colon, uterine, rectal, endometrial, brain, ovarian, large intestine confirmed by histopathological evaluation. ureter, gastric, breast, duodenal, sebaceous, bone, thyroid, and lung METHODS: DGGE of exons 1-14, PTT and heteroduplex analysis cancer. Therefore, genetic counseling must emphasize the inability to of exon 15, RT-PCR of exons 1-15, sequencing of the 5’ end, and establish any correlation between the site of the individual mutation Southern blot analysis of the APC gene. and spectrum of tumor types and the use of appropriate surveillance RESULTS: Six unrelated cases (one female and five males) with methods. This family demonstrates the intrafamilial variability of multiple polyposis of the colon were enrolled in this study. Of the carcinogenesis even among monozygotic twins, and suggests that six patients, only one had a positive familial history. In the female non-genetic factors are important in modifying the expression of this patient the number of polyps was much lower (<100) than the number syndrome. observed in the male subjects (>1,000). Detailed DNA analyses of the APC gene revealed the presence of rare (unusual) defects in two P0069. Mutations of N- and K-Ras, p53 and FMS genes in patients. A large deletion, removing the entire APC gene, was found myelodysplastic syndromes in children in the patient with a positive familial history. A somatic mosaicism B. Jekic1, V. Bunjevacki1, M. Kuzmanovic2, I. Novakovic1, L. Lukovic1; for a deletion removing exons 2-14 was detected in the female 1Faculty of Medicine, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 2Institute for Mother and patient. No abnormalities at the DNA level and no allelic imbalance Child Health, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. in the expression profile of the APC gene were detected in the other Myelodysplastic syndromes arise from molecular-genetic disorder four patients. Abnormal APC gene transcripts were found in the of myeloid stem cell, characterized by dysfunction of myeloid, peripheral blood of two of these (deletion of exons 9-13 and exon 14, monocytic, erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages and high risk of respectively) that could not be explained by any defect at the DNA evolution to ALL. Hence, MDS are considered to be preleukemic level. states and are a model for studying mechanisms of leukemic CONCLUSION: The unusual findings of our study indicate that there transformation. Ras, FMS and p53 were found to be the most are genes other than the APC which might influence the development frequently mutated genes in adults with MDS. We have used PCR- of multiple colorectal adenomas, either through an APC related SSCP method and sequencing to examine mutations in these genes mechanism or through other pathways. in 35 archival bone marrow samples of children with MDS collected in last ten years in Institute for Mother and Child Health. 22 DNA P0067. Linkage mapping of FAP disease modifier locus in samples were successfully amplified with primers for N-Ras (exons a large family with a known APC mutation 1 and 2), K-Ras (exons 1 and 2) and FMS (region including codon M. Plasilova, Z. Dobbie, K. Heinimann, H. Müller; 969) genes and 11 with primers for p53 gene (exons 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9). Human Genetics, Division of Medical Genetics, University Clinics One of analyzed samples harbored mutation in first exon, and two in Basel, Switzerland. second exon of N-Ras gene. In two samples were detected mutations Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant in second exon of K-Ras gene. We have not detected mutations colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline in analyzed regions of neither p53 nor FMS genes. These findings mutations within the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. may suggest that mutations of Ras genes play important role in the Mouse model studies and broad phenotypic variability observed both development of MDS in children. within and among affected families indicate, that in FAP disease expression also other genetic and environmental factors must play P0070. The relationship of chromosomes 7,9,10,17 an important role. Their identification would substantially improve aneuploidies and p53 gene alterations between the low possibilities of genetic counseling of FAP patients by enabling the and high grade astrocytomas, using interphase FISH precise prediction of the disease severity. A large FAP kindred which technique has been previously reported by our group and harbours an adenine U. Egeli1, T. Yakut1, A. Bekar2, M. Doygun2, E. Ogul3; deletion at codon 1982 of the APC gene represents an ideal model 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, for studying FAP modifiers. Though carrying the same mutation, the University of Uludag, Bursa, Turkey, 2Department of Neurosurgery, affected subjects (45) present with variable colonic and extracolonic Faculty of Medicine, University of Uludag, Bursa, Turkey, manifestations which are in several branches transmitted through the 3Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Uludag, generations. Performed simulation studies revealed a high potential Bursa, Turkey. of this pedigree to detect a modifier locus. Here, the results of linkage In the present study, we examined chromosomes 7, 9, 10 and analysis of 20 candidate regions and eventually results on the 17 aneuploidies and p53 gene alteration on surgical fresh tissue genome wide screening for a modifier gene in FAP condition will be samples of 29 different grades of astrocytomas by using flourescence presented. in situ hybridization (FISH). Eleven of these astrocytomas were low grade (5 pilocytic and 6 grade II) and eighteen astrocytomas were P0068. Monozygotic twins showing variable expression high grade (6 anaplastic and 12 gioblastoma multiforme). All samples of Muir-Torre syndrome due to MSH2 mutation. were classified according to the WHO classification of tumours S. R. Forrester1, C. Baker2, V. Kimonis3, M. Schneider1; of the central nervous system and none of the patients received 1Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Department of preoperative chemotherapy or radiotherapy. The results showed that Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Springfield, IL, 2 of 11 low-grade and in 6 of 18 high-grade tumours had trisomy 2Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Department of 7. One of 11 low-grade and one of 18 high-grades had monosomy Internal Medicine, Division of Dermatology, Springfield, IL, 33 Harvard 9. Three of 11 low-grade and in 5 of 18 high-grade tumours had Medical School, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Boston, MA. monosomy 10. One of 11 low-grade and 2 of 18 high-grade tumours 88 Posters - Cancer Genetics 89 had monosomy 17. Three of 11 low-grade and 6 of 18 high-grade Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 3University Hospital Motol, astrocytomas had deletion of p53 gene, although there were not Prague, Czech Republic. monosomy 17. Based on these findings, chromosomes 9 and 17 A strong genetic determination is observed in about 5% of all cancer aneuploidies are not exclusive to low and high grade astrocytomas. cases. These patients belong to families with high cancer incidence However we identified monosomy 10 and p53 deletions similary rates and/or suffer from early onset tumours or multiple or multifocal between low and high grade astrocytomas, gain of chromosome 7 malignancies. Many cases of hereditary predisposition to cancer was identified in high-grade astrocytomas nearly two times more than are due to a germline mutation in one of the tumour suppressor low grade ones. Thus, we suggest that loss of chromosome 10 and genes. Some familial cancer syndromes show predisposition to a p53 gene abnormalities to be earlier event than gain of chromosome particular type of cancer (e.g. breast or colon cancer). The much 7 for carcinogenesis of astrocytomas. rarer Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is distinct because members of LFS families suffer from a wide spectrum of different malignancies P0071. p53 mutations and PAX5 and SHB genes including sarcomas, brain tumours, breast cancer, adrenocortical expression in superficial bladder cancer carcinomas and other tumours. The cancer predisposition in most J. Mares1, M. Babjuk2, M. Trkova1, J. Duskova3, V. Soukup2, P. of these families is due to a germline mutation in the TP53 gene. It Goetz1, Z. Sedlacek1; is generally expected that the tumours in most of such predisposed 1Institute of Biology and Clinical Genetics, 2nd Medical School, persons arise after the wild type TP53 allele is lost in a particular Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Urology Clinic, 1st cell clone in a carrier individual. We show on our material that many Medical School, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, tumours from germline TP53 mutation carriers retain the wild type 3Institute of Pathological Anatomy, 1st Medical School, Charles TP53 allele. The development of these tumours in LFS individuals University, Prague, Czech Republic. must therefore be based on another mechanism of the TP53 gene Transitional cell carcinoma belongs to a very heterogenous group silencing than simple DNA loss. Alternatively, one functional TP53 of neoplasms. Prognosis of a patient at the time of diagnosis is a allele may still be present in these tumours. We also compare these basic problem of the bladder cancer therapy and has encouraged observations with records in our web database of published germline the search for prognostic markers. The role and possible oncogenic TP53 mutations, which is a very useful tool for different analyses of activity of the PAX genes have been discussed recently. A candidate this intriguing syndrome. Supported by grant IGA MZ CR NC/6513-3. gene PAX5 is situated on the 9p21-23, the region of the most frequent genetic changes in bladder cancer, as well as another signal P0074. Gene expression following tet-regulated transduction gene SHB. Concerning the prognostic potential of p53 reexpression of wt p53 in lung cancer cells mutations, recent research yielded contradictory results. The aim I. Wieland1, A. Brüning2, H. Burtscher3, U. H. Weidle3; of the study was to define new combinations of prognostic markers 1Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Institute for reflecting biological behaviour of individual tumours in order to identify Cell Biology (Cancer Research), University Essen Medical School, patients at risk for tumour progression. We investigated 44 patients Essen, Germany, 3Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Penzberg, Germany. with superficial bladder cancer and 20 controls for p53 mutations in The tumor suppressor p53 is inactivated in a wide range of human exons 5-9 and adjacent intronic sequences by the SSCP and direct tumors. In non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell line NCI- genomic sequencing. One mutation (del 128 Pro) was detected H358 p53 and p16INK4a/p15INK4b are deficient while Rb is among the 44 tumours (2.3 %). 36 patients overexpressed at least expressed. This condition occurs frequently in native human NSCLC one of the PAX5 or SHB genes, 26 of them overexpressed both and, therefore, appears to be particularly suited for studying the genes. The staging and grading of these pacients were generally effects of reexpression of wild-type (wt) p53 in lung cancer cells. higher then of those without increased expression. The correlation We generated the wt p53 inducible NSCLC line H358B22 using a of PAX5 and SHB expression and clinical and histopathological data tetracycline/doxycline-regulated (tet-on) expression system. High- was evaluated. In conclusion, our results indicate that combination level reexpression of wt p53 suppressed proliferation of H358B22 of expression data might be used as a diagnostic tool in superficial cells completely. Most growth arrested cells stayed viable over a bladder cancer. Supported by the grant IGA MZ NC/5961-3. period of 1 week. Therefore, p53 appears to function mainly as an inducer of cell cycle arrest rather than as an inducer of apoptosis in P0072. Loss of heterozygosity of p53 gene in gastic these cells. This growth inhibitory effect of wt p53 is reversible after carcinoma in the region of easten Turkey 24 h of p53 induction, but it becomes irreversible after 48 h of wt p53 I. Pirim1, A. Karaman2, M. Ikbal1; induction followed by resilencing of the exogenous wt p53. Therefore, 1Ataturk Universty, Erzurum, Turkey, 2State Hospital, Erzurum, genes regulated in growth arrested H358B22 cells were investigated Turkey. by microarrays (Affymetrix), RT-PCR and Western blotting. Most Loss of heterozygosity effecting various chromosomes has been differences in gene expression were reversible upon resilencing of characterized on tumor of many human cancers. Tumor suppressor exogenous wt p53. However, in irreversibly arrested H358B22 cells gene p53 was found to be primer target for that losses. In our a subset of genes including Bax, Fas, p27KIP1, p21WAF1, B-myb, study, we examined 41 patients with gastric neoplasm for loss cyclin A and IGF-BP3 escaped reversibility. of heterozygozity effecting the p53 gene by using PCR/RFLP technique. The samples were run on to agarose gel and visualized P0075. GSTM1 null, GSTT1 null, GSTP1 (Ile105Val) on UV. Cancerous lesion of wet tissues from 25 of 41 patients was and CYPA1 (T6235C) Genotypes in Childhood Acute taken together with their peripheral blood samples. 6 patients was Leukemia inoperable, so only blood was taken and paraffin tissue of 10 patients G. Balta1, E. Ozyurek1, U. Ertem2, G. Hicsonmez1, C. Altay1, A. were examined for allelic losses. The PCR was carried out by using Gurgey1; two sets of primers, both amplified 72. codon of exon 4 of p53 gene. 1Hacettepe University, Pediatric Hematology Unit, Ankara, Turkey, The primer called G-H gave amplified fragment of 66 bp and the 2Sami Ulus Children’s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. other I-J gave 247bp fragment. These fragment were subjected to The purpose of the present study is to elucidate the role of GSTM1 restriction enzyme BstUI for detecting LOH. 18 out of 41 patients null, GSTT1 null, GSTP1 (Ile105Val) and CYPA1 (T6235C) exhibited heterozygosity loss 43,6 % and many of these LOH positive polymorphisms in the etiology of childhood acute leukemia. The cases had lenf metastasis. We could not determined any relation study showed that: A) Frequencies of the genotypes were almost between p53 LOH positivity and sex or age. Finally, it has been identical in 145 ALL patients and 186 healthy controls. Differences shown that LOH in p53 gene are common in gastric cancer and play in the frequencies were not statistically significant in all genotypes important role for cancer progression. (>p 0.2). The frequency of GSTM1 and GSTT1 double null genotype was lower in ALL (9.9%) than controls (13%). In ALL patients: 1- No P0073. Loss of heterozygosity in tumours of carriers of statistically significant differences were found in the frequencies germline TP53 mutations of genotypes between patients belonging to B cell (73) and non B P. Goetz1, M. Trkova1, L. Foretova2, V. Krutilkova3, R. Kodet1, J. cell lineage (41), yet the frequency of GSTT1 genotype was lower Mares1, Z. Sedlacek1; in the group non-B cell (17%) than B cell and control (23%). 2- No 1Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk Memorial differences were found in frequencies of the genotypes between male and female patients. 3- There was no differences in distribution of Posters - Cancer Genetics 90 91 the genotypes among age groups, except frequency of the GSTT1 patients. These results show that such deletions may also be found in genotype was lower in patients 10-17 years (17%) than 0-2, 2-9 years sporadic AML and may have contributed to leukaemogenesis. (23%) and control. 4- The frequency of CYPA1 polymorphism was Charcteristics of FANCA deletion samples (*= deletions endpoints statistically significant in group of patients with WBC count 10.000- undefined) 50.000 at presentation (58%) than <10.000 (20%), >50.000 (21%) (p FANCA 0.01) and control (29%). Frequency of GSTT1 genotype was lower Sample Type Cytogenetics Deletion in patients with >50.000 (10%) than others and control (23%). B) Statistically significant association was found in the frequencies of Male 65 43,XY,del(5)(q15q3?3),-6,-7, heterozygous GSTT1 genotype between AML patients (3.4%) and control (23%) (p 1 yrs r(7),i(8)q),add(16)(q?24),-17,-22, ex5-43* 0.016) while no association was observed for other genotypes. FAB M2 +der(?)t(?;6)(?;?p11) Female 44.XX,add(2)(q2),add(5)(q?),-7, heterozygous P0076. Increased accuracy of leukemia diagnosis by 2 45 yrs +?10, -12, add(16)(q2), -18, -20, ex19-21 combined analysis of morphology and FISH using the FAB M1 +mar[4] Duet automatic cell scanning system. Male 56 44,XY,del(1)(q21q25),add(4)(q? heterozygous C. Kaplinski1, I. Hardan1, M. Daniely2, A. Toren1, A. Shimoni1, A. 3 yrs 25),-5,-7,-11,-12,del(12)(q21q24),a 11-21 Avigdor1, M. Reichart2, A. Nagler1, T. Kaplan2, F. Brok-Simoni1, G. FAB M6 dd(13)(q13), add(16) Rechavi1, N. Amariglio1, L. Trakhtenbrot1; Female heterozygous 4 N/A 1Dept. of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology and Inst. of Hematology, The 69 yrs ex 5-43* Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 2BioView Ltd., Rehovot, Israel. P0078. Gene expression patterns in childhood acute Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a valuable tool in clinical lymphoblastic leukemia practice of leukemia. However, high false positive and false negative H. Bruchova, R. Brdicka; rates complicate the interpretation of results. These limitations are Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Department of especially important in follow-up examinations, and in detection Molecular Genetics, Prague 2, Czech Republic. of minimal residual disease (MRD). Recently, the Duet scanning Array hybridization technique represents a useful method for the system (BioView Ltd, Rehovot, Israel) was introduced. The system expression profiling of large gene sets during disease processes. provides two important features: Automatic scanning of large Using this technology we studied gene expression in childhood acute number of cells, and combined analysis of morphology and FISH lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients. For detection of transcription on the same cells. Prior to scanning, blood samples are processed activity we used Human Cancer cDNA Nylon Arrays (Clontech, USA) according to a unique protocol, which allows removal of RBC and with 588 genes that can be involved in transformation. Total RNA 2 consecutive staining of WBC (giemsa or immunocytochemistry was isolated from bone marrow leukocytes of patients at the time of and FISH). This approach was applied to 80 samples of various diagnosis (previously untreated). The standard sample was prepared hematological malignancies in order to: a) Determine the lineage by RNA mixing of control individuals (bone marrow donors). Our of cells carrying specific chromosomal rearrangement. b) Enhance objectives were to identify genes that were differentially expressed FISH analysis accuracy in leukemic cells. c) Determine clonality in ALL and might contribute to the disease development (and and maturity of residual recipient/donor cells in bone marrow characterization). transplantation. d) Determine the maturity of cells carrying Obtained gene expression profiles of patients were compared with chromosomal rearrangements in MRD. The results were compared the standard profile. The majority of patient genes showed the similar to the diagnosis given by routine methods. We found that the Duet gene activity as in the control sample (e.g. gluthatione-S-transferase system enabled increased specificity and sensitivity of leukemic cells homolog, vimentin, rho-GAP hematopoietic protein C1, rho GDP detection. Scanning automatically large numbers of cells provided dissociation inhibitor 2, fau etc.). Many genes displayed significant rapid and efficient identification of rare cells in MRD cases (up to one expression changes only in some patients. In a few genes it was leukemic cells in 15,000 WBC). The combined morphologic and FISH possible to observe similar significant changes of gene expression information of suspected cells enhanced the specificity of leukemic in most patients ( eg. PCNA, MMP8). These changes might be cells detection and reduced FP drawbacks. These preliminary results associated with common stream of the disease process and they can indicate the advantage of using such approach in diagnosis of be studied in more detail. Supported by the grant IGA MZ CR no. leukemic diseases. NM/5901-3. P0077. Are Fanconi Anaemia Genes Inactivated in P0079. The relationship between the chromosomal Sporadic Acute Myeloid Leukemia? rearrangement complexity and disease agresivity in M. D. Tischkowitz1, N. V. Morgan1, C. Eddy1, S. Ball2, S. E. some cases of leukemia Langabeer3, I. Vorechovsky4, R. Stoeger1, D. Grimwade1,3, C. G. A. G. Lungeanu1, A. Arghir2, A. Lupu3, D. Mut-Popescu4, N. Berbec4, Mathew1, S. V. Hodgson1; L. Popescu5; 1GKT School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom, 2Department 1National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Victor Babes” Institute, of Haematology, St George’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, Bucharest, Romania, 3”Carol Davila”University, Bucharest, Romania, 3Department of Haematology, University College, London, United 4”Carol Davila” University, Bucharest, Romania, 5”Carol Davila” Kingdom, 4Department of Bioscience, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, University, “Victor Babes” Institute, Bucharest, Romania. Sweden. Among over 100 patients with myeloid and lymphoid leukemias Fanconi Anaemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive disorder investigated cytogeneticaly during the last 15 months, in four cases, characterised by congenital abnormalities, defective haemopoesis disease evolution was determined by the complexity and nature of and a greatly increased risk of Acute Myeloid Leukaemia (AML). We chromosomal abnormalities identified at the first presentation. First are investigating whether mutations in the FA genes might predispose case, a 22 years old man with L3type ALL, exhibited: del 3q26;del to the development of sporadic AML. Quantitative fluorescent PCR 5p13; t(8;14)(q24;q13);del 9p11q11 and inv 15p12qter in all cells was used to screen archival DNA from peripheral blood or bone from bone marrow. He died after four months. The second case, marrow from AML cases for deletions in the cloned FA genes, a woman of 62 years old with acute leukemia weak-differentiated, FANCA, C, D2, E, F, G. Of the 103 samples successfully screened for refractory to treatment, showed 48-54 chromosomes and 3-4 markers the FANCA gene, four heterozygous deletions were found (see table). derived from chromosomes 5 and 12. She died in the next three Sequence analysis of the other allele in these four cases did not weekes. The third case, a young man of 27 years old, with acute locate a second mutation. A sodium bisulphite conversion assay was myeloid leukemia, apart of Ph chromosome presented del11q21 and developed to detect methylation of the FANCA CpG island. There del16q22. The rapid death of the three cases was a powerful prove of was no evidence of allele inactivation by hypermethylation in these 4 positive correlation between the complexity of chromosomal changes samples, nor in a further 28 non-deleted samples. No deletions were and disease agresivity. In change, a constitutional translocation found on screening the FANCC, D2, E, F and G genes in 64, 68, 31, t(3;5)(q26;q21) identified in a 72 years old woman with ET, conferred 42 and 51 samples respectively. FANCA is a large gene (43 exons, favourable evolution of the disease after a succesfull treatment with 80kb) with a high incidence of deletion mutations in affected FA HU. So, we appreciate that, if in the first three cases of myeloid 90 Posters - Cancer Genetics 91 and lymphoid leukemias could be a direct relationship between that may be associated with neoplasia have been described in this the complexity of genomic rearrangements identified at the onset region. We describe a female girl with low birth weight, microcephaly, and agresive development of the disease, in the fourth case of ET, mid facial hipoplasia, synophris, short palpebral fissures, epicanthic constitutional translocation t(3;5), seems to be not involved in the fold, beak-like nose, narrow palate, teeth abnormalities, cardiac etiology of the disease. defect, syndactily, and motor delay, that presented, at 18 months of Acknowledgements: VIASAN project 089, ANSTI 5195/1999-2001, age, an acute monocytic leukemia (FAB-M5) according to cytological, and Schering-Plough Central East Ag. histochemical and immunophenotyping features. The patient failed to achieve remission, and died 2 months after diagnosis. Cytogenetic P0080. Expression of Negative Regulators of Cell Cycle study of the bone marrow cells by GTG-banding showed: 44~48,XX,- in Human Acute Leukemia Cells. X[9],dup(1)(q23q44)[35],+2[27],-6[13],+7[4],-8[3],-9[7],+9[2],+10[3] D. Szczesniak1, J. Kocki1, M. Cioch2, A. Dmoszynska2, B. Marzec1, J. ,+11[13], +12[5],-14[5],-15[4],-17[7],-18[13],-19[3],+21[5],-22[5],+2 Wojcierowski1; 2[2],+mar[5]cp[35].Spectral karyotyping (SKY) was also performed 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Academy, Lublin, Poland, to identify the aberrations 46,XX,der(1)dup(1)(q23q44)t(1;1)(p36 2Department of Hematology, Medical Academy, Lublin, Poland. ;q32),der(6)t(6;8)(p25;q13),+11,der(11)t(11;18)(q10;q10).Periphe The negative regulators of cell cycle like cyclin dependent kinases ral blood cytogenetic analysis was not performed due to repeated inhibitors genes, Rb family genes and p53 gene play important blood products transfusions and the precocious patient death. The role as inhibitors of cell proliferation. Incorrect expression of these dismorphological features with the dup(1q) founded in all bone genes may cause disturbances in cell machinery, uncontrolled cell marrow cells analyzed suggest that this is probably a constitutional division and consequently malignant transformation.In our research chromosome alteration and the first, in our knowledge, association of we examined the level of cell cycle negative regulators genes a trisomy 1q”syndrome” with AML. expression on mRNA level in bone marrow samples in patients with Supported by: FAEPA, FAPESP, CCS, NCIC acute leukemia before treatment.For detection of mRNA we used the Multi Probe RNase protection Assay System (RiboQuant). We P0083. Three new cases of complex Ph’ variants in analyzed the expression of cyclin dependent kinases genes (p16 Chronic Myeloid Leukemia and p21 family), Rb family genes and p53 gene.Obtained results A. Carrió1, D. Costa1, A. Arias1, R. Queralt1, F. Cervantes2, J. Aguilar3, show significantly high level of p53, p27, p19 and p18 mRNA, while D. Colomer3, E. Campo3; the level of Rb and p16 mRNA is very low in the examined cells.The 1Servei de Genètica. CDB. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, correlation of the results with the level of other cell cycle regulators 2Servei d’Hematologia. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Unitat expressions and clinical data may give us important information about d’Hematopatologia. CDB. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. new prognostic factors in hematological malignancies. A 90-95% of patients diagnosed with Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) show the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) as a result of the P0081. Submicroscopic deletion at the breakpoint in t(9;22)(q34;q11). About 5-10% of CML show the variant forms: simple chromosome der(9) in Ph+ acute lymphoblastic leukemia (22q11qter is translocated into a chromosome other than 9) and complex (three or more chromosomes are involved). (ALL) We present cytogenetic, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), I. F. Loncarevic-Barcena1, B. Shell1, H. J. Fricke2, M. Prechtel1, M. and molecular analyses in three cases of the complex variant. Ziegler1, U. Claussen1; The chromosome bands involved were 11q13 (two cases) and 1Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany, 2Klinik für Innere 1p36.1. The FISH analyses (locus specific, centromeric and whole Medizin II, Jena, Germany. chromosome painting) showed that the bcr/abl fusion gene was in Submicroscopic deletions in the breakpoint region of chromosome chromosome 22 in all three cases, suggesting a complex variant der(9)t(9;22) are found in ~25% of patients with chronic myeloid rather than a clonal evolution. leukemia (CML). Notably, these deletions are strongly associated with a shorter life expectancy when non transplanted CML patients are compared. We present molecular and clinical data of a 22 year old P0084. Characterisation of Acute Myeloid Leukemias male patient with a t(9;22) positive B-cell specific acute lymphoblastic (AML) with complex aberrant karyotype using gene leukemia (B-ALL) that exhibit a deletion in chromosome der(9). In expression analysis and mutation screening of candidate ALL this deletion was first and uniquely detected so far in one of 48 genes ALL patients investigated by Reid et al (abstract: 1334, ASH meeting S. Mergenthaler, C. Schoch, S. Schnittger, A. Kohlmann, W. Kern, 2001). The rare occurrence of this deletion in ALL makes it difficult M. Dugas, M. Klaus, J. Christodoulou, W. Hiddemann, T. Haferlach; to evaluate the clinical impact. The deletion we found is located Labor für Leukämiediagnostik, Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, proximal to the breakpoint in der(9)t(9;22). RT-PCR detected a b3a2 Germany. BCR-ABL and failed to detect an ABL-BCR transcript. No response to AML represent a pathogenetically and prognostically heterogeneous therapy was achieved with a high dose protocol (Hölzer Studie 5/93). group. For differentiation of AML-subgroups, cytogenetics offers The patient was subjected to salvage therapy with Idarubicin/AraC the most evaluated and established criteria today. 10-15% of AML- and reached a partial remission with 20-25% BCR-ABL positive cells patients show complex aberrant karyotypes in leukemic blasts, at day 125 after initial therapy. At present, STI571 is administered associated with a most adverse progression of the disease. So far, no and a stem cell donor is searched. The data confirm that deletions crucial candidate genes relevant for the pathogenesis were identified. in der(9) can also be found in Ph+ ALL. The clinical significance Data obtained by 24color-FISH and CGH in 50 AML-cases with of this rare deletion in ALL is unknown and has to be evaluated by complex aberrant karyotype demonstrated a much larger percentage increasing the study cohort. of loss than gain of genetic material. Frequent observations included deletions of the entire chromosomes 5 and 7, as well as interstitial P0082. Acute monocytic leukemia and multiple deletions within their long arms. abnormalities in a child with duplication of 1q detected These deletions may represent the first of two required mutation by GTG-banding and SKY. events to deplete a tumorsuppressor gene’s function. Alternatively, M. R. Baruffi1, C. A. Scrideli2, J. A. Squire3, J. Karaskowa3, E. S. haploinsufficiency with only one mutation event might already be Ramos4, B. Heck4, L. G. Tone4; sufficient to reduce the physiologically necessary amount of gene 1Ribeirao Preto Medice School, University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirao product. Preto, SP, Brazil, 2Ribeirao Preto Medicine School, University of Sao To evaluate both models, we currently investigate 25 of these AML- Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil, 3University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, cases with complex aberrant karyotype more precisely on molecular Canada, 4Ribeirao Preto Medicine School, University of Sao Paulo, genetic level: utilizing gene expression analysis (GeneChip U133) Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil. and mutation screening (Single Strand Conformation Polymorphism Patients with 1q duplication have demonstrated a wide range of Analysis, SSCPA) we focus on 20 functionally relevant candidate multiple congenital abnormalities, but a clinical delineation of a genes on chromosomes 5 and 7, involved in apoptosis, cell cycle/ trisomy 1q “syndrome” was proposed. Alterations involving this transcription regulation and DNA repair mechanisms. same chromosomal region have also being described in various So far, SSCPA in 25 AML-patients and 10 healthy controls using hematopoietic malignant disorders and a series of candidate genes different conditions excluded the General Transciption Factor Posters - Cancer Genetics 92 93 GTF2H2 (5q12.2-q13.3), involved in transcription/transcription- associated with severe decrease in bone mineral density, significantly mediated DNA-repair, as a major candidate gene in complex AML- hindering reconstructive bone surgery. Osteoporosis has been pathogenesis. found to be associated with distinct polymorphisms of the vitamin Our future investigations aim at providing a deeper insight into D receptor gene (VDR), oestrogen receptor gene (OER) and the basic pathogenetic mechanisms of complex AML with subsequent collagen 1α1 gene (COL1A1) in the general population. The purpose implementation in prognosis and therapy strategy. of the present case-control study was to evaluate the hypothesis, whether the genotypes at these three polymorphic loci are associated P0085. Validation of human BAC clone microarray based with decreased bone mineral density in scoliotic patients with CGH studies in HL-60 cell line. neurofibromatosis. Genotype of 21 selected NF1 patients with M. Alkan1, C. Ulger1, G. A. Toruner1, M. Muhammed2, S. Damani2, P. scoliosis and decreased bone mineral density was compared to 21 Tolias1,3, M. Schwalb1, J. Dermody1; patients with non-scoliotic NF1 with normal bone density. Patients 1Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, UMDNJ-New with idiopathic scoliosis with normal bone density measurements (21) Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, 2Spectral Genomics, Houston, have been also assessed for the same genetic polymorphisms. In TX, 3Center for Applied Genomics, Public Health Research Institute, this pilot study of altogether 63 individuals no association was found Newark, NJ. between VDR and OER polymorphisms, and the phenotype. The Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) is a method, used to genetic marker distribution in the idiopathic scoliosis (IS) group did detect, and map DNA sequence copy number differences between not significantly differ from that of scoliotic NF1 patients. However, we two genomes in a single experiment. Although it is a valuable observed a threefold prevalence of the homozygous polymorphism technique, the lower resolution of CGH compared to molecular (CC) over the heterozygous form (Cc) of the COL1A1 gene in non- genetic techniques have limited its application. The utilization scoliotic NF1 patients compared to patients with scoliosis presenting of microarray technology in CGH analysis has the potential to with an almost equal distribution in this genotype. This difference was meet these challenges. For this purpose, a well-characterized not statistically significant. The sample size of this pilot study is not promyelocytic cell line HL-60 was analyzed by using Human BAC large enough to draw a final conclusion. A possible protective role of Array- 3MB system, which was developed by Spectral GenomicsTM. CC genotype in non-scoliotic NF patients deserves reevaluation in a The glass array is composed of 1003 non-overlapping BAC library larger group of patients. clones which encompass the human genome with a resolution of 3 Megabases. In HL-60, amplification of the region of 8q24, an P0088. Radiological appearance of intracranial tumours extra copy of chromosome 18, and deletions in loci of 5q11.2-q31, in neurofibromatosis (NF1) 6q12, 8p23, 9p21.3-p22, 10p12-15, 14q22-q31, 16q21, and 17p12- E. Leisti; 17p13.3 were detected. These results are largely concordant with the Oulu University Hospital, Department of Radiology, Oulu, Finland. previously reported aberrations, and indicate that this system might In a population-based study on neuroradiological imaging of be an alternative to conventional CGH analysis. individuals with NF1, 10 of 124 studied patients (8%) presented with intracranial tumours other than optic gliomas or T2 hyperintense P0086. High-throughput tissue microarray analysis of lesions. Six patients aged 6 to 53 years had an astrocytoma, one 11q13 genes amplification (CCND1, FGF3/FGF4, FGF3, patient had a suspected astrocytoma which proved histologically to be normal brain tissue, one patient had a small lipoma in the EMS1) in urinary bladder cancer interpeduncular cistern, one patient had a hypophyseal adenoma B. Zaharieva1, R. Simon2, T. Gasser3, G. Sauter2, D. Toncheva1; and one patient presented with an enhancing lesion of the cavernous 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty Sofia, Sofia, sinus. - The astrocytomas showed wide variation in their behaviour Bulgaria, 2Institute of Pathology, University of Basel, Basel, and MR imaging. Four of the tumours were progressive, one Switzerland, 3Urologic Clinics, Cantonal Hospital Liestal, Liestal, histologically confirmed astrocytoma disappeared spontaneously Switzerland. and one astrocytoma appeared within a previously detected T2 Gene amplification is a common mechanism for oncogene hyperintense lesion, which was partly located in the region of the overexpression. High-level amplifications at 11q13 had been optic radiation and had remained stable for several years. The results repeatedly found in bladder cancer by comparative genomic indicate that the fate of an astrocytoma in NF1 cannot be predicted hybridization and by other techniques. Putitative candidate on the basis of one imaging only, but that the patients need close oncogenes located in this region are CCND1, EMS1, FGF3 and follow-up. FGF4. To evaluate the involvement of these genes in bladder cancer, we screened a tissue microarray (TMA) containing 2317 samples by FISH. Among all tumors with 11q13 amplifications (13.3%) 68.3% P0089. Do some additional chromosome rearrangements had all 4 genes amplified, 19.5% had amplified CCND1, FGF4 and mean a favourable T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia FGF3 together, 0.8% had FGF4, FGF3 and EMS1 coamplified. Single prognosis with preserved alkylator based treatment amplification of CCND1 was found in 9% of the tumors, while 1,6% sensitivity? had single amplification of EMS1 and 0.8% - of FGF4 suggesting that N. Kokalj Vokac1, S. Zver2, A. Erjavec1, B. Zagradisnik1, A. Zagorac1, CCND1 is the major target gene in the 11q13 amplicon in bladder D. Zontar2, P. Cernelc2; cancer. The frequency of both gains and amplifications of all genes 1Maribor Teaching Hospital, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Univ.Clinical Center increased significantly from stage pTa to pT1-4 and from low to high Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. grade tumors. Increased copy number changes of all 4 genes were A 77-year-old woman came to haematological department because associated with survival of patients with tumors from all stages and of leucocytosis, (WBC 276x109/L; Hgb 111 g/L, Plt 239x109/L), progression of pT1 tumors and were not associated with recurrence sweating and weight loss. Bone marrow biopsy revealed 80% of pTa tumors and survival of patients with pT2-4 tumors. Tumors lymphoid-cell infiltration. Morphologically cells appeared as with gains of FGF3, FGF3/FGF4 and EMS1 were shown to behave prolymphocytes and immunohistochemically they were CD3, CD4, like tumors with amplifications rather than like normal tumors contrary CD5 positive, while being CD8, CD20, CD30, CD43, CD56, TIA-1 to CCND1 where gained tumors behaved like CCND1 normal rather and Granzyme B negative. Flow-cytometrically performed T-lymphoid than like CCND1 amplified tumors. immunological markers CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5 and CD7 were highly, more than 90% positive. Diagnosis of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia P0087. Dystrophic Scoliosis And Genetic Polymorphisms (T-PLL) was made and the later was confirmed also by cytogenetic In Patients With Neurofibromatosis analysis. T-PLL specific chromosome rearrangements were S. Funke1, E. Morava2, M. Czakó3, B. Cser4, G. Kosztolányi4, T. Illés5; observed: inv(14)(q11q32), i(8)(q10) and del(11)(q22q23) involving 1Dep. Medical Genetics and Dep. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, ATM gene. Complex translocation of X chromosome, probably University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2University of Pécs, Pécs, involving MTCP1 gene, was present on der(X)t(X;3)(q28;p25)t(X;16 Hungary, 3MTA-PTE Clinical Genetic Research Group, University of )(p14;q12). There were several other chromosome rearrangements Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 4Department of Medical Genetics and Child observed, including chromosomes 5, 6, 13, 14, 17, 20 and 22. Development, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 5Department of Classical cytogenetic analysis was confirmed by FISH, using Cytocell Orthopedics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. Octochrome Multiprobe System, and some locus specific DNA The dystrophic form of scoliosis in neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) is often probes.92 Posters - Cancer Genetics 93 T-PL leukemia is aggressive, and refractory to alkylator-based being pseudodiploid. Translocations involving band 14q11 were therapy, with a median survival of 7 months. Treatment options observed in 7 patients whereas band 12p13 was deleted in 2 cases are highly immunosupressive 2-CDA, Pentostatin or Campath 1- and translocated in a further 3 cases. The short arm of chromosome H. Because of the patient’s advanced age, we have started with 11 was involved in 4 translocations, band 11p13 in 2 and band 11p15 chlorambucil 10 mg/m2 for 5 consecutive days, repeatingly every in another 2 cases [t(4;11) and t(1;4;11)]. Other recurring structural 4 weeks. After 4 cycles of chlorambucil the patient was without any rearrangements include del(6q) in 3 cases and del(5q) in 2. Most of clinical symptoms, with WBC 23,4x109/L, Hgb 128g/L, Plt 256x109/L. these recurrent abnormalities are different from those of B-lineage To our knowledge, the additional chromosomal rearrangements: ALL. Some are known to involve T cell receptor genes whereas der(6)t(X;6)(p14;q25), der(13)t(13;14)(q22;q11), t(5;13)(q34;p11), others can lead to the discovery of new genes that are important to r(17)(p13q21), t(17;20)(q21;q13), 22p+ , were not yet described in T-lineage leukemogenesis. the literature. Some of them may means favourable T-PL prognosis because of preserved alkylator agent treatment sensitivity. P0092. Detection of Philadelphia Chromosome in Chronic Myelogenous and Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia in two P0090. Prognostic Significance Of Small Cell Clones locations in Ecuador. With Hyperdiploidy In Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic J. C. Ruiz-Cabezas; Leukemia (all). Hospital Dr. Juan Tanca Marengo SOLCA, Guayaquil, Ecuador. Z. Zemanova1, K. Michalová1,2, L. Sindelarova1, J. Brezinova2, S. A previous study sustained that there may be a difference in the Kurkova2, P. Smisek3, O. Hrusak4, J. Stary3; presence in Philadephia (Ph) Chromosome t(9;22) in the studied 1Center of Oncocytogenetics, General Faculty Hospital and 1st ecuadorian series due to the ethnical content and geographical Medical Faculty of Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, location (Quito, 2800m) of the studied human group. 2Institute of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech We present here data that supports that there is no influence of Republic, 32nd Department of Pediatrics, Faculty Hospital Motol, these aspect in the presence of this chromosomal marker in cases of Prague, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Immunology, 2nd Medical Chronic Myelogenous and Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemias (CML and Faculty of Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. ALL, respectively) in Ecuador. Children with ALL and chromosome hyperdiploidy in bone marrow The study was performed in two major laboratories in Guayaquil (at cells have a better prognosis in contrast to those with other the sea level) and Quito (2800 m over the sea level) and included cytogenetic abnormalities. Therefore early detection of hyperdiploid a population with varied ethnical content. The described cases cell clones is important and can lead to appropriate less aggressive correspond to ALL and CML diagnosed by bone marrow smears and therapy protocol with the lower risk of the late side effect. For the Immunocytochemistry, this are 199 cases of ALL and 295 cases of assessment of hyperdiploidy we use consecutive double target CML studied in both cities. interphase FISH (I-FISH) with combination of alpha-satellite and/ The CML presented and average frequency of Ph+ of 85%, and the or locus-specific probes for 10 chromosomes most frequently ALL cases had a frequency of 14%. overrepresented in hyperdiploid clones (200 interphase nuclei No statistical difference in the presence of Ph Chromosome in analysed per slide and probe-mix, cut-off level 2.5% tested on neither CML or ALL was found in the studied cases at the coast area controls, standard deviation not exceed 0.5%). I-FISH is quick and in relation to the frequencies published for Quito and to the world sensitive screening method which enables to find even “hidden” statistics, although in a previous publication of the molecular analysis small pathological clones. Structural and/or complex chromosomal of Quito’s cases it was shown the presence of a particular pattern of aberrations in hyperdiploid cells were analysed by multi-color FISH the abl-bcr rearrangements. (mFISH). During the last four years we examined prospectively or P0093. Molecular and cytogenetic changes in STI571 retrospectively 88 children with ALL (56 boys, 32 girls; mean age (Gleevec) treated Acute Lymphoblastic Ph + Leukemia 8 years). Various level of hyperdiploidy was found in 60 children R. Kusec; (68%). The extent of pathological clones being 2.5 - 100%. Small Cytogenetics Laboratory, Zagreb, Croatia. clones under 10% were detected in 18 patients (20,5%). Structural or Targeting the tyrosine kines activity of Bcr-Abloncoprotein is effective complex chromosomal rearrangements together with hyperdiploidy therapeuitc option of Ph-chromosome positive CML and ALL. were found in 23 patients (26%). We compare FISH and cytogenetic However, accumulating clinical experience describes emerging findings, results of DNA analysis by flow cytometry and clinical course tumour resistance to STI571 tyrosine kinase inhibitor in the treatment of the disease in all patients with a particular respect to the prognostic course. significance of small pathological clones and complex chromosomal A 36-year old woman with relapsing Philadelphia positive Acute rearrangements. Lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ALL) was treated with STI571 This work was supported by grants IGA MZ CR NE 6472-3, GACR (600 mg/d). After 3 months haematological response in terms of 301/01/0200 and IGA MZ CR 6406-3. correcting leukopenia, reducing the number of immature cells in the bone marrow by 50% and decreasing the need for platenet and P0091. Cytogenetic studies in T-cell acute lymphoblastic haemoglobin transfusion was seen. However, in the sixth month leukemia: a report of 35 cases. of treatment patient stopped responding to the drug with rapidly N. Douet-Guilbert1, M. J. Le Bris2, A. Herry2, F. Morel2, G. Le Calvez3, incresing number of blasts. At that point standard G-banding of V. Marion3, J. F. Abgrall3, C. Berthou1, M. De Braekeleer2; leukaemic cells identifed additional chromosomal changes:del(6q) 1Service d’Hématologie clinique, CHU, Brest, France, 2Service de and t(11;14)(q13;q32). Molecurarly, we were able to detect Major Cytogénétique, Cytologie et Biologie de la Reproduction, UBO & and Minor-breakpoint Bcr gene rearrangements in the fusion with CHU, Brest, France, 3Service d’Hématologie biologique, CHU, Brest, the Abl gene while molecular cytogenetics showed amplification of France. the Bcr-Abl gene detected as the emergence of an extra Bcr-Abl A total of 198 patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), gene copy in 17%of cells.PCR amplification of the BCL1-IgH fusion including 189 at diagnosis and 9 at relapse, had a cytogenetic gene was negative and there was no BCL1 expression by the blasts analysis on a bone marrow sample between 1981 and 2001. Thirty- (immunocytochemistry). Biological mechanisms of these genetic five ALL (17.7%) were of the T cell lineage. The immunophenotyping events are unknown and multiplication of Philadelphia chromosome performed on 32 cases showed that 30 were true T-cell ALL, one can be related to the acquired. was mixed T-cell/B-cell and one mixed T-cell/Myeloid. The 35 patients were distributed in 14 children and 21 adults. The quality P0094. CGH In The Evaluation Of The Placenta In of the chromosomal preparations was too poor to allow a feasible Abnormal Pregnancies identification in 2 cases and one culture did not yield metaphases. A. Amiel, N. Bouaron, R. Sharony, D. Kidron, M. Fejgin; Karyotyping was sucessfully performed in 32 patients. A normal Meir Hospital, Kfar-Saba, Israel. karyotype was observed in 5 of the 13 pediatric cases (38.5%) and Confined placental mosaicism (CPM) in term placental tissues in 5 of the 19 adult cases (26.3%). These values are within the range is usually diagnosed by conventional cytogenetic analysis and observed in other series of T cell-ALL. Numerical chromosome more recently by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) of the abnormalities were rare, 77.3% of the abnormal karyotypes (17/22) trophoblast. In this study, we describe the use of comparative Posters - Cancer Genetics 94 95 genomic hybridization (CGH) for detection of chromosomal A. Weise, H. Starke, A. Heller, U. Claussen, T. Liehr; aneuploidy in 26 fresh and 14 paraffin embedded placentas and Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. evaluate the sensitivity of this novel approach for CPM diagnosis in Conventional banding techniques often fail to characterize the exact multiple placental samples. nature of chromosomal rearrangements. The MCB technique has We applied CGH technique to samples taken from various sites of demonstrated to improve the definition of chromosomal breakpoints placentas originating from abnormal pregnancies (23 IUGRs, one (e.g. Starke et al., 2001, PrenatDiag, 21, 1049-1052, Dufke et al., with fetal malformation, one with toxemia, one with hydrocephalus 2001, Europ J Hum Genet 9, 572-576). Here MCB was applied to and 2 undetectable MSAFP). In the control cases (7 normal and 5 identify human chromosome 2 breakpoints in two clinical cases. To with known aneuploidy) CGH concurred with the known karyotype. show how precise the correlation between the MCB pseudocolors The most common aberration in the IUGR cases was the addition of and the GTG banding works the results of MCB were reexamined a whole or part of X chromosome. Other aberrations such as addition using region-specific YAC or BAC probes. The chosen band of Y chromosome , addition of 13(q22) and loss of chromosome resolution of chromosome 2 was 400 bands per haploid karyotype. 17 where found in other cases. There was also one IUGR case of Case 1 presented with primary mental retardation and severe trisomy 8 (in one site) and 47,XXY found in all sites. In the two cases delayed speech development. The boy had a der(9)t(2;9)(2q24.2;9 with the MSAFP=O monosomy 16 was detected (in one case on both p11.2) according to GTG banding. MCB showed, however, that the sites searched). Some of the results were confirmed by the FISH translocation was balanced although it seemed to be not according technique. to GTG banding; new karyptype: t(2;9)(q24.2;p24.3). Case 2 showed Our results demonstrate the usefulness of CGH technique in the primary mental retardation, tendency to seizures, craniofacial genetic evaluation of fresh and paraffin embedded placentas in dysmorphisms and adipositas. The type of aberration in this male problematic pregnancies even when its morphology is normal. patient could not be defined by GTG-banding (inv(2)(p11q23)+dup?o r.inv(2)(p21q24.1)+del?). MCB could characterize the rearrangement P0095. Detection of chromosomal aneuploidy in as inv(2)(p15q24.3). In both cases the results of MCB were confirmed spontaneous abortions using comparative genomic with a panel of region specific YAC/BAC probes. In all 20 MCB metaphases analyzed per case the breakpoints appeared within the hybridization (CGH) same pseudo-colored bands. Thus, the highly reproducible MCB N. V. Ostroverkhova, S. A. Nazarenko, I. N. Lebedev, A. D. pattern, can be used to characterize abnormalities that remain cryptic Cheremnykh; or unresolvable in G-banding analysis. Supported by DFG (436 RUS Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. 17/40/00; PO284/6-1), Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung (99.105.1), the EU Chromosomal aneuploidy is a common cause of abnormal prenatal (ICA2-CT-2000-10012 and QLRT-1999-31590). Dr. Rocchi (Bari, development. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) provides a Italy) is acknowledged for YAC/BACs. rapid and comprehensive detection chromosomal gains and losses in the test genome and maps the aneuploidies onto normal metaphase chromosomes. Among the 52 tissue culture of spontaneous P0098. Identification of satellite sequences in metaphase abortions, 10 cases showed failure of fetal cell growth in culture and and interphase with peptide nucleic acid (PNA) probes could not be identified reliably by conventional cytogenetics. CGH using multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization. analysis was successfully performed for detection of chromosomal K. L. Taneja1, B. Williams1, R. H. Singer2; aneuploidy in spontaneously aborted specimens with tissue culture 1Applied Biosystems, Bedford, MA, 2Albert Einstein College of failure. Balanced karyotype profiles were obtained for 5 samples. All Medicine, Bronx, NY. of them were analysed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) Multiplex fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) can be used with centromere-specific DNA probes to exclude polyploidy. Nothing to detect marker chromosomes, chromosomal rearrangements in cells with abnormal level of ploidy were found. Five spontaneous cancer, prenatal diagnosis etc. Regular M-FISH requires a large abortions (50%) have monosomy 22 and trisomy 10, 14, 18 and amount of labeled DNA, the hybridization time is longer and is 21. Monosomy 22 identified by CGH is one of the most rare less informative in interphase nuclei compared to standard FISH. aneuploidies in spontaneous abortions. In all cases with an indication We have designed and developed directly labeled PNA probes of chromosomal imbalance by CGH, FISH with chromosome-specific to distinguish up to 2n-1 chromosomes (where n is the number DNA probe was performed to confirm the presence of aneuploidy. of different fluorochromes) using an epifluorescence microscope As determined by FISH analysis two cases with trisomy 10 and equipped with a digital imaging camera and computer software monosomy 22 were mosaics with frequency of abnormal cell line for pseudocoloring and merging images. Peptide nucleic acids 68% and 33% respectively. Advantages and limitations of CGH for a (PNA) are synthetic mimics of DNA in which the phosphodiester detection of complete and mosaic forms of aneuploidy are discussed. backbone has been replaced with 2-aminoethyl glycine linkages, but maintaining the four natural nucleobases. PNA probes bind to P0096. Marker chromosome identification with the complementary DNA sequence obeying Watson-Crick base chromosome microdissection and reverse FISH and CGH pairing, however the neutral backbone of the PNA molecule allows Y. H. Cho, J. Y. Lee, J. H. Kyhm, H. K. Seo, C. H. Lee; for the PNA/DNA binding to occur more rapidly and more tightly than Department of Medical Genetics, College of Medicine, Hanyang DNA/DNA binding. Chromosome specific composite PNA probe University, Seoul, REPUBLIC OF KOREA. sets were generated from the human satellite sequences, in which Reverse painting fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) on the different fluorochromes were incorporated to address specific the normal metaphase with probes generated by chromosome issues, like identification of marker chromosomes and anueploidies. microdissection and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) are With four fluorophores, we were able to enumerate up to 15 powerful methods to identify the origin of marker chromosomes. chromosomes in both metaphase spreads and interphase nuclei in Three cases having unidentified marker chromosomes were studied a single hybridization experiment. Our data suggests that multiplex by reverse painting FISH and CGH. Reverse FISH probes were fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) using PNA probes could generated from five copies of each marker chromosomes dissected have wide clinical utility, particularly in detection and enumeration with micromanipulator, amplified with DOP-PCR, and labeled with of chromosomes in a given sample. Multi-parameter hybridization fluorochromes. The probes were hybridized to normal metaphases analysis should facilitate the study in molecular cytogenetics and and the origin of marker chromosomes could be determined. Three probe-based diagnosis of pathogens. marker chromosomes were identified as derivative chromosome 15 inducing partial trisomy of 15q, duplication of the short arm of P0099. Multicolor fluorescent in situ hybridization in chromosome 17 and duplication of the short arm and deletion of the neuronal cells as an approach for identification of low part of the long arm of chromosome X. CGH showed concordant level chromosomal aneuploidy in the brain results with reverse FISH. Y. B. Yurov1, V. M. Vostrikov1, S. G. Vorsanova2, V. V. Monachov1, I. Y. Iourov1; P0097. Reexamination of chromosome 2 rearrangements 1National Center of Mental Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, characterized by multicolor banding (MCB) by region- 2Intitute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Moscow, Russian specific FISH probes Federation. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) of DNA-DNA or DNA-RNA 94 Posters - Cancer Genetics 95 using post-mortem brain samples is an approach to study a low- p<.001), depression (F=9.1; p<.01), interpersonal sensitivity (F=4.5; level chromosomal aneuploidy and selective expression of specific p<.05) hostility (F=14.4; p<.001), and GSI (F=8.9; p<.01). It may genes in brain of patients with neuropsychiatric diseases. We have be that healthy women who carry a mutation are more stressed performed a pilot molecular-cytogenetic analysis of post-mortem regarding their health status than breast cancer mutation carriers. brain of schizophrenic patients. Multicolor FISH on two post-mortem brain samples of normal and six schizophrenic individuals (area 10 P0102. Familial or sporadic? Unexpected results in the of cortex) was applied. A set of DNA probes for FISH included (i) diagnosis of hereditary breast cancers centromeric alphoid DNA probes for chromosomes 7, 8, 13 and 21, C. Schiffer, T. Voigtländer, R. Klaes; 18, X, Y;(ii) classical satellite DNA probes for chromosomes 1 and 16 Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany. and (iii) region-specific DNA probes for chromosomes 13, 21 and 22. Genetic counseling and risk assessment in families with breast/ Statistically significant level of aneuploidy (up to 3-4% of neurons) ovarian cancer is regularly based on pedigree analysis. However, involving chromosome X and 18 was detected in two post-mortem familial and sporadic cases may occur in the same family. We report brains of patients with schizophrenia. The multicolor FISH assay on three families with unexpected segregation of BRCA1/2 mutations could be applied to study low level of chromosomal aneuploidy, in affected and unaffected family members. intranuclear distribution and conformation of heterochromatin, Family No 1: The female proband, who presented with breast cancer abnormal patterns of chromosomal organization and functional at 28 years of age, carried the common T300G mutation. Surprisingly gene expression in situ in post-mortem brain at many neurogenetic her mother, diagnosed with breast cancer at 33 years of age, diseases. Schizophrenia and Rett syndrome are the diseases of was tested negative for this mutation. T300G was identified in the special interest for extended molecular-cytogenetic analysis as both proband´s healthy father. of them could suspect alterations in chromatin conformation and Family No 2: Three siblings (one man, two women) and their differential gene expression in brain cells. Supported by Copernicus deceased father had been diagnosed with breast cancer. The brother 2 grant. and one sister, diagnosed at 40 years of age, carried the common 2041insA mutation in the BRCA2 gene. The other sister, diagnosed at P0100. CGH contribution in the delineation of 60 years of age, tested negative for this mutation. chromosomal rearrangements Family No 3: The female proband presented with breast cancer at 37 J. M. Lapierre, G. Joly, M. Prieur, O. Raoul, M. C. de Blois, N. years of age. She carried a novel BRCA1-splice mutation(4304+2in Morichon-Delvallez, P. Gosset, M. Vekemans, S. P. Romana, C. sAdel21bp). Her mother, diagnosed with breast cancer at 55 years, Turleau; was tested negative, although she had two affected sisters. The Hop.Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. proband`s healthy father however with an unremarkable family history Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) is able to identify the carried the splice mutation. br />We conclude that for exact risk origin of extra or missing chromosome material when either the assessment and genetic counseling in the hereditary breast/ovarian small size of the segment or a non-discriminatory banding pattern cancer syndrome, each affected and unaffected family member at does not allow a cytogenetic diagnosis. It has also the potential to risk should be tested. detect both terminal and interstitial rearrangements. We illustrate here the contribution of CGH in the delineation of 13 different cases P0103. Familial Dissemination of BRCA1/BRCA2 Test studied in our laboratory. In most cases, CGH was performed to Results characterize a rearrangement detected using classical cytogenetic J. C. Coyne1, J. Stopfer2, K. Calzone1; methods i.e identification of extra or missing chromosome 1University of Pennsylvania Health System, Philadelphia, PA, material, confirmation of an imbalance or accurate definition of the 2University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. chromosome breakpoints. In all these cases CGH was decisive. Study Design: Retrospective follow up study of individuals who In some other cases, classical cytogenetics (550 to 850 bands) notified that they are carriers of a BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation. did not detect any chromosome imbalance when CGH detected Participants received and returned by mail an assessment of the a chromosome imbalance in several cases. All abnormal results pattern of their disclosure of the results of their genetic testing in their were confirmed using whole chromosome painting and/or FISH family. with subtelomeric probes. In conclusion, CGH is a very powerful Instrumentation: Self-report questionnaire follow up assessment of method to analyze an unbalanced rearrangement already identified mutation carriers who have received results. using classical cytogenetics and requiring further characterization . Most probands (60%) were the first in their family to receive results, When no chromosomal rearrangement is observed, CGH could be and almost half (47.3%) had agreements with family members an alternative to multiprobe FISH study of all subtelomeric regions. prior to testing to disclose results. Probands with such agreements However its use as a screening tool in unexplained mental retardation were more likely to have family members present during genetic remains limited due to the difficulty of obtaining chromosomal counseling and results disclosure, C2 (1) = 4.0, p < .05. Individuals preparations allowing high quality hybridizations on a regular basis. with such an agreement reported that a sense of obligation, encouragement from their physician and family members, and P0101. The Impact of BRCA1/2 susceptibility genes on being asked by family members were stronger determinants of women’s mental health their decision to share results than did probands without a prior E. Dagan, S. Gil; agreement (all ps < .001). Probands with such an agreement were University of Haifa - Department of Nursing, Haifa, Israel. more likely to endorse the following factors as facilitating disclosure: Three predominant mutations in BRCA1/2 genes have been support from close family relationships, their physicians’ support, found in 3% of the Jewish Ashkenazi population. Such mutations concern that family members be able to use information to make significantly increase lifetime risk for developing breast and/or ovarian healthcare decisions for themselves and their children, and being cancer. The present study focuses on the impact of being BRCA1/2 asked directly by family members (all p < .05). These data suggest mutation carrier on women’s mental health. A retrospective study that the family context is a crucial determinant of how genetic was conducted in the oncogenetic clinic at Rambam medical center, testing information is disseminated, and that interventions aimed at Israel. One hundred and thirty eight women were recruited and improving dissemination of genetic testing information need to focus evaluated regarding their medical history and mental health state on agreements to disseminate test results made prior to the receipt using the BSI (The Brief Symptom Inventory; Derogatise 1982). of results. All women were genotyped for BRCA1/2 founder mutations. Of the 138 women, 39 (28%) were mutation carriers. Breast cancer was P0104. Genetic polymorphisms of biotransformation diagnosed in 69 (50%) women. The mean age at diagnosis was enzymes and susceptibility to breast cancer 45.7±10.7 years and at the interview was 50±10.5 years. Univariate J. Sarmanova1, S. Susova1, I. Gut1, J. Adamek2, K. Kubackova2, P. analysis of Variance (ANOVA) [Morbidity (with/without breast Soucek1; cancer) X Mutation (carrier/non-carrier)] revealed significant effect 1National Institute of Public Health, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty for morbidity, mutation, and the interaction on four sub-scales of the Hospital in Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. BSI and on its total score (GSI). Apparently, asymptomatic mutation Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women and carriers expressed the highest levels of somatization (F=30.0; second leading cause of death from cancer. The genetically variable Posters - Cancer Genetics 96 97 biotransformation enzymes: epoxide hydrolase (EPHX), NADPH- signs of either neurofibromatosis 1 or the Noonan syndrome, and quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1), and glutathione S-transferases neither one of the parents carried the mutation. (GST’s) metabolize drugs, carcinogens, and natural products. In Previously, Bahuau et al.(1998) found the same mutation in a family addition, it is generally accepted that majority of human cancers segregating both NF1 and Noonan syndrome. They suggested a results from exposure to environmental carcinogens. Considering coincidental occurrence of the two conditions, having evidence from the role in the metabolism of chemicals played by biotransformation their pedigree that both phenotypes co-localize and that another enzymes, we aimed at determining whether any association exists locus for Noonan syndrome resides on 17q in close vicinity of between genetic polymorphisms of biotransformation enzymes and the NF1 gene. They also identified this mutation in 3/184 (1.6%) individual susceptibility to breast cancer in Czech women. individuals with only classical NF1. However, the independent finding Genotyping analyses were performed by PCR-RFLP to determine of the same R816X mutation in an unrelated patient displaying both the frequency of polymorphisms in EPHX (exons 3 and 4), GSTM1 phenotypes suggests that this particular mutation may bring about (deletion), GSTP1 (exon 5), GSTT1 (deletion) and NQO1 (exon 6). the expression of the Noonan phenotype in individuals with NF1. The study population consisted of 169 breast cancer cases and 231 healthy controls. P0107. Application of denaturing high-performance liquid No association between polymorphisms in EPHX, GSTM1, GSTP1, chromatography-based analysis to neurofibromatosis and GSTT1 and breast cancer was found. On the contrary, a type 1 significantly different distribution of genotypes in NQO1 between A. De Luca1, A. Buccino1, D. Gianni1, S. Giustini2, A. Richetta2, L. controls and breast cancer group was confirmed by chi-square test Divona2, S. Calvieri2, R. Mingarelli1, B. Dallapiccola1; (P=0.003, chi-square=11.83, DF=2). We have observed significantly 1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Institute of Clinical Dermatology, higher frequency of mutated genotype S/S in patients in comparison University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy. with controls (8.1% vs. 1.3%). Homozygous mutant genotype S/S Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1; MIM# 162200) is a common leads to complete lack of activity NQO1. Moreover, the involvement of autosomal dominant disorder, characterised by café-au-lait spots, NQO1 in colorectal cancer and tumor resistance to anticancer drugs peripheral neurofibromas, Lisch nodules and freckling. The high was implicated. mutation rate at the NF1 locus results in a wide range of molecular Our results suggest that NQO1 may be an important factor in abnormalities. The majority of NF1 mutations are private and rare, susceptibility to breast cancer and its role should be further generating high allelic diversity with a restricted number of recurrent investigated. mutations. Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography This study was supported by grant GACR No.: 310/01/1537. (DHPLC) has been recently introduced as a rapid and highly sensitive method for detecting sequence alterations, well suited to mutation P0105. Mutational analysis of the Tuberous Sclerosis detection. We have scanned 17 exons of the NF1 gene using Complex (TSC) genes DHPLC method in a series of 39 NF1 patients. Five novel mutations N. D. Rendtorff1, B. Mogensen2, K. Brondum-Nielsen1, M. Schwartz2; (496delGTTT, E725X, G848E, 1148insG, 4481delAG), plus two 1Department of Medical Genetics, The John F. Kennedy Institute, mutated alleles previously reported (499delTGTT, L847P) have been Glostrup, Denmark, 2Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of identified. In addition we detected one silent mutation (G846A), three Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. rare intron changes (730-6)A→C, (1063-28)C→G, (1063-24)delT, Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominantly and one apparent polymorphism (4368-46)G→C. Our results suggest inherited disorder characterized by development of benign tumours that DHPLC provides an accurate method for the rapid identification (hamartomas) in many organs. Hamartoma formation in the central of NF1 mutations. nervous system is associated with some of the most problematic This work was supported by the Italian Ministry of Health and clinical manifestations of TSC, and can lead to intellectual handicap, Associazione Romana Ricerca Dermatologica (ARRD) epilepsy and autism. Inactivating mutations in either of two tumour supressor genes, TSC1 or TSC2, is the cause of this syndrome. P0107. Mutation characterization in patients with type I Here we have established a mutational analysis for TSC1 and TSC2. Neurofibromatosis: towards a routine diagnostic test For the 21 coding exons of TSC1, we have developed a mutation A. Honsberger, C. DeLozier-Blanchet, M. Morris; identification assay that combines long-range PCR with automated Divison Medical Genetics, Geneva University Medical Faculty, sequencing. For mutation screening of the 41 coding exons of TSC2, Geneva, Switzerland. we have developed a rapid and efficient denaturing gradient gel Neurofibromatosis type I, an autosomal dominant condition with electrophoresis (DGGE) assay. an incidence of about 1/3000, results from mutations in the NF1 We are currently collecting DNA samples from Danish tuberous gene. The variability in clinical expression is striking, with symptoms sclerosis patients. Presently, we are carrying out mutational analysis varying from “cosmetic” to lethal. This variability is apparently not on DNA from peripheral blood from 25 Danish TSC patients (15 due to locus heterogeneity, since mutations in the NF1 gene are sporadic and 10 familial cases). Furthermore, Southern blot analyses responsible for the quasi-totality of cases. Allelic heterogeneity may using TSC1 and TSC2 cDNA probes are also carried out. Sofar, we explain a proportion, as over 400 mutations have been reported. have identified a total of 11 mutations, 4 of which have been identified However, major intrafamilial variation in disease expression also previously in another lab and 9 of which are novel mutations. In one occurs, making the establishment of genotype-phenotype correlations patient mosaicism was detected. A number of polymorphisms were difficult. A reliable molecular diagnostic test is needed to allow earlier also detected. diagnosis, carrier detection and clinical follow-up. However, the size of the gene and the diversity of mutations currently makes testing P0106. Neurofibromatosis-Noonan phenotype with a difficult outside of a research context. We have done molecular mutation (R816X) in the NF1 gene. analysis on 38 NF1 patients using a multi-step DNA and RNA- M. Somer1, L. M. Messiaen2, K. Aittomäki1; based protocol, using SSCA of selected exons, RT-PCR and PTT 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, followed by sequencing of variants. This approach has allowed us to Finland, 2Center Medical Genetics, University Central Hospital, Gent, define mutations in nearly half (17 of 38) of our patients, with work Belgium. still ongoing. The mutations defined, 11 of which have not been An 11-year-old girl of Albanian origin was diagnosed to have previously described, include 7 nonsense, 4 splice-site, 4 insertion- neurofibromatosis 1, but she also had features of the Noonan deletions and 2 missense mutations. syndrome including short stature (-4.2 SD), pulmonary valvular Attempts will be made to correlate clinical symptoms with specific stenosis, shield chest, posteriorly rotated earlobes with thick helices, mutations, as a standard set of clinical information has been and high palate. The diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1 was collected. made on the basis of several cafe-au-lait spots, axillary freckling, and On the basis of these and published results we now propose a bilateral Lisch noduli of the iris. The MRI studies showed both bright routine diagnostic test which compromises acceptable cost and signals in left globus pallidus and hippocampus and a thick medulla reasonable sensitivity, thus responding to a frequent demand of oblongata. She had mild to moderate developmental delay. patients and physicians. In molecular genetic studies, a nonsense mutation (R816X) was identified in the NF1 gene. The parents and the 5 siblings had no 96 Posters - Cancer Genetics 97 P0109. Characterization of 2p aberrations in classical P0111. Investigation of a potential role of the putative Hodgkin lymphoma by means of FICTION reveals tumor suppressor gene EXTL1 in neuroblastoma recurrent involvement of the REL and BCL11A loci development J. I. Martin-Subero1, S. Gesk1, L. Harder1, T. Sonoki2, P. W. Tucker3, D. Mathysen1, W. Van Hul1, N. Van Roy2, F. Speleman2, W. Wuyts1; B. Schlegelberger1, W. Grote1, F. J. Novo4, M. J. Calasanz4, M. L. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Hansmann5, M. J. S. Dyer6, R. Siebert1; Belgium, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Ghent, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Kiel, Germany, 2Internal Medicine II, Ghent, Belgium. Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan, 3Institute of Cellular and Neuroblastoma, a frequent pediatric tumor of the sympathetic Molecular Biology, Austin, TX, 4University of Navarra, Pamplona, nervous system, is characterized by a wide variety in outcome, Spain, 5University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany, 6University of ranging from rapid progression of the disease associated with poor Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. prognosis to a quite unusual and rather high rate of spontaneous The genetic background of classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) is tumor regression that correlates with excellent prognosis. It has widely unknown. A common feature of the tumor cells in HL is the been shown that molecular abnormalities often recognized in constitutive activation of the NF-kB transcription factor. In a subset neuroblastomas, such as MYCN-amplification or deletion of the of cases this might be due to the presence of the LMP1 of the EBV distal part of chromosome 1p are correlated with the outcome of or mutations in the NF-kB inhibitors IkB-alpha or IkB-epsilon. Recent the disease. Two neuroblastoma suppressor loci are thought to comparative genomic hybridization studies have shown gains in be located on chromosome 1p36. Recently, the EXTL1 gene was chromosome arm 2p as the most common imbalance in cHL. The suggested to be a candidate neuroblastoma suppressor gene minimal region of gain contained two candidate oncogenes, REL and because of its chromosomal localization in the 1p36.1 region between BCL11A. Overexpression of REL due to genetic amplification might the translocation breakpoints observed in the UHG-NP and GI-ME-N contribute to NF-kB activation. The transcriptional repressor BCL11A neuroblastoma-derived cell lines, and its presumed tumor suppressor has been shown to be overexpressed in cHL cell lines and may play capacity. To evaluate this hypothesis, we performed 1p-deletion a role in B-cell transformation through the BCL6 pathway. Here, we analysis and mutation screening of the EXTL1 coding region on investigated the involvement of REL and BCL11A in 44 primary cases tumor genomic DNA originating from 25 neuroblastoma-derived cell of cHL by combined immunophenotyping and interphase cytogenetics lines and 30 neuroblastomas. Deletion of a fragment of chromosome (FICTION technique). A median 2p13 copy number above the 1p, including the EXTL1 locus, has been observed in at least 23 tetraploid range was detected in 24 (55%) cases. Adjustment for of the 55 investigated neuroblastoma samples. Only one mutation centromere 2 copy number indicated gains of 2p13 in 11 of 31 cHL (C83G; Ser28Cys) has been observed in the DNA of neuroblastoma (35%) with 8 (26%) high-level amplifications. One case displayed cell line STA-NB3. This combination of deletion and mutation analysis selective amplification of the REL locus not affecting BCL11A, and allows us to conclude that the EXTL1 gene does not play a leading another case showed signal patterns suggesting a breakpoint in the role in neuroblastoma etiology, despite the fact that it is often deleted. region spanned by the REL probe. According to these data, REL rather than BCL11A may be the target of the 2p13 alterations in cHL, P0112. Plasma DNA Microsatellite Analysis for Bladder although a role for BCL11A in cHL cannot be ruled out due to its Cancer Follow-up may give False Positive Results. frequent coamplification. D. Fornari1, H. Vibits2, J. V. Jepsen2, J. D. Olesen1, M. Schwartz3, K. Steven2, T. Horn1, S. Larsen1; P0110. Gene mutation in the SDHB gene in sporadic 1Department of Pathology, Herlev University Hospital of Copenhagen, pheochromocytoma induces the same functional Herlev, Denmark, 2Department of Urology, Herlev University Hospital consequences as SDHD gene mutation in hereditary of Copenhagen, Herlev, Denmark, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, paraganglioma Rigshospitalet University Hospital of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, A. Gimenez-Roqueplo1, J. Favier2, P. Rustin3, P. Plouin4, X. Denmark. Jeunemaitre1; Purpose: Patients with non-invasive bladder cancer develop frequent 1Département de Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France, 2INSERM recurrences, a part of which progresses into invasive disease. U36, Paris, France, 3INSERM U393, Paris, France, 4Département Intensive follow-up is therefore required. d’Hypertension Artérielle, HEGP, Paris, France. We studied the possibility of following-up bladder cancer patients The genetics of neural crest-derived tumors was recently transformed by microsatellite investigation of plasma DNA for LOH (Loss of by the discovery of mutations in SDHD, SDHC and SDHB genes. Heterozygosity) and MSI (Microsatellite Instability). The goal of this study was to better understand the functional Materials and methods: Sixteen microsatellite markers were consequences of SDHD and SDHB gene mutations.The first patient amplified in plasma, leukocyte and, when available, tissue DNA of 40 had a mediastinal pheochromocytoma and was a member of a family patients and 20 healthy controls by use of fluorescent primers. The with inherited paraganglioma.The second patient had a malignant plasma was filtered prior to DNA extraction in order to exclude the nonfamilial pheochromocytoma. The search for mutations in the presence of cells. SDHD and SDHB genes was performed by direct sequencing in Results: germ-line and tumoral DNA. LOH was tested with several fluorescent Tissue LOH/cases Plasma LOH/cases Classification microsatellites of 11q and 1p chromosome regions. The activity of analyzed analyzed respiratory-chain enzymes was tested by measuring the succinate Controls 0 % (0/10) 5 % (1/20) cytochrome c reductase activities on the tumor homogenates. The Patients (Ta + influence of the mutations on the hypoxic pathway was tested by in 68 % (25/37) 25 % (10/40) T1-4) situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry and real-time quantitative RT-PCR.A nonsense mutation of the SDHD gene was detected in Only two patients displayed LOH in both tissue and plasma, however the first patient and a missense mutation of the SDHB gene in the the markers involved were not the same. second. These two mutations were associated with a LOH in tumors The tissue MSI frequency was 0 % in the controls and 5 % in the on 11q and 1p chromosomes, respectively. Enzymatic experiments cancer patients. As for the plasma MSI, in most cases it was enough showed a complete and selective loss of complex II electron transfer to reduce the number of PCR cycles in order for it to disappear. activity in both the SDHD- and SDHB-inherited pheochromocytomas. Conclusions: Plasma microsatellite analysis was found to be of little Immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization and quantitative RT-PCR use for bladder cancer follow-up. Attention should be paid to allelic revealed a high level of expression of angiogenic factors EPAS1, drop-out and overamplification as they may give, respectively, artifact VEGF and its receptors in both tumors.Mutation in the SDHB gene LOH and MSI. induced a dramatic disturbance of mitochondrial and hypoxia pathways similar to those induced by SDHD gene mutation, which might be important to trigger tumorigenesis of pheochromocytomas.Posters - Cancer Genetics 98 99 P0113. Cytogenetic investigation of 224 Leukaemic cases of erythroblasts or fetal membrane. The gene responsible for HYDM in Iran have been mapped to chromosome 19q13.3-q13.4 (Hum. Molec. M. T. Akbari, F. Behjati; Genet. 8:667-671, 1999; Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 8: 641-644, 2000). Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, 98 Taleghani Avenue, Tehran, We have studied three large Indian pedigrees with an autosomal Islamic Republic of Iran. recessive HYDM. Pedigrees consist of 65 individuals, including 18 The investigation was carried out on bone marrow and peripheral affecteds. The Severity of the disease was quite variable among the blood samples of 224 Iranian patients presented or followed up for families. The desease occurred in two or more pregnancies in two or various types of leukaemia in years 1999 and 2000. The samples more sisters of the same pedigree. Detailed clinical, ultrasonographic, were mainly referred from three major haematology-oncology morphological and histological studies were carried out on 14 centres at Tehran. The Cell cultureing and bandings were carried affecteds from the three pedigrees. The affected status of remaining out according to standard protocols. Chromosome analysis was individuals was collected from the family records. Karyotype analysis performed following ISCN guidelines. The patients were from different of six affecteds representing the three pedigrees showed no leukaemic groups, the major ones being: CML, AML, ALL and MDS. chromosomal anomaly. Linkage studies with markers closely linked to There were more males than females: 133 and 91 respectively HYDM will either confirm allelism to this locus or provide evidence for with approximately 1.5:1 ratio. In terms of sample types, 210 had genetic heterogeneity. BM aspiration, whreas peripheral blood was used only in 14 cases. The common typical chromosome abnormalities as well as rare P0116. Polymorphisms C825T in GNB3 gene and Pro/Leu and combined forms were observed. The overall chromosome at codon 10 in TGFbeta1 gene and the risk of prostate abnormality rate obtained was about 50%. The breakdown figures for cancer different categories were as follows: 73% in CML, 41% in AML, 26% T. Hajdinjak, B. Zagradisnik, N. Kokalj-Vokac, K. Kisner; in ALL, 30% in MDS and 61% in other types. Maribor Teaching Hospital, Maribor, Slovenia. Compared to the published data, the observed rate in the present Essential role for G proteins and TGFbeta in prostate cells signaling, study is considered low to average. The main reason being the growth and differentiation was recently recognized. Beta 3 subunit patients selection criteria at the initial diagnosis stage. is functional part of most G proteins signaling cascades with its polymorphism C825T being functionally significant. TGFbeta1 level P0114. The role of microsatellite instability in patients was found to be predictor for progression of prostate cancer and with gastric cancer: A case-control study in high-frequent polymorphism in codon 10 is associated with variations in tissue area. TGFbeta1 level. M. Yaghoobi, L. Gholamrezaei, S. Mamaghani, M. Sohrabi, A. A group of 86 patients with histologically proven prostate cancer was Sayyari, F. Imanzadeh, A. Farsar; compared to 200 apparently healthy controls. Research Unit, Department of Gastroenterology, Mofid Medical C825T polymorphism distribution was 14% TT, 44% CT, 42% CC Center, Shahid Beheshti Uni. Med. Sci., Tehran, Islamic Republic of among patients and 8% TT, 46% CT and 46% CC among controls. Iran. The difference for the frequency of homozygosity TT was not Introduction: Microsatellite instability (MSI) in gastrointestinal significant between the groups (p=0.12, OR 1.87, 95%CI 0.84-4.1). cancers is a process in developing of gastric cancer. We studied MSI Proline (C) and leucine (T) distribution among cancer patients was in 8 MS region in gastric cancer tissue of the patients with a history 11% CC, 55% CT, 34% TT and among controls 17% CC, 49% CT, of gastric cancer in their first-degree-relative and healthy family 34% TT. The difference for the frequency of homoygosity CC was not memebers. significant between the groups (p=0.25, OR 0.64, 95%CI 0.30-1.37). Methods: Patients expired of gastric cancer with a positive family The two studied polymorphisms were not found to be significantly history of gastric cancer in the first-degree relative and their healthy correlated with the risk of prostate cancer in Slovenian/Caucasian first-degree relatives were included in the study. Paraffin-blocked population, although trend toward increased risk for TT in C825T tissues were obtained from pathology department. Biopsies from the GNB3 was noted. These findings do not exclude influence of these intact gastric tissue were also taken from healthy members. DNA polymorphisms on progression and prognosis of prostate cancer, was extracted and reserved in 4oC. MSI was checked based on 8 which warrants further studies. MS markers including BAT25, BAT26, BAT40, D2S123, D5S346, D13S170, D17S250 and TP53. P0117. Genetic changes of chromosomal region 10q24 in Results: 20 patients were enrolled in the study. Low-level MSI was malignant lymphomas: Detection of aberrations affecting detected in 9 (45%) and high-level MSI in 3(15%). 8 patients (40%) the NFKB2/LYT10 gene locus by FISH was MSS. 20 healthy members were randomly selected and included S. Gesk1, C. Kahl2, L. Harder2, L. French3, M. Earthrowl3, J. I. Martin- in the study. Low-level MSI was detected in 4 (20%) and the other Subero2, B. Schlegelberger2, D. G. Oscier4, J. A. Martinez-Climent5, cases (85%) were MSS. Intestinal metaplasia was detected in 2 E. Callet-Bauchu6, F. Sole7, P. Deloukas3, R. Siebert2; patents with low-level MSI. 1supported by Deutsche Krebshilfe,Institute of Human Genetics, Conclusion: This study showed that MSI could be one of the most University Hospital Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, important screening tests in detecting first-degree relatives of patients University Hospital Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 3Sanger Centre, Hinxton, with gastric cancer. United Kingdom, 4Royal Bournemouth Hospital, Bournemouth, United Kingdom, 5Dept. of Hematology and Oncology, University of Valencia, P0115. Hydatidiform mole (HYDM): study of three large Valencia, Spain, 6Lab. d`Hematology, Centre Hospitalier, Lyon, Indian pedigrees France, 7Dept. of Pathology, Hospital del Mar IMAS IMIM, Barcelona, U. Chalapathi Rao1, M. Ravindrababu2, U. Ratnamala2, B. Solanki3, Spain. J. Solanki4, U. Radhakrishna2; Various genetic changes affecting chromosomal region 10q24 have 1Green Cross Blood Bank & Genetic Centre, Ahmedabad, been shown to be recurrent in malignant lymphomas. Among those, India, 2Green Cross blood bank & Genetic Centre, Ahmedabad, the translocation t(10;14)(q24;q32) is supposed to activate the India, 3Department of Gynaecology, Civil Hospital, Kheda, India, NFKB2/LYT10 gene in 10q24 via its juxtaposition nexto the IGH gene 4Department of Animal Genetics & Breeding, Veterinary college, in 14q32. In addition, the NFKB2/LYT10-locus has been reported Gujarat Agriculture University, Anand, India. to be targeted by deletions particularly in cutaneous lymphomas. Hydatidiform mole (HYDM) (OMIM 231090) is the product of In the present study, we established an interphase FISH assay for malformed human pregnancy with the incidence ranging from detecting alterations of NFKB2/LYT10-locus. As probes, differentially 1/250 to 1/1500 pregnancies depending on ethnic groups. It was labelled BAC-clones from a contig of chromosomal region 10q24 classified into two different types. Complete hydatidiform mole were applied which cover at least 400kb on each side of the NFKB2/ (CHM) and partial hydatidiform mole (PHM). CHM is characterized LYT10-locus. The diagnostic cut-off levels of the FISH probe set by gross hydropic swelling of almost all of the chorionic villi with in interphase cells were determined in normal controls. A cell line loss of intravillous vascularity and resembling bunches of grapes, known to carry breaks in both NFKB2 alleles served as positive usually with an absence of a fetus or fetal tissue such as blood or control. In all five studied B-cell lymphomas with cytogenetically amniotic membrane. PHM is generally accompanied by a fetus, or proven t(10;14)(q24;q32) a break within the IGH locus but not in the shows evidence of a previous existence of a fetus by the presence NFKB2 locus was detected. From 14 lymphomas with chromosomal 98 Posters - Cancer Genetics 99 aberrations in 10q, only a single case displayed a signal constellation amplification of exons 2 and 4 HFE gene followed by restriction indicating a breakpoint within the NFKB2/LYT10-locus. Four cases endonuclease digestion with RsaI for C282Y and BclI for H63D. showed signal patterns indicating deletions of the NFKB2/LYT10- Statistical data analysis was performed by Fishers exect test. locus. Similarly, a loss of the NFKB2/LYT10-locus was detected in The allele frequency of the C282Y mutation in the normal population 8/18 cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. These findings indicate that the and malignant glioblastomas patients were 0.021 and 0.026, NFKB2 gene very likely is not the sole target of the t(10;14)(q24;q32) respectivelly ( p=0.32 ). The allele frequency of the H63D mutation and that deletions affecting the NFKB2/LYT10-locus are recurrent in the normal subjects and malignant gliomas patients were 0.17 and particularly in cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Finally, our results show 0.13, respectivelly( p=0.11 ). the established double-color FISH assay to provide a new routinely These findings did not provide evidence of association between applicable tool for diagnosing recurrent breakpoints and imbalances higher level of H63D mutation and malignant glioblastomas in in NFKB2/LYT10-locus. contrast to the date obtained by F. Martines di Montemuros et al. (2001).The obtained tendency of association malignant glioblastomas P0118. p16INK4a, p15INK4b, p14ARF, Rb1 and ECAD with lower frequency of H63D mutation in genotype will be check for Genes Aberrant Methylation in Various Cancers. major patients group with malignant glioblastomas. V. Zemlyakova1, L. Lubchenko2, I. Zborovskaya2, V. Strelnikov3, V. Artamonov4, M. Nemtsova1; P0120. A Complex Karyotype in A Childhood Relaps ALL- 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical L1 Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Oncological A. Cirakoglu1, S. Hacihanefioglu1, Y. Tarkan-Argüden1, A. Deviren1, Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute for Molecular S. Berrak2, C. Canpolat2; Medicine, Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 1Dept. of Genetics, Div. of Biomedical Sciences, Cerrahpasa Medical 4Russian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. School, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Dept.of Pediatric Alterations of DNA methylation pattern have been recognized as Hematology Oncology, Marmara University Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey. common changes in human cancers. It is known that clonal chromosomal changes in childhood ALL are We investigated the frequency of p16INK4a, p15INK4b, p14ARF, nonrandom. They are important markers for diagnosis, prognosis and retinoblastoma (Rb1) and E-cadherin (ECAD) genes aberrant relaps. The median survival time following relaps and clonal complex methylation in different cancers: breast cancer (60 samples), non- chromosomal changes are related. Our case was four years old small lung cancer - NSLC - (35 samples), nephroblastoma (10 boy. He was diagnosed with ALL-L1 a year ago. He had weakness, samples), retinoblastoma (50 samples), acute lymphoblastic leukemia fever, massive lymphadenopathy (LAP) and hepatosplenomegaly. - ALL - (30 samples), chronic lymphoblastic leukemia - CLL - (15 He was considered poor risk patient and treated with chemotherapy samples). and radiotherapy because of central nervous system involvement. Methylation in the breast cancer samples was detected in 14% for Relaps was occured a year later. Bone marrow sample was analysed Rb1 promoter, 27% for p16INK4a promoter, 41% for p16INK4a cytogenetically after relaps. The karyotype was 46,XY,t(3;17)(q23?; exon1, 40% for ECAD promoter; for nephroblastoma - 70% for Rb1 p13),t(5;12)(q31;p13),inv(11)(p15q12)[11]/46,XY[8]. The patient died promoter, 50% for p16INK4a promoter, 50% for p16INK4a exon1, from ARDS after convulsions likely due to toxicity of drugs. 50% for ECAD promoter; for NSLC - 12% for Rb1 promoter, 18% t(5;12)(q31-33;p12-13) was reported in childhood and adult for p16INK4a promoter, 66% for p16INK4a exon1, 72% for ECAD myelodysplastic syndromes. Extensive research of literature promoter; for ALL - 16% for Rb1 promoter, 26% for p16INK4a failed to demonstrate any published on t(3;17)(q23?;p13) in promoter, 26% for p16INK4a exon1, 20% forECAD promoter; for leukemias. Whereas the breakpoint of 17p13 had been involved CLL - 13% for Rb1 promoter, 26% for p16INK4a promoter, 26% for in a t(11;17)(q23;p13) in ANLL. inv(11)(p15q12) has not been p16INK4a exon1, 6% for ECAD promoter; for retinoblastoma - 28% reportedin literature, but the breakpoint of 11p15 had been reported for Rb1 promoter, 16% for p16INK4a promoter, 57% for p16INK4a in inv(11)(p15q23) in ANLL and MDS and in t(7;11)(p15;p15) in ANLL exon1, 59% for ECAD promoter. No methylation of p15INK4b and and CML in blast crisis. p14ARF was detected in our samples. In a number of samples we To our knowledge there is no reported case with such karyotypic have shown joint methylation of several genes. abnormalities. Since the patient had not been referred us for Studies of joint genes methylation and determination of methylation cytogenetic examination at the time of diagnosis,it remains unknown profile in tumors will allow to define a functional role of genes in whether this anomaly was present in earlier stages of the disease or carcinogenesis, as well as to develop practical approaches to the occured after relaps. early diagnostics of cancer. Joint methylation of p16INK4a, Rb1, ECAD genes in cancer samples P0121. The role of H-ras gene in tumorigenesis of oral squamous cell carcinoma p16 p16 p16 Rb1 Rb1 B. Popovic1, J. Milasin1, B. Jekic2, I. Novakovic2; Rb1 ECAD ECAD ECAD 1Faculty of Stomatology, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. ALL 9% 9% 6% 6% The aim of the present study is to establish the relationship between CLL 12% 6% 6% 6% mutations in exons 1 and 2 of the H-Ras gene and clinicopathological Breast cancer 14% 51% 8% 8% features of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). It is well known NSLC 11% 53% 11% 11% that H-Ras gene is one of a family of Ras genes, which encode p21 Retinoblastoma 16% 42% 18% 12% plasma membrane protein involved in signal transduction. Point mutations within codons 12 and 13(exon 1) or codon 61(exon 2) Nephroblastoma 40% 50% 40% 40% are frequently present in various tumours including OSCC. In our study, in order to detect these mutations, we isolated DNA from 20 P0119. Frequency of the C282Y and H63D mutations of paraffin embedded OSCC specimens. Using PCR technique, it was HFE gene in patients with malignant glioblastomas from possible to analyse 10 of 20 (50%) samples, probably, because Ukraine of DNA degradation, which occurred during paraffin embedding. V. N. Pampuha1, A. P. Cherchenko2, L. A. Livshits1; According to the TNM staging, 5 of 10 successful amplified samples 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine, 2Institute were stage III and 5 stage II. These histopathological parameters of Neurosurgery, Kiev, Ukraine. suggest that our analyzed samples, might have a higher incidence The discovery of the HFE gene allows us to study the molecular of H-Ras mutations, but to confirm this correlation, PCR products basis of iron overload disorders. In hereditary haemochromatosis will be screened by method for detection mutations–SSCP. Also, the high frequency of the C282Y and H63D mutations of HFE gene additional cases will be tested and their prognostic significance will established, but their role in neoplastic transformation are still under be discussed. investigation. For elucidation the association beetween HFE gene mutations and risk malignant gliomas development we investigated the frequency of the HFE mutations on DNA of 38 patients with malignant glioblastomas and 97 normal healthy subjects from Ukraine. The C282Y and H63D mutations were detected after PCR Posters - Cancer Genetics 100 101 P0122. Translocation T(1;21)(p36;q22) In A Child With with 27% in the whole group patients. We found strong correlation Fanconi Anemia between the right tumor localization and MSI-H (MSI-high) H. Sennana Sendi1, H. Elghezal1, M. Gribaa1, B. Meddeb2, H. Ben phenotypes. Abid2, A. Hafsia2, A. Saad1; The histopathological evaluation showed the presence of mucin 1Service de Cytogénétique, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, production in 64,3% of the MSI cases, compared with 15,9% in the 2Service d’Hématologie, CHU Aziza Othmana, Tunis, Tunisia. microsatelite stable tumors. Most of the cases had not cancer cell We report herein a 9-year old boy undergoing a cytogenetic metastasis in the regional lymph nodes (71,4%). All the right localized investigation for pancytopenia. A bone marrow aspirate revealed tumors were included in this group. No long distance metastases in aplastic anemia. A diagnosis of fanconi anemia was confirmed by an MSI positive tumors were found. These data were corelated with the increased number of chromosomal breaks and rearrangements in better prognosis of the MSI positive colorectal cancers especially the peripheral blood lymphocytes cultured in the presence of mitomycin tumors with right colon origin. C. The patient had no phenotypic manifestations. Bone marrow RHG-banded karyotype showed deletion del(21)(q22). Fluorescence P0125. PCR detection and typing of HPV in Bulgarian in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis revealed a cryptic translocation patients with invasive cervical cancer t(1;21)(p36;q22).This translocation have been reported previously in D. Georgiev1, L. N. Georgieva2, T. Arsov2, B. Slavchev1, I. two old patients who developed acute myeloid leukemia secondary Karagyozov1, A. Galabov3, D. Toncheva2; to toxic exposure (after radiation exposure in one case, and after 1University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynaecology “Maichin dom”, treatment with antitopoisomerase II in the second case), but this is First Clinics of Gynaecology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical the first report of t(1;21)(p36;q22) in a child with fanconi anemia. Genetics, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Institute of Microbiology, Department of Virology, Bulgarianan Academy of P0123. Neuroblastoma cell detection by RT-PCR for Sciencies, Sofia, Bulgaria. tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA Human Papillomavirus (HPV) infection is considered to be an B. Ravcukova, J. Kadlecova, I. Valaskova, J. Sterba, R. Gaillyova; important risk factor for cervical cancer development. The polymerase University of Children´s hospital, Brno, Czech Republic. chain reaction (PCR) method enables detection and typing of large Bone marrow metastasis often occurs in patients with neuroblastoma; number of HPV types and is widely used in HPV diagnostics. Here therefore a sensitive assay to detect circulating neuroblastoma cells we present results from PCR HPV typing in cervical cancer patients in bone marrow (BM) and peripheral blood (PB) is needed. The obtained for the first time in Bulgaria. feasibility and clinical value of using the reverse transcriptase (RT) HPV diagnostics was carried out on DNA samples obtained from 70 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify mRNA for tyrosinase paraffin-embedded biopsies from Bulgarian women diagnosed with hydroxylase (TH), the first enzyme of catecholamine synthesis, was invasive cervical cancers during the last 2 years. The samples were evaluated to detect neroblastoma cells in patient samples. initially tested with MY09/MY11 consensus primers located within A total of 32 patients with neuroblastoma were studied. After the L1 region of HPV genome, which covers a broad spectrum of preparation of complementary DNA, the PCR was performed HPV types. Gamma globin gene amplification was carried out as an to amplify the TH gene. Amplified products were analyzed in internal positive control. The positive samples were subsequently polyacrylamide gel or by using the GeneScan Analysis on ABI tested with specific primers for the most common HPV types (6, 11, PRISM 310.The specificity of the amplified products was checked 16, 18, 31 and 33). by sequencing analysis and neuroblastoma cells were detected at We detected HPV in 45 cases (64.28%). Mixed infection was a level of 1 per 105 normal PB mononuclear cells by this method.TH observed in more than 40% of the positive cases. HPV 16 was mRNA was in 19 of the 63 BM samples, in 6 of the 53 PB samples detected in 25 cases (31.6%), HPV 18 in 19 (24.1%), HPV 6 in 15 and in 4 of the 8 tumor samples. (19.0%), HPV 11 in 9 (11.4%), HPV 31 in 7 (8.9%) and HPV 33 in 4 RT-PCR of TH mRNA is a sensitive and specific method for detection cases(5.0%). of circulating neuroblastoma cells in BM and PB samples. The clinical Our initial results indicate the highest prevalence of HPV types 16 significance of these very low levels of neuroblastoma cells detected and 18. This confirms the association of high-risk types HPV16 and by RT-PCR requires further investigation. We conclude that, by 18 with invasive cervical cancers. combining multiple molecular markers and independent screening techniques, we may be able to overcome tumor heterogeneity P0126. Amplification of the androgen receptor gene and expedite the detection of microscopic disease in the clinical in primary prostate cancer due to X chromosome management of NB. This work is supported from the Ministry of the aneuploidy Health in the Czech Republic ( MZ 0006526 97 05) A. Röpke1, K. John1, A. Erbersdobler2, P. Hammerer3, M. Stumm1, P. F. Wieacker1; P0124. Microsatelite Instability in Bulgarian Patients with 1Institute of Human Genetics, Otto-von-Guericke- Colorectal Cancer University, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Institute of Pathology, T. K. Petrova1, M. Tzancheva2, A. Gegova2, G. Dineva1, M. Marinov2, Universitätskrankenhaus Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, H. Kadyan2, P. Pentchev2, D. Nedin2, A. Alexandrova2, J. Ilieva2, D. 3Department of Urology, Universitätskrankenhaus Hamburg- Damyanov2, V. Mitev3, I. Kremensky1; Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, University Hospital of Obstetrics In the majority of patients with prostate cancers (PC), the growth of and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Queen Jovanna Hospital, the tumor is androgen-dependent. In advanced PC, when radical Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Chemistry and treatment of prostate cancer is not curative, androgen deprivation Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. therapy has proved to be an effective palliative therapy. In this study Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the most common gastro- intestinal we analysed isolated nuclei from 31 prostatectomy specimens from neoplasia. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer is the most PC patients without preoperative therapy for amplification of the common type of familial CRC. Germline mutations in one of DNA androgen receptor (AR) gene by fluorescence in situ hybridization mismatch repair genes are known to be responsible for the HNPCC (FISH). For this purpose, an AR gene probe (Vysis) was used in phenotype. Their mutations induce microsatelite instability (MSI). combination with an X centromere control probe. In 11 out of 31 Approximately 12-17% of the unselected tumors also show MSI. PC, additional X chromosomes (disomy to tetrasomy) with the Highly efficient set of five markers- D2S123, BAT26, D5S346, corresponding AR gene could be detected in more than 20% of the D18S35 and FGA have been selected for detecting the MSI. analysed nuclei. In two of these patients, over 40% of the nuclei of A total of 108 patients with colorectal cancer have been included in the PC tissue showed two or more fluorescence signals. Control the current study. The analysis was performed using two detection analyses with centromere probes of chromosomes X, Y and 18 methods- denaturing polyacrylamide gels followed by silver staining confirmed these high level of X aneuploidies. Both patients have and/or automated fluorescence detection (ALFExpress Biotech, advanced stage PC (pT4,pN1 and pT3b,pN0). FISH analysis on Pharmacia). normal prostate tissue detected in both patients in less than 10% of We detected 16 tumours with MSI. These cases were reliably the nuclei additional X chromosomes. Furthermore, the analysis of 11 detected by the two methods. 64,3% of them were family cases. In normal prostate tissues showed that an average of 8% of the nuclei 65% of the MSI cases the tumors were right localized, compared had two or more signals for the AR and X centromere probe.100 Posters - Cancer Genetics 101 We conclude that additional AR gene copies are present in a P0129. Genetic alterations in the SDH genes lead to subgroup of primary PC prior to anti-androgen therapy. This may be oncogenesis of paragangliomas an important factor for initial anti-androgen resistance. S. Braun1,2, K. Riemann1,2, M. Pfister2, K. Sotlar3, H. Zenner4, N. Blin1, This study was founded by Dr. Mildred Scheel Stiftung. C. Pusch1, S. Kupka1,2; 1Department of Anthropology and Human Genetics, University of P0127. Microsatellite instability in HNPCC patients Tübingen, Germany, 2Department of Otolaryngology, University M. Papezova1, A. Krepelova1, V. Kebrdlova1, T. Dolezal1, L. Foretova2, of Tübingen, Germany, 3Department of Pathology, University of P. Plevova3; Tübingen, Germany, 4Department of Otolaryngology,, University of 11st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, Tübingen, Germany. 2Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Faculty Paragangliomas of the head and neck region are usually benign Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic. tumors developing from chemoreceptors of paraganglionic origin in Microsatellite instability (MSI) is characteristic feature of colorectal the majority of patients. These receptors play an important role in cancer with loss of mismatch repair (MMR) in tumor cells. MSI is sensing and regulation of the blood CO2-level. Genetic alterations found in tumors of patients with HNPCC and in 15-20% of sporadic in the mitochondrial enzyme complex II (SDH), which is involved in colorectal tumors. In connection with mutation analysis of MSH2 respiratory chain and citric acid cycle reactions, have been shown to and MLH1 genes in patients with HNPCC, we studied MSI in 47 lead to sporadic as well as familiar cases of these tumors. Therefore unrelated patients with colorectal cancer. Of these, 8 patients fulfilled we analyzed our collective containing sporadic cases of patients Amsterdam criteria (AMS+), 27 patients were familial (AMS-) and 12 with paragangliomas for genetic changes in the SDH-genes SDHD, were sporadic cases (Spor). Two mononucleotide (BATRII, BAT26) SDHC and SDHB. We detected several new DNA mutations in and five dinucleotide (D2S123, D3S1029, D5S346, D17S250, samples derived from tumor patients. Furthermore we demonstrated D18S58) loci were analysed. Initially, MSI was determined in loss of heterozygosity (LOH) usually connected with oncogenesis of denaturing polyacrylamide gel stained with ethidium bromide, then various tumors. Elucidation of the genetic regions involved in tumor fragmentation analysis with fluorescent primers on ABI Prism 310 development is a basis for understanding their contribution to normal Genetic Analyzer was introduced and both methods were compared. and pathogenic cell physiology. Tumors were classified as MSI-H (high degree of MSI, 2 or more loci with MSI), MSI-L (low degree of MSI, 1 unstable locus), and P0130. A fixed cascade of genomic changes in a murine MSS (stable, no MSI detected). Results of MSI analysis in tumors tumor progression model for pancreatic adenocarcinoma are shown in table. Number of patients with germ-line mutation B. Schreiner1, U. Zechner2, D. Baur2, F. Greten2,3, M. Wagner2, H. in MSH2 or MLH1 gene is shown in parentheses. In patients with Hameister1, R. Schmid2; MSI-H tumor and negative result of mutation detection, analysis of 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Germany, methylation status of MLH1 gene promoter is in progress. This work 2Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Ulm, Germany, was supported by Grant Agency of Charles University (Grant No. 3Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, 17/2001). CA. Group of patients MSI-H tumors MSI-L tumors MSS tumors Total P53+/- knockout mice overexpressing TGFa in a pancreas specific AMS+ 5 (5) 1 (0) 2 (0) 8 (5) manner develop adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic ducts. This established animal model reflects human pancreatic cancer disease. AMS- 5 (2) 1 (0) 21 (1) 27 (3) To investigate secondary genomic changes, more than 40 tumors Spor 2 (0) 0 10 (2) 12 (2) were analyzed by CGH. In about 40% of the tumors gain of proximal All 12 (7) 2 (0) 33 (3) 47 (10) chromosome 11 and loss of its distal part including p53 was detected. Due to this loss no wildtype p53-allel is left. P0128. Differential gene expression in human prostate In addition to this recurrent aberration pattern further cancer cancer. progression follows two alternate routes: Overrepresentation of M. Grzmil1, D. Mury1, W. Engel1, P. Thelen2, R. Ringert2, B. chromosome 15 including the Myc locus (A), or more rarely, loss Hemmerlein3, H. Radzun3, P. Burfeind1; of the distal part of chromosome 14 including the Rb-locus (B). It 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, seems that these aberrations occur exclusively because in none Germany, 2Department of Urology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, of the aforementioned tumors a combination of these events was Germany, 3Department of Pathology, University of Göttingen, detected. On the average mice bearing tumors of subtype B develop Göttingen, Germany. tumors about 75 days earlier than mice with tumors of subtype A. Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed solid tumor in men, These data indicate that there are at least two different pathways in and the second leading cause of cancer death in males from western pancreatic tumor formation: Proliferation through Rb-deletion or c- countries. One of the key issues in prostate cancer research is to myc overexpression and activation. develop molecular markers that can effectively detect and distinguish To analyze the extension of the amplified regions of chromosome the progression and malignancy of prostate tumors. In order to 11 and 15 cell lines were investigated by FISH and real-time PCR. analyze differential gene expression of putative tumor markers On proximal chromosome 11 the amplification-unit extends about 18 labeled cDNA probes were generated from capsule-invasive prostate cM. Together with Egfr, the c-Rel gene gets amplified which provides tumor (stage pT3a) and normal prostate tissue. The cDNA probes antiapoptotic activity. In contrast, the Myc amplification-unit of were hybridized with an Atlas Select Human Tumor cDNA Expression chromosome 15 is much smaller. Array (Clontech) with immobilized cDNAs of differentially expressed In the meanwhile a second series of pancreatic adenocarcinoma with genes from five different human tumors, e.g. bladder, breast, liver, TGFa / p19ARF+/- was analyzed by CGH. These tumors show less lung and prostate carcinoma. In total, 46 known and unknown genes chromosomal aberrations. were identified to be up-or down-regulated in prostate carcinoma. The known genes showing a differential expression pattern in prostate P0131. Breakpoint Analysis of a Novel Recurrent tumor samples included transcription factors, protooncogenes and Chromosomal Translocation (14;20)(q32;q12) in a Human other proteins, e.g. Krox 24, c-jun, spermidyne acetyltransferase, Multiple Myeloma Cell Line. ribosomal proteins, clusterin and prostate secretory protein 94. In G. R. Boersma-Vreugdenhil, T. Peeters, J. Kuipers, B. Bast; addition, by using both Northern blot analyses on whole tumor RNA Dept. of Immunology, UMC, Utrecht, Netherlands. and real time RT-PCR on RNA from tumor cryosections enhanced Recurrent chromosomal translocations are regularly involved expression of seven unknown genes was verified in prostate tumors in hematological malignancies. Translocations involving the as compared to normal prostate tissue. To further circumvent the Immunoglobulin Heavy chain (IgH) region at chromosome 14q32 problem of tissue heterogeneity, RNA from microdissected prostate are a hallmark in human B cell malignancies including multiple tumor tissue samples was isolated and analyzed for differential gene myeloma (MM). Using Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) we expression. The identification of these tumor-specific expression already demonstrated the ubiquitous presence of translocations patterns could lead to the establishment of genetic fingerprints of in this region in MM cell lines, with a diverse array of translocation prostate tumors as a versatile tool for diagnostic and prognostic partners. Recently we have found a high percentage (92%) of purposes. der14t(14;?)(q32;?) in fresh MM samples as well.Posters - Cancer Genetics 102 103 Apart from the four major 14q32 translocations (involving 4p16, 6p25, as it functions as an upstream regulator of pRB activity and others 11q13 and 16q23), we reported another recurrent translocation, i.e. important tumor-suppressor gene: p15 (INK4b), p14 (ARF) and t(14;20)(q32;q12). Here, we describe the cloning and characterization ECAD in retinoblastoma tumors. We found abnormal methylation of the breakpoint of this UM3 cell line. p16 promoter region - 11% cases, in exon 1 of p16 - 46% tumors Using FiberFISH techniques the breakpoint was detected in the and methylation of ECAD promoter - in 59% retinoblastomas. These switch gamma-1 region of chromosome14. Next, a genomic phage data confirm necessity of methylation profile studies in different tumor library of the UM3 cell line was screened with a gamma-1 probe types. resulting in a clone that spans the breakpoint. Sequence analysis pinpointed the breakpoint of chromosome 14 in the mu enhancer, P0134. Telomerase activity as a predictive marker for in adjacent to the recombined switch mu/switch gamma-1 genes. vitro chemo-reponsiveness of bilharzial bladder cancer Screening a P1 library picked up a larger genomic fragment covering A. M. Metwally1, H. M. Khaled1, I. Abdel Salam1, M. S. Aly2; the breakpoint at chromosome 20. Screening of a UM3 derived cDNA 1National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt, 2Faculty of library with this P1 clone resulted in a cDNA clone of 3.5kb. The first Science, Cairo University (Beni Suef branch), Cairo, Egypt. known gene located downstream of the breakpoint at 20q12 is the The DNA component of telomeres is synthesized by a specialized oncoprotein MAF-B, pointing to MAF-B as one of the candidate target reverse transcriptase enzyme,the telomerase.More than 90% of genes involved in t(14;20) in multiple myeloma. Functional studies to human cancers are telomerase positive where most normal tissues such an effect are underway. or benign tumors contained low or undetectable levels.We wanted to know if there would be any correlation between the in vitro P0132. Increased noise as an effect of haploinsufficiency sensitivity of bilharzial bladder cancer to different chemotherapeutic of the tumor suppressor gene Neurofibromatosis type 1 agents and the telomerase activity.The present study included in vitro 33 samples taken from bladder cancer patients treated at the D. Kaufmann1, S. Schrank2, W. Vogel1, H. Gruler2, R. Kemkemer2; National Cancer Institute,Cairo University.Three anticancer drugs 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Germany, (gemcitabine,taxotere,and navelbine) were applied as single agents 2Department of Biophysics, University of Ulm, Germany. or in combination.Telomerase activity was positive in 28 out of In human diseases related to tumor suppressor genes, it is suggested the 33(85%)cases studied.The drug gemcitabine was tested on that only the complete loss of the protein results in specific symptoms all 33 samples included in the study,while taxotere and navelbine such as tumor formation, whereas simple reduction of protein quantity were tested on 26 and 28 samples respectively.Simultaneous to 50%, called haploinsufficiency, essentially does not affect cellular application of the 3 drugs was tested on 7 samples. No sensitivity behavior. Using a model of gene expression it was presumed that could be detected to any of the 33 samples tested for gemcitabine haploinsufficiency is related to an increased noise in gene expression (0%).Among the 26 samples tested for taxotere,3 samples showed also in vivo [Cook, D. L., Gerber, A. N. & Tapscott, S. J. (1998) Proc. in vitro sensitivity (9%).Navelbine has demonstrated in vitro activity Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 15641-15646]. Here, we demonstrate that in 1/27 (9%)samples.Among 7 samples tested for simultaneous haploinsufficiency of the tumor suppressor gene Neurofibromatosis application of the 3 drugs,the activity of the combination was type 1 (NF1) results in an increased variation of dendrite formation in demonstrated in one sample(14%). There was highly significant cultured NF1 melanocytes. These morphological differences between correlation between the telomerase activity and the in vitro sensitivity NF1 and control melanocytes can be described by a mathematical to both the drugs taxotere and navelbine (p.00016 and .0005 for model where the cell is considered a self-organized automaton. taxotere and .012 and .0421 for navelbine).Thus it may be concluded The model describes the adjustment of the cells to a set point and that telomerase activity may be used as a predictive marker for includes a noise term which allows for stochastic processes. It responsiveness to chemotherapy in bilharzial bladder cancer patien describes the experimental data of control and NF1 melanocytes. In ts.However,clinical correlations are clearly needed before reaching the cells haploinsufficient for NF1 we found an altered signal-to-noise such a conclusion. ratio detectable as increased variation in dendrite formation in two out of three investigated morphological parameters. We also suggest P0135. Conversion of ALL-L2 with a double 12;21 that in vivo NF1 haploinsufficiency results in an increased noise in a translocation to JMML with a 4;11 translocation: A cellular regulation and that this effect of haploinsufficiency might be cytogenetic, morphological and immunophenotypic found also in other tumor suppressors. study. E. Manor; P0133. RB1 structural and functional pathology, Human Genetics, Beer Sheva, Israel. methylation pattern of p16, p15, p14 and ECAD genes in Abstract retinoblastoma patients. The phenotypic conversion of acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) into O. Babenko1, V. Zemlyakova1, S. Saakyan2, V. Kozlova3; juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is a rare event, especially 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical in the pediatric population. We describe a comprehensive cytogenetic Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow Institute for Eye and flowcytometric study performed from bone marrow and peripheral Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3National Scientific Oncology cells from such a child enabling us to determine the origin of his Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. JMML. A four-year-old boy diagnosed with double t(12;21), CALLA+, The aim of our investigation was to research molecular anomalies pre-B ALL was treated as-per BFM protocols on the low risk arm. A causing retinoblastoma. Retinoblastoma is an embryonic malignant routine cytogenetic analysis performed at 17 months into treatment tumor of retina with an incidence of 1:13000 which is found together failed to detect t(12;21) in bone marrow (BM) cells. However, a with structural abnormalities in RB1 tumor-suppressor gene. Some novel translocation, namely, t(4;11), involving the MLL gene at 11q23 cases are obviously caused by methylation of RB1 gene promoter was detected in monocytes, mature granulocytes and in immature region. SSCP and heteroduplex analysis were used for mutation myeloid/monocytic cells. No cytogenetic abnormalities were found screening, microsatellite analysis (intron 2, 20, D13S262, D13S284) - either in EBV-transformed B or in PHA-stimulated T lymphoid cells. for loss of heterozygosity (LOH), methylation pattern analysis of RB1 Flowcytometric analysis demonstrated an asynchronous expression promoter region - for functional mutation. of the antigenic determinants in populations of granulocyte and We have studied 60 families with different forms of retinoblastoma. monocytoid cells: Low levels of CD14, an unusually high level of Analysis of PCR products mobility by using of SSCP and CD15, and no CD13 or HLA-DR antigens were observed in 60% heteroduplex analyses revealed 47 mutations in different RB1 of monocytes, while 74% of myeloid cells expressed no CD13. gene exons and introns. All familial and sporadic bilateral cases of Debate exists as to whether JMML is a disorder of the pluripotent retinoblastoma had germinal mutations. Complete deletion of RB1 hemopoietic stem cells or of the committed myeloid/erythroid/ was revealed in two sporadic cases. Loss of heterozygosity of at least megakaryocytic (GEMM) stem cell. Our results indicate that the one of intragenic markers was found in 71% of analyzed tumors. transformation from B-cell ALL to JMML in this case, occurred, most Methylation pattern anomalies of the RB1 gene promoter region were probably in the GEMM stem cells without involving the lymphoid cell found in 27% retinoblastomas. line. The role of the initial double t(12;21) aberration in the evolution Having not found any abnormalities in same tumors we undertook of the disease is not clear. a study of methylation status of p16 gene (INK4a) promoter region 102 Posters - Cancer Genetics 103 P0136. Leucosis virus influence on animals cells genome disjunction/duplication leading to partial or total isodisomy. Z. S. Klestova1, V. N. Balatsky2, R. A. Golubets1; In an attempt to further characterize the main chromosomal 1The Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2The Institute of mechanisms involved in the hSNF5/INI1 inactivation in rhabdoid Pig breeding, Poltava, Ukraine. tumors, we report here the molecular cytogenetic data obtained with Many items of human and animals leucosis pathogenesis are not 18 rhabdoid cell lines harboring hSNF5/INI1 mutation or deletion clear. We studied leucosis virus influence on animals’ cells genome using 10 different markers located all along the chromosome and change of exchange processes in an organism in case of long 22q11.2-q12 region. The FISH results show that several deletions term infection. As a model we used Bovine Leukemia virus (BLV) may occured in the cases carrying chromosome 22 abnormalities. and cattle of black-mottle species (in fifties experimental and check The translocations including the hSNF5/INI1 consensus region are animals). Peculiarity of cattle pathogenic properties is its tropism always associated with an homozygous deletion of variable size. By to lymphocytes. After have studied locus BM-315 of chromosome contrast, no deletion could be detected in any of the cases exhibiting #5 cattle’s lymphocytes of infected cattle within 4 months we had an apparently normal karyotype. defined 1 allele sized 152 pairs of nucleotides. In 4 months two Besides common mechanisms of mitotic recombination or non alleles sized 152 and 166 pairs of nucleotides were found in the disjunction/ duplication occuring in 60% of either retinoblastoma or same animals. One animal in the studied locus on first analyses were rhabdoid tumors, other specific chromosome mechanisms seem to found two alleles sized 160 and 156 pairs of nucleotides. In 4 months be involved in each category of tumors for inactivating the respective in the same animal were found 2 alleles sized 158 and 152 pairs of tumor suppressor genes. Translocations associated with homozygous nucleotides. In locus MAF-50 of cattle’s cells chromosome #4 was deletions and monosomy cases associated with mutations are also registered change of allele’s number and sizes in comparison mainly described in the rhabdoid tumors. Inactivation by two different with check animals. Thus was found the change in parts of animals’ mutations is mainly found in retinoblastoma. These differences may cells chromosomes #4 and #5 in BLV infected animals. Comparative be related to the presence of low copy repeat families in the proximal RAPD-PCR analyses revealed individual changes on strips quantity 22q region leading to an increased chromosome instability. in RAPD-spectrum of experimental animals in ontogenesis in comparison with check animals after a time. This testifies to changes P0139. Application of FISH and microsatellite markers for in genome of studied cells. RAPD-PCR analyses is more informative monitoring chimerism in Bulgarian patients after bone for small sampling of animals evaluation. It is also preferable for marrow transplantation comparing with analyses of single high-polymer locuses. D. Koynova1, B. Zaharieva1, S. Atanasova1, G. Mihailov2, B. Avramova2, M. Jordanova2, L. Garcheva2, D. Bobev2, D. Toncheva1; P0137. Detection of coding microsatellite instability by 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty Sofia, Sofia, MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Bulgaria, 2Children Hospital for oncohematological disorders, Sofia, A. Humeny1, T. Bonk1, J. Gebert2, C. Sutter2, M. von Knebel- Bulgaria. Döberitz2, C. M. Becker1; Development of effective molecular-diagnostic methods for 1Institut für Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Universität Erlangen- monitoring chimerism is an important tool for determining the risk Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Sektion für Molekulare Diagnostik of relapse in patients after allogenic bone marrow transplantation. und Therapie, Chirurgische Klinik, Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Evaluation of the chimerism status in these patients provides Germany. substantial information about the replacement of host cells with donor Insertion as well as deletion of repetitive units in microsatellites cells during the posttransplantation period at the level of extremely arise as a consequence of DNA polymerase slippage during DNA small number of cells. Two male patients were studied by FISH with replication. The DNA mismatch repair (MMR) system eliminates alternatively labeled X and Y probes after transplantation from sister the initial insertion-deletion loops to reduce the error rates in DNA and mother donors respectively. In the first case the percentage of replication. Defects in the MMR system result in an increased donor cells increased in cultured lymphocytes from periferal blood loss or gain of repeat units in microsatellites, commonly known as from 6 to 70% in about 10 days period starting one month after the microsatellite instability (MSI). These processes play an important transplantation and by now the patient has achieved full remission. role in cancer development and therefore serve as markers for The second patient showed 97% chimerism on a bone marrow smear tumorigenesis. Due to this reason, efficient methodical approaches at the 51st day of transplantation and is still under observation. The for the reliable detection of MSI with prospects for high throughput three male-to-male donor-recipient pairs were studied by genotyping screening are needed. Matrix assisted laser desorption ionization of ACPP, D3S1282, D3S1509, SST, RHO, D3S1212, SLC, SERT - time of flight - mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) possesses and DAT1 microsattelite loci by PCR. In the case of brother donation these general features as shown for genotyping of single nucleotide SERT proved to be informative and showed chimerism 3 months polymorphisms (SNPs). Here, we present a MALDI-TOF-MS based after the transplantation in blood sample followed by recurrence genotyping approach for MSI affecting mono nucleotide repeats of the illness. In the case of unrelated donor ACPP was found to in somatic tissues important in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal be informative but unfortunately the patient died before the first cancer (HNPCC). Following PCR amplification of genomic regions monitoring. In the third case (father donor) none of the markers was including the microsatellites and primer extension reactions over the informative. Polymorphic microsattelite markers and FISH can be microsatellites to produce informative molecular masses, MSI was used as powerfull tools in identification of donor-recipient differences. detected by MALDI-TOF-MS. The analysis of peak integral ratios in a single spectrum of the peaks representing insertions or deletions P0140. FISH analysis of 11q13 gene amplifications on in comparison to the full length microsatellites lead to a relative tissue microchips of transitional cell carcinomas from quantification of MSI. MALDI-TOF-MS based genotyping results Bulgarian patients were confirmed completely by conventional DNA sequencing and D. Toncheva1, T. Arsov2, B. Zaharieva1, C. Georgiev3, T. Todorov3, G. electrophoresis. Due to its accuracy, short runtimes and low costs, Sauter4; this procedure possesses the potential for high throughput screening 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty Sofia, Sofia, of MSI to replace gel based methods. Bulgaria, 2Institute of Immunology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, P0138. Chromosome mechanisms involved in the 3Department of pathological anatomy, Medical Faculty Sofia, inactivation of hSNF5/INI1 leading to rhabdoid tumors. Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Institute of Pathology, University of Basel, Basel, M. F. Rousseau-Merck1, I. Legrand1, I. Versteege1, N. Sévenet1, P. Switzerland. Heiman2, O. Delattre1, A. Aurias1; Gene amplification results in an increased dosage of the affected 1INSERM U509, Paris, France, 2Hopital Erasme, Bruxelles, Belgium. gene. It represents one of the major molecular pathways through Rhabdoid tumors are highly malignant pediatric cancers. which the oncogenes are activated during tumorogenesis. The most Observations of biallelic alterations or deletions of hSNF5/INI1 frequently amplified proto-oncogenes in human tumors mainly belong in these tumors as well as in murine models provide evidence of to one of the three erbB, ras and myc families, or to the 11q13 locus. a tumor suppressor gene acting in this pathology. A precedent Candidate oncogenes located at 11q13 are CCND1 (PRAD1, bcl-1), work demonstrated that the major mechanisms associated to the EMS1, FGF3 (Int-2) and FGF4 (hst1, hstf1). We report results from inactivation of hSNF5/INI1 are mitotic recombinations or putative non a screening for gains and amplifications of CCND1, FGF3/FGF4, Posters - Cancer Genetics 104 105 FGF3 and EMS1 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using that a single chemical modification of DNA gives rise to a dramatic tissue microarray (TMA) containing urinary tract tumor samples from rearrangement in protein positions. If one protein covers 15 base 207 Bulgarian patientsAll 4 genes were successfully analysed in 106 pairs then the area of rearrangement involves up to 200 base pairs. tumors. Three of these tumors (2,83%) had the 4 genes amplified, Cisplatin changes the region(s) of preferable binding of proteins. In three tumors (2,83%) had amplifications of CCND1, FGF3/FGF4 the case of chromatin, platination might cause primary nucleosome and FGF3 together, two of which had gain for EMS1 and one was repositioning and strong secondary stabilization of their locations. normal for EMS1. No tumor had amplification of a single gene. 8 of This work was supported by BRFFI (X99R-099) the tumors had gain for all 4 genes (7,5%), 3 tumors (2,83%) had gain only for CCND1, 2 tumors (1,9%) had gain only for CCND1 P0143. Mixed Polyposis Syndrome in patients referred and FGF4 and 1 tumor had gain for all 3 genes without CCND1. to genetic counselling clinic as Familial Adenomatous Three of the patients had Balkan Endemic Nephropathy (BEN). Polyposis patients. Interestingly, two of the three BEN tumors studied (stage pTa and pT3 C. Marchese1, M. Montera2, M. Torrini2, E. Picco3, L. Locatelli4, M. respectively) had genetic gain at 11q13, the third did not react. The Bossotti5, C. Mareni2; BEN associated pTa tumor was the only pTa tumor with 11q13 copy 1Ospedale Mauriziano, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Internal Medicine, number change of all studied tumors. University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 3Ospedale Valdese, Pomaretto, Italy, 4Ospedale Valdese, Torino, Italy, 5Ospedale Gradenigo, Torino, P0141. Association of the G289S polymorphism in the Italy. HSD17B3 Gene with Prostate Cancer Risk in Italian Men The polyposis syndromes are a heterogeneous group of disease K. Margiotti1,2, E. Kim2, L. Pearce2, E. Spera1, G. Novelli1, J. characterized by multiple lesions in the intestinal tract. The Reichardt2; classification of polyposis syndromes is based on clinical observation 1University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 2USC Keck School of of affected pedigree, on hystopathological diagnosis, on extracolonic Medicine, Los Angeles, CA. manifestations. The better characterized autosomal dominant Prostate cancer is a significant public health problem. Substantial syndromes predisposing to colorectal cancer are associated to data support an important role for androgens in the etiology of this APC gene known to cause familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) disease. The human HSD17B3 gene encodes the testicular (or type and to mismatch repair genes hMLH1 and hMSH2 associated with III) 17ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase enzyme which is involved hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). Peutz Jegher in testosterone biosynthesis in men. We have investigated the syndrome (PJS) and juvenile polyposis (JP) are characterized by G289S (glycine at codon 289 replaced by serine) polymorphism at amartomatous or hyperplastic polyps readily distinguishable from the HSD17B3 locus as a potential candidate SNP (single nucleotide adenomatous polyps of FAP. Recently the mixed hereditary polyposis polymorphism) for prostate cancer risk in constitutional (“germline”) syndrome (HMPS) has been described as a new rare syndrome as DNA from 103 Italian prostate cancer cases and 109 Italian only two small families and a large kindred were reported. Genetic “centenarian” controls to assess the role of this SNP in susceptibility linkage suggested that the HMPS locus lies on the proximal part of to prostate cancer. The G289S polymorphism appears to confer a the long arm of chromosome 6. We report our experience in genetic statistically significant increased risk for prostate cancer (OR= 2.5; p= counselling with 53 patients referred as FAP patients. In 32 out 0.04) in this pilot study. of 46 patients with adenomatous polyps APC gene mutation was Our preliminary data are consistent with an important role of the detected. 7 presented an hystological feature of mixed adenomatous G289S SNP in prostate cancer susceptibility. Thus, the HSD17B3 and hyperplastic polyps. No APC gene mutation or microsatellite gene may be an important candidate gene for prostate cancer risk. instability (MSI) were detected. Three presented familiarity, four were apparently sporadic. Mean age of polyps detection was 40.5 (13-57). Supported by the NCI, USA (JR) the Ministero della Sanita’, Italy Increasing cases of mixed polyposis syndrome are seen in genetic (GN) counselling clinic but many questions raises about its classification The G289S polymorphism at the HSD17B3 Locus and Prostate and about surveillance of patients and at risk individuals. The Cancer syndrome is rare but an effort should be done, through collaborative studies, to identify the responsible Genotype Controls Cases GG(wt) 101 86 P0144. Germline mutations in the ccm1 gene, encoding GS+SS 8 (8+0) 17(15+2) OR=2.5 krit1, in patients with cerebral cavernous malformations. p=0.04 V. Marini1, L. Ferrera1, F. Pigatto2, F. Alberti3, E. Sanzaro3, G. Viale4, P. The heterozygote (GS) and homozygote (SS) genotypes were Origone1, C. Mareni5, C. Garrè1; combined in the analysis. GG (wt) is the normal genotype. OR is the 1Department of Oncology, Biology and Genetics, University of odds ratio and p is the p-value Genova, Genova, Italy, 2Department of Neurological Science and Vision, University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 3Division of Neurology, P0142. A Single DNA chemical modification by cisplatin Sanremo Hospital, Imperia, Italy, 4Department of Specialistic Surgery may cause long-range changes in protein binding to Science, Anaesthesiology and Organ Transplantation, University of DNA. Results of computer modeling. Genova, Genova, Italy, 5Department of Internal Medicine, University V. B. Teif1,2, V. I. Vorob’ev3, D. Y. Lando4; of Genova, Genova, Italy. 1Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Minsk, Belarus, 2Institute of Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCM) are congenital vascular Molecular and Atomic Physics, Belarus National Academy of anomalies of the brain, constituting approximately 10 to 20% of Sciences, Minsk, Belarus, 3Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of cerebral vascular lesions and with a frequency of 0.5% in the general Sciences, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Institute of Bioorganic population. The most common symptoms in affected patients are Chemistry, Belarus National Academy of Sciences, Minsk, Belarus. seizures, focal neurological deficits, migraine and/or intracranial Anticancer drug cisplatin covalently binds to DNA in vivo. The sites haemorrhage, although some patients are asymptomatic. of DNA platination are recognized by several nuclear proteins. In Both sporadic and familial forms have been identified. Familial forms particular, histone H1 and some of HMG proteins bind to platinated exhibit autosomal dominant inheritance with variable expression. DNA with binding constants hundred times greater in comparison In familial patients multiple lesions occur and the frequency of with unmodified DNA. Using computer modeling, we investigated haemorrhages is higher. About 50% of familial forms are linked to binding of proteins to DNA treated by cisplatin. Binding of proteins to mutations of the CCM1 gene (Chr 7q21-22) encoding Krit1 protein DNA is characterized by contact cooperativity as well as long-range (736 aa). To date 27 mutations have been described all leading to interaction. Each platinated site is characterized by 100 times higher non-sense stop codons and to a truncated protein. statistical weight for protein binding in comparison with non-modified We analysed 18 unrelated patients/families (11 sporadic cases, 2 ones. As a result the map of binding, i.e. the probability of each DNA familial cases and 5 unclassified cases) by the SSCP technique and base pair to be bound to a protein was calculated. It was found that sequencing analysis. chemical modification of one or several DNA base pairs by cisplatin In the 2 familial cases, we found 2 different mutations leading to a strongly changes the character of protein binding to DNA. This effect truncated protein: is strongly dependent on the position of modified site. It was shown - 1302delGAAT, previously described as giving rise to a protein of 435 aa104 Posters - Cancer Genetics 105 - IVS8 -13 C→G, a new intronic substitution leading to a protein of 1Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 385 aa. 2Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic”, Moreover, a GTA→GTG (V660V) polymorphism was also observed in Belgrade, Yugoslavia. control subjects. Diagnostic of neuroblastoma (NB) is complex process involving Using 6 extragenic polymorphic markers, we are evaluating the loss multiple analyses from different samples (blood, urine, bone marrow, of heterozigosity in tumour tissue from CCM patients. tumor tissue). Determination of genetic parameters involved in NB is The aim is to identify CCM1 gene mutations and to determine the one of the most significant analysis with great prognostic value. incidence of familial cases in the Italian population. Moreover, In past ten years, in Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Mother and we propose to ascertain whether the “Knudson’s double-loss Child Health Institute “Dr. Vukan Cupic”, Belgrade, 80 patients with mechanism” is involved in CCM disease. NB were analysed. Samples from bone marrow were cytogenetically analysed in 78 cases using standard preparation of chromosomes P0145. The 825C allele of the gene GNB3 encoding the and G banding. In 3 patients beside cytogenetic we used FISH G-protein -3 subunit is associated with an increased risk technique for detection of LOH for 1p36 and in one patient we combined these two techniques with PCR to detect deletion of 1p36. for developing colorectal cancer Two patients were analysed using just one molecular technique, D. Öfner1, M. Zitt1, H. Menzel2, K. W. Schmid3, U. Frey4, W. Siffert4; FISH for 1p36 deletion in first case and PCR for 1p36 deletion in 1University Clinic for Surgery, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute of second case. medical Biology and human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Institute Results were following: 44 of 78 (56,4%) cytogenetically examined of Pathology, Essen, Germany, 4Institute of Pharmacology, Essen, patients had normal karyotype while 34 (43,2%) had aberrant Germany. karyotype. 1p36 deletion was detected with FISH technique in Colorectal cancer is one of the major malign disease in all Western one case while other analysed patients had no 1p 36 deletion. countries. Little is known about the pathogenesis of this disease. Cytogenetic findings in two of these trhee patient were normal but the Like many other disorders, the development of colorectal cancer one with deletion had also hiperdiplod clone in bone marrow. Analysis is multifactorial with a certain genetic contribution. We screened with PCR in two patients for 1p36 region showed intact chromosome patients from Tirol with colorectal cancer for the C825T polymorphism 1. in the gene encoding the G-protein beta-3 subunit. The frequency of the genotypes was 3% TT, 35% TC and 63% CC (n=157) which is significantly (p<0.0013) different from a local control population P0148. Somatic mitochondrial mutation in early gastric (randomly recruited healthy blood donors). The frequency of cancer. genotypes in the control population was 11% TT, 43% TC and R. A. Caruso1, L. Rigoli2, C. Di Bella2, E. Cavallaro3, D. C. Salpietro2; 46% CC (n=188). Carriers of the 825C allele have a 1.89 fold 1Dpt of Human Pathology, Messina, Italy, 2Unità Operativa di increased risk (95% CI, 1.32-2.72) to develop colorectal cancer Genetica ed Immunologia Pediatrica Policlinico Universitario, compared to carriers of the 825T allele. We observed also a gene- Messina, Italy, 3Unità Operativa di Terapia Subintensiva e Dialisi dose effect since homozygotes for 825C-allele have a higher risk Policlinico Universitario, Messina, Italy. to develop colorectal cancer than heterozygotes, both compared to Mitochondrial abnormalities have been observed in many human homozygotes with the T-allele. CC versus TT gives an odds ratio of cancers,including changes in structure, number,respiratory enzyme 4.83 (95% CI, 1.67-17.01) and CC versus CT gives an odds ratio components and transport systems.Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) can of 1.70 (95% CI, 1.06-2.72). The protein of the GNB3 gene is part be modified by many carcinogens because its repair is less efficient of a G-protein heterotrimer involved in signal transduction. The compared with nuclear DNA.The mtDNA non-coding region, which messenger RNA with the 825T allele is spliced differently but the contain hypervariable regions HV1 and HV2, origin of replication, resulting protein is still active. There is evidence that the 825T allele the D-loop region and both origins of transcriptions,exibits a high is associated with enhanced G-protein reactivity and hypertension, degree of sequence polymorphisms. In this study, we examined in obesity and lately, that it is a genetic marker for enhanced T cell some gastric adenocarcinomas the mitochondrial D-loop region.The response. 15 primary gastric cancers were obtained from gastrectomies.MtDNA was extracted from paraffin-embedded tissues.A 445-bp portion of P0146. Chromosome Insitability and Sister Chromatid the human mitochondrial D-loop (bases 75 to 520) was amplified with four sets of overlapping PCR primers.For each tumor and normal Exchange Studies in Patients with Esophageal fraction was performed the PCR-SSCP gel analysis.In four cancers, Carcinoma similar but altered bands distinctly different from the patterns obtained O. Sahin, M. Ikbal, T. Tos, I. Pirim, C. Gundogdu, A. Yilmaz; from adjacent normal tissue were observed. These altered bands Ataturk Universitiy, Erzurum, Turkey. were cloned and sequenced to reveal identical 50-bp deletions Cytogenetic studies have been carried out using convansional that involved flanking 9-bp direct repeats.This deletion eliminates a technique in peripheral blood lymphocytes in patiens with cancers. functional region.Antimitochondrial immunoreactivity was revealed in Sister chromatid exchanges (SCE) are resiprocal exchanges the supranuclear portion of adenocarcinoma cells.The deletion was between sister chromatids. It has been reported that the ferquency not observed in normal mucosa.Mitochondrial mutations in human of SCE in peripheral blood lymphocytes is significantly higher in solid tumors have been reported in isolated case reports.One recent patiens with variety type cancer than in normal individuals. This study study sequenced a portion of the mitochondrial D-loop in colorectal assesed the frequencies of SCE and chromosome abnormality in cancers and failed to find mutations.Instead, in our study the 50 bp peripheral lymphocytes of 28 patients with esophageal carcinoma deletion was found in four out of 15 adenocarcinomas. These findings and 20 controls. Peripheral lymphocyt cells were cultured with document the presence of somatic mitochondrial alterations in gastric conventional culture methods. The blood samples were obtained from cancer, which may reflect the environmental and genetic influence the patiens after histopatologic confirmation of the malignancy but operative during tumor progression. before the initiation of chemotherapy or radiotherapy. The frequncy of aberrant metaphases appear to be significant in patients with P0149. Blast Crisis in Philadelphia Negative CML: Clinical esophageal carcinoma. The mean SCE ferquencies were 10.46 ± 0.48 and 6.82 ± 0.38 per methaphase in patients and controls, Findings and Molecular Cytogenetic Characterization of a respectively. The increase of SCE frequency in cancer patients was 47,XX,+i(11)(q10) Cell Line. stastically significant ( p< 0.001), but no seen in controls. Our results W. Emberger1, W. Olipitz2, S. Sodia1, E. Petek1, H. Zierler1, P. M. suggest that patients with esophageal carcinoma show a degree of Kroisel1, K. Wagner1; chromosomal insitability that might be related to a predisposition to 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Karl-Franzens neoplasia. University, Graz, Austria, 2Departement of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Karl-Franzens University, Graz, Austria. P0147. Cytogenetic and molecular genetic The presence of an abnormal karyotype is well known in Philadelphia negative CML. Cases without detectable cytogenetic aberrations are characterization of patients with neuroblastoma in rare. The correlation between cytogenetic, morphologic, and clinical Yugoslavia data is widely unclear. We report on a female patient who was first M. Djurisic1, M. Guc-Scekic2, D. Radivojevic2, T. Lalic2, S. Djuricic1, diagnosed with CML at an age of 69 years. At this time cytogenetic D. Djokic2;Posters - Cancer Genetics 106 107 evaluation revealed a normal karyotype and no BCR/ABL transcripts P0152. Detection of Illegitimate Rearrangements could be detected using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Litalir within the Immunoglobulin Light Chain Loci in B-cell therapy was performed and after a chronic phase of three years Malignancies. she developed a CML blast crisis. The blasts where characterized A. N. Silahtaroglu1, T. S. Poulsen2, C. G. Gisselø2, N. Tommerup1, H. as FAB M4 and cytogenetic evaluation was performed. A clone with E. Johnsen2; a 47,XX,+i(11)(q10) karyotype resulting in a partial tetrasomy for 1Wilhelm Johansen Research Centre for Functional Genomics, IMBG, 11q could be found. Cytogenetic data was confirmed by molecular Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, cytogenetic analysis. Palliative Aloxan therapy was applied. The 2The Research Laboratory, Department of Haematology L, Herlev patient died in the 9th month of the blast crisis. Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. To our knowledge the presence of an isochromosome 11q in a CML Translocations involving the immunoglobulin loci are recurring blast crisis has never been reported before. The possibility that the events of B-cell oncogenesis. However, only a minority of 47,XX,+i(11)(q10) clone developed from the CML cell line or the translocations involves the immunoglobulin light chain loci; the occurrence of a secondary leukaemia will be discussed. kappa light chain (IGK) located at 2p11.2 and the lambda light chain (IGL) located at 22q11.2. We characterized clones from bacterial P0150. Rapid quantitative monitoring of mixed chimerism artificial chromosomes (BAC) libraries, spanning the IGK and IGL using amplification a highly discriminative PCR-STR loci, for detection of illegitimate rearrangements within the loci by system after bone marrow transplant fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Within the IGL region we M. Shahrooei, A. Aleyasin, K. Darvishi, K. Alimoghaddam, A. have identified six end sequenced probes (22M5, 1152K19, 2036J16, Ghavamzadeh; 3188M21, 3115E23, and 274M7) covering the IGL variable (IGLV) National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and cluster and two probes (165G5 and 31L9) covering the IGL constant Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. (IGLC) cluster however within the IGK region five probes (479P12, Monitoring the engraftment of donor cells after allogeneic blood 969D7, 316G9, 122B6, and 2575M7) have been identified covering stem cell transplantation (BSCT) is an important way for the early the IGK variable (IGKV) cluster, and one probe (1021F21) covering diagnosis of graft failure or relapse of disease. Several techniques the IGK constant (IGKC) cluster. A series of 25 cell lines of different have been reported for this purpose. PCR-based assays analyzing origin have been analyzed for the presence of a translocation polymorphic short tandem repeat (STR) markers are shown to be involving the immunoglobulin light chain by dual color FISH where sensitive and rapid method. The intent of the present study was to the split of the variable cluster and the constant cluster indicated a test this approach for the quantification of mixed chimerism using translocation. six to twelve STR assay after boon marrow transplantation. The This study is supported by The Danish Cancer Society. feasibility of this assay and the accuracy of quantitative results were ¤ The two authors have contributed to the work equally. tested using serial cell mixtures of unrelated individuals. Sequential analysis of individual chimerism status was performed in 63 patients P0153. Cytogenetic Profiling Could be an Adjunct to who underwent BMT in Shariati Hospital, Tehran, Iran. Mixed Differential Diagnosis and Prognosis of Unknown chimerism (MC) was found in 12 of the patients from four weeks till Primary Tumors nine months. Using the STR-PCR, discrimination between donor and H. Tsarouha1, D. Pantou2, A. Papadopoulou3, L. Mahaira3, I. recipient was possible in all patients analyzed (n = 53) except for one Kyriazoglou4, N. Apostoloikas5, S. Markidou6, T. Trangas3, N. Pandis3, patient who was homologous even for his HLA genotypes with donor G. Bardi3; genotype. This procedure allows rapid and sensitive quantification of 1Department of Genetics, “ Saint Savas” Oncological Hospital, mixed chimerism after boon marrow transplantaion. Athens, Greece, 2Department of Genetics, “Saint Savas” Oncological Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Department of Genetics “Saint Savas” P0151. Chromosome imbalances in oligodendroglial Oncological Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4Orthopaedics, “SAINT Savas” tumors detected by Comparative Genomic Hybridization Oncological Hospital, Athens, Greece, 5Histopathology, “Saint Savas” V. Bourdon1, G. Plessis2, F. Chapon3, J. Derlon4, P. Jonveaux5; Oncological Hospital, Athens, Greece, 6Cytology, “SaintSavas” 1Laboratoire de Génétique - EA 3441, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, Oncological Hospital, Athens, Greece. France, 2Service de Génétique, CHU, Caen, France, 3Laboratoire de Unknown primary tumors (UPT) constitute an entity, with great Neuropathologie, CHU, CAEN, France, 4Service de Neurochirurgie, clinical and biological interest. The patients’ clinical features are CHU, Caen, France, 5Laboratoire de Génétique - EA 3441, CHU, heterogeneous and their prognosis is very difficult to predict. Nancy, France. The present study aims to 1.identify UPT-associated cytogenetic Morphologic criteria for diagnosing and classifying oligodendroglial aberrations, 2.evaluate the efficacy of cytogenetic analysis in tumors remain the gold standard. Nevertheless, the addition of differentiating metastatic carcinomas from lymphomas and sarcomas, molecular approaches such as LOH, and Comparative Genomic and 3.assess the potential of genetic characteristics in UPT Hybridization (CGH) can provide a means of arbitrating difficult or prognosis. borderline cases, and establishing objective, reproducible standards, G-banding analysis was performed in surgical biopsies from 20 UPT which will be tested prospectively for their ability to predict prognosis at diagnosis. In cases with tumor material available after G-banding, and responsiveness to therapy. Here we report a study on 25 CGH and interphase FISH were performed in 10 and 5 cases oligodendroglial tumors (7 well-differentiated oligodendrogliomas, 16 respectively. anaplastic oligodendrogliomas and 2 oligoastrocytomas) analysed The cytogenetic investigation revealed clonal chromosome by CGH. Losses of 1p and 19q, known as common markers of aberrations in all, but one, of 18 successfully analyzed samples. In oligodendroglial tumors, were observed in 36% (9/25) and 68% the total series of tumors, the breakpoints 1q21, 6q15, 7q22, 11p12- (17/25) of cases respectiveley and 32 % (8/25) of the tumors 13, 11q21-22, 12cen, and 17p11-12 were most frequently involved in displayed both losses. These 8 tumors with 1p/19q losses have structural rearrangements, whereas the most common imbalances other abnormalities, except one case. The most prevalent deviations were losses of 1p, 6q, 8p, 9p, 11p, 11q, and 13q. Which of the above associated with this 1p/19q losses were deletions of chromosome chromosomal sites are important to UPT pathogenesis and harbor 22 (3/8) and gains of the region 13(q21qter) (4/8). Loss of 9p was genes that might determine the highly aggressive phenotype of this essentially restricted to anaplastic ooligodendrogliomas (4/16) and diagnostic entity needs to be further investigated. CGH analysis occured in tumors with intact 1p or 19q. Interestingly, six tumors enhanced the classical cytogenetic findings by revealing imbalances (24%) showed gain of chromosome 7 associated in 3 cases with an in 7 out of 10 cases, including 2 cytogenetically not informative. amplification of the EGFR region (7p11), and loss of chromosome Interphase FISH analysis, using locus-specific, break-apart probes 10, alterations known to be preferentially involved in the progression for IgH(14q32) and ALK(2p23) revealed a lymphoma diagnosis in 3 of astrocytic tumors. This study confirms previous reports and shows UPT, histologically classified as malignant neoplasms. that oligodendroglial tumors carry heterogeneous genetic alterations A preliminary correlation analysis between the cytogenetic profile . In addition, these findings suggest that genes localized to these of the tumors and the patients’ survival showed that the increase common chromosomal regions play a role in the tumorogenesis of of karyotypic complexity was associated with decrease of patient’ oligodendrogliomas. survival.106 Posters - Cancer Genetics 107 P0154. Methylation-Associated Transcriptional Silencing with poor prognosis. Point mutations in the RET oncogene are of E-Cadherin in Association with beta-Catenin the hallmark in the molecular pathogenesis of this disease. This Expression in Sporadic Colorectal Carcinomas. malignancy presents with sporadic and inherited etiology. In the G. A. Garinis1, P. Menounos1, N. Spanakis2, G. P. Patrinos1, G. view of the fact that genetic penetrance is close to 100%, early Papadopoulos3, G. Karavitis3, G. Peros3; detection of inherited mutations in the RET oncogene offers the 1Nursing Military Academy, Athens, Greece, 2Medicanalysis Research basis for prevention of MTC. This report describes initial efforts to Institute, Athens, Greece, 3Nikaia Hospital, Department of Surgery, establish genotype/phenotype relations in Serbia. We analyzed DNA from 35 tissue specimens of 21 patients histopathologically Athens, Greece. diagnosed as MTC and from 6 blood specimens of their relatives. We investigated the possibility of an epigenetically associated loss- Namely, two patients provided informed consent for the gene analysis of-E-cadherin function in SCRCs by examining the methylation status of family members where heritable nature of mutated RET was of the e-cadherin promoter by means of the methylation-specific confirmed. RET gene (exons: 10, 11, 13, 15 and 16) was scanned for PCR (MSP), in tumour and adjacent normal tissues derived from 63 mutations by single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and SCRC patients and correlated it with gene transcriptional silencing, at heteroduplex analysis (HD). Mutations characterized by direct cycle both the RNA and protein level and beta-catenin mRNA expression. sequencing and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). Data were associated with patients’ clinicopathological features. A Germline mutations were detected in 4 patients from distinct families. more than two-fold decreased expression of e-cadherin gene was These mutations were: TGC618AGC, TGC629CGC, ATG918ACG observed in 29/63 carcinomas (46%) versus 11/63 (17.5%) and 23/63 and TGC634CGC. Four patients were characterized by somatically (34.3%) that was found to be increased or unaltered respectively. acquired mutations in the RET oncogene. One of sporadic cases ICH examination revealed reduced E-cadherin protein expression in presented with mutation in exon 10, TTG610TCG, (Leu→Trp) 21/63 (33,3%) of carcinomas versus 42/63 (66.7%) with increased not previously described in literature. This initial research effort is E-cadherin expression. Decreased e-cadherin gene expression was currently being extended to population wide scope. significantly associated with E-cadherin ICH detection (P=0.0002) and was paralleled with a decreased beta-catenin expression in 70% of the carcinomas examined (P=0.001). Thirty-four out of 61 cases P0157. How well do the old and new criteria identify Li- (50,7%) were reported as hypermethylated in e-cadherin promoter Fraumeni families? locus versus 27/61 (40.3%) that were found to be unmethylated. S. Kiuru-Kuhlefelt1,2, M. Allinen3, P. Huusko3, P. Vahteristo2, H. The methylation status of the e-cadherin gene promoter was Eerola2, R. Winqvist3, H. Nevanlinna2, K. Aittomäki1,2; significantly associated with E-cadherin expression at both the RNA 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Helsinki University Central and the protein level (P=0.002, P=0.004 respectively). A significant Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3University of Oulu and Oulu University association was observed between E-cadherin ICH detection, lymph Hospital, Oulu, Finland. node metastasis and/or tumour stage (P=0.007, P=0.01 respectively). Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a dominantly inherited cancer In agreement with prior work demonstrating that somatic mutations predisposition caused by mutations in the p53 gene. The cancer and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of e-cadherin gene are rare spectrum in LFS is broad complicating the identification of families. or absent in the vast majority of SCRCs studied, we have found Recently Chompret et al. (2001) introduced new LFS-criteria based consistent aberrant methylation-associated decrease of E-cadherin on the occurrence of narrow spectrum tumors including breast, expression suggesting an epigenetically mediated loss-of-E-cadherin sarcoma, brain, and adrenocortical cancer. The criteria include: 1. A function. proband with a narrow spectrum tumor <36 years with a 1° relative with a narrow spectrum tumor <46 years (other than breast cancer, if P0155. A new frameshift AML1/ETO fusion transcript in a the proband had this) or with multiple tumors. 2. A proband with two patient with t(8;21) positive acute myeloid leukaemia narrow spectrum tumors, the first of which diagnosed <36 years. 3. A. Lasa1, M. J. Carnicer1, J. F. Nomdedeu1, J. Llorente2, A. Aventín1, A proband with adrenocortical carcinoma regardless of the age or S. Brunet1, M. Baiget1, J. Sierra1; family history. The more stringent classical criteria include: a proband 1Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Joan XXIII, with sarcoma <46 years, a 1° relative with cancer <46 years, and another 1° or 2° relative with cancer <45 years or sarcoma at any Tarragona, Spain. age. We used both criteria to categorize 14 families with a clinical Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease, with LFS-suspicion. p53 mutation screening had also been performed. individual cases showing variability in clinical presentation, blast Two mutation positive families fulfilled both criteria. Ten families, of cell morphology, therapeutic response and long-term prognosis. which five were mutation positive, fulfilled only the new criteria. Two One of the most frequent cytogenetic abnormalities in AML is mutation negative families fulfilled neither of the criteria, although t(8;21)(q22;q22), found in approximately 10-15% of the cases. one proband had both breast cancer and sarcoma, and the other The t(8;21) fuses the AML gene to the ETO gene also identified as had sarcoma and a sister with breast cancer. None of these cancers MTG8 (myeloid translocation gene on chromosome 8), generating were, however, diagnosed <36 years. In our series, the specificity predominant PCR products of a constant size (260bp), corresponding and sensitivity for the old criteria were 100% and 29%, and for the to an in-frame fusion of AML1 exon 5 to ETO exon 2. new 58% and 100%, respectively. We present one AML patient in wich an abnormal AML1-ETO fusion transcript was observed by RT-PCR. The sequence of this purified product revealed a 50 bp frameshift deletion in exon 2 of the ETO P0158. Molecular cytogenetic profile of invasive gene. The loss of 50 bp originates a disruption of the reading frame transitional cell urinary bladder cancer determined by of this transcript creating a stop codon 48 aa downstream. As a comparative genomic hybridisation consecuence of this deletion, the expected protein will be a truncated T. Arsov1, B. Zaharieva2, N. Kalchishkova2, C. Damianov3, V. form. Due to the fact that: a) AML breakpoints are clustered between Tabakov3, B. Tzingilev3, C. Georgiev4, T. Todorov4, D. Toncheva2; exon 5 and exon 6, and ETO breakpoints are located upstream of 1Institute for immunobiology and human genetics, Faculty of exon 2 and, b) the deletion is located in exon 2 of the ETO gene, the Medicine, University in Skopje, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav structure of this truncated fusion-protein will included only 31 aa of Republic of Macedonia, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical the ETO gene. Faculty Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Division of Urology, National Center AML/ETO has been shown to fuction as a transcriptional activator of Oncology, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Pathology, that is critical for the tissue-specific expression of a number of Medical Faculty Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. haemopoietic specific genes. This case shows that most ETO We analyzed chromosomal abnormalities (CA) in 25 tumor sequence may be dispensable in AML/ETO+ leukemias. specimens originating from 25 Bulgarian patients with invasive transitional cell cancer of the urinary bladder by comparative genome P0156. RET oncogene mutations in Serbian patients with hybridization (CHG). A total of 168 CA were detected in 21 cases (6,7 thyroid medullary carcinoma aberrations/case), the remaining 4 being normal. The distribution of G. G. Neskovic1, E. Veljkovic1, R. Dzodic2, B. Dimitrijevic1; the CA (gains-CG, loses-CL, whole chromosome gains-WCG) for the 1INS-Vinca, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 2Institute of Oncology and whole group and pT1/pT2-4, and G2/G3 subgroups are given in the Radiology of Serbia, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. table. Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is rare malignant disease Posters - Cancer Genetics 108 109 Municipal Hospital, Zilina, Slovakia, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Municipal Hospital, Presov, Slovakia, 6Department of Medical PT1 pT2-4 G2 G3 Total Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia. 56 (3,7/ 64 (6,4/ 83 (4,6/ 37 (5,3/ 120 (4,8/ The Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome is a dominantly inherited familial CG case) case) case) case) case) cancer syndrome with an incidence of 1 in 53000 to 85000 persons, 5 (0,3/ 21 (2,1/ 22 (1,2/ 4 (0,6/ 26 (1/case) predisposing to retinal, cerebellar, and spinal hemangioblastoma, CL case) case) case) case) renal cell carcinoma, pheochromocytoma and pancreatic tumors. 12 (0,8/ 12 (0.7/ 10 (1,4/ 22 (0,9/ The disease is caused by germ-line mutations in the VHL tumor 10 (1/case) WCG case) case) case) case) suppressor gene. Between 1996 and 2001, sixteen unrelated probands fulfilling clinical criteria of VHL disease and seven patients 73 (4,8/ 95 (9,5/ 117 (6,5/ 51 (7,3/ 168 (6,7/ Number with sporadic hemangioblastoma (2 retinal, 5 cerebellar) were case) case) case) case) case) CA included to the study. Detection of mutations in the VHL gene was performed by Southern blot analysis, DGGE of exons 2 and 3, and Number 15 10 18 7 25 DNA sequencing of exon 1 in all samples and of exon 2 or 3 in the cases DGGE-positive samples. Germ-line mutations of the VHL gene were identified in 13/16 (81%) patients with VHL disease and in 2/7 (29%) Individual case analysis of CG demonstrated that the most frequently patients with sporadic hemangioblastoma. Among the identified affected regions were 1p, 1q, 2q, 3p, 7q, 16p, 17q, 19p and 19q mutations one mutation was novel (Y112S) and 14 mutations have (representing 51,4% of all chromosome gains). CL on 9, 6 and 10 been already described by others (P25L, S65L, S65W, F76del, represented 46% of all chromosome losses. WCG were found most S80N, L101R, G132X, R161X, 2x R167W, 3x R167Q, 10kb genomic frequently for chromosome 19 (5 cases). deletion of exon 3). Except the P25L substitution, which could Multiple case analysis included combined bar analysis and pool represent a polymorphism, the mutations are pathogenic. Moreover, chromosome analysis. Combined bar analysis demonstrated that one rare variant, IVS2+8c>t, was also identified in one healthy the minimal overlapping regions of CG were 1p36, 1q12.11-12.12, individual. In seven families, the identification of mutation in proband 3q12-13, 3q27, 12q12.2-12.4, 19p12 and 19q12. The 3q12-13 was was followed by presymptomatic DNA testing in 29 relatives at risk. characteristic for the pT1 whereas 1p36 for the pT2-4 group. Negative results of mutation analysis in 3 patients with familial VHL Multiple case CGH analysis (pool chromosome analysis) disease require further study. This work was supported by the Grant demonstrated significant CG at regions 1q12.11-12.13, 16q11-12 and Agency of Charles University (Grant No. 36/1996). 19p for the whole group, 1q12.11-12.13, 6q14.5-16.3 and 19p for the pT1, 19p for the pT2-4 and G2 group, and 2q12.3-14.1, 8q21.31- P0161. Cyclin D1 Cd242 G-A Polymorphism is not a ter, 11q13.1-14.1, 11q14.31-ter, 12q14.2-ter, 13q32-33, 15q21.11- Risk Factor for Colorectal Cancer in Patients from The ter, 16q, 18q21-23.1, 19q, 20q11.41-45, 21q22.21-ter for the G3 Republic Of Macedonia subgroup. A. M. Stefanovska1, T. Josifovski2, M. Panovski2, D. Jasar3, G. Zografski3, K. Stefanovski1, G. D. Efremov1, A. J. Dimovski1; P0159. Frequency of frameshift alterations in 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, The Former polynucleotide repeat-containing genes in HNPCC Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Clinic for Abdominal Surgery, tumors Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 3Institute of A. Paoloni-Giacobino1, C. Rey-Berthoed2, A. Couturier2, S. E. Oncology, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Antonarakis1, P. Hutter2; Cyclin D1 is involved in the regulation of the transition from G1 to 1Division of Medical Genetics, Geneva University Hospital, S phase of the cell cycle and is often over-expressed in tumors. A Switzerland, 2Unit of Genetics, Institut Central des Hôpitaux G→A polymorphism at CD242 of the CCND1 gene was implicated Valaisans, Sion, Switzerland. as an important risk factor for development of colorectal cancer DNA sequences made of mono-, di- and trinucleotide sequences at a younger age, both among HNPCC and sporadic cases. We are prone to replication errors and thus constitute mutational hot evaluated the prevalence of the CCND1 polymorphism using spots. This is well illustrated by the occurrence of DNA microsatellite RFLP-PCR among 136 colorectal cancer patients and 170 normal instability in tumors from patients affected with hereditary non- controls from Macedonia. The allele frequencies and the distribution polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), resulting from a defect in a of different genotypes of the case subjects was similar to those gene that controls post-replicative DNA mismatch repair (MMR). of the controls (A/G allele 0.55/0.45 and 0.51/0.49, respectively; We analysed 10 tumors (9 colorectal and 1 ovary carcinomas) from AA/AG/GG genotypes 33.1%/44.1%/22.8% and 25.3%/51.2%/ HNPCC patients carrying a germline mutation in the MMR gene 23.5%, respectively). No differences of allele frequencies and MLH1. For each tumor, error rates were measured by sequencing genotype distribution were observed when cases were grouped by 20 to 50 cloned amplicons from 4 genes involved in either cell age, Dukes stage, localization, histological type, MSI, p53 and 18q proliferation or apoptosis. The polynucleotide tracts selected status (p>0.05). The observed differences in the CCND1 genotypes consisted in a 10 A coding repeat in the TGFbRII gene, an 8 G coding between colorectal cancer patients from Macedonia and the USA repeat in the BAX gene, a 7 A coding repeat in the CASP1 gene, and are similar to the differences that were observed for the transforming a 7 CCA repeat in the 3’-UTR of the APP gene. Substantial inter- growth factor b-type I receptor polymorphism (Stefanovska et al., tumors variations were observed in the pattern of alterations, with Cancer Res., 61:8351, 2001), and strongly suggests that certain error rates varying between 12 and 80% for TGFbRII, 2 and 84% environmental factors influence colorectal cancerogenesis through for BAX, 0 and 30% for CASP1 and 0 to 18% for APP. In contrast multiple mechanisms. with previous results obtained not from single molecule analysis, the BAX error rate did not exceed 20 % in 9 tumors. High error rates in P0162. The role of the H-ras oncogene in more than one gene in a same tumor suggested additive selective neurometabolism: Do depression and cancer stem from a effects from different alterations. These data on somatic frameshifts common etiology? in specific genes may contribute to better tumor classification and J. K. Brewer; outcome prediction. Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. An association between depression and cancer has long- P0160. VHL gene mutations in Czech and Slovak patients been recognized. Essentially, the prevailing hypothesis is that with VHL disease and sporadic hemangioblastoma neurometabolic disturbances inherent in depression effect a change A. Krepelova1, J. Plas2, E. Kantorova3, F. Cisarik4, M. in endocrine and immunological systems making one at greater risk Puschauerova5, V. Kovacova6; for cancer. More recently, molecular epidemiologists have postulated 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Medical Faculty, that the linkage between depression and later cancer onset might be Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Clinics of Neurosurgery, genetic in nature. Specifically, the H-ras oncogene has recently been 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, implicated as a source of dysfunctional neurometabolism, presenting 3Department of Medical Genetics, Municipal Hospital, Ceske as an alternative hypothesis to the prevailing view that cancer Budejovice, Czech Republic, 4Department of Medical Genetics, results from a weakened immune system. Essentially, it has been 108 Posters - Cancer Genetics 109 theorized that dysregulation of this cancer gene results in impaired the present study stresses on the need for sequential cytogenetic serotonin and dopamine synthesis secondarily. However, whatever and molecular analysis in CML patients on therapy. The importance the cause of depression/cancer comorbidity, studies have failed to of using FISH on interphase nuclei and poorly spread metaphases confirm a definite link between depression and later onset of cancer. that cannot be analysed using conventional cytogenetics is also I expect that two confounding variables exist within the most recent highlighted. depression/cancer correlational studies. First, these studies have failed to incorporate the growing body of literature delineating the P0165. High frequencies of primary multiple melanomas role of the H-ras oncogene in neurometabolism. It is plausible that a in families with CDKN2A mutations. dysfunctional H-ras gene may be the causal link between depression S. Majore1, C. Catricalà2, F. Binni1, P. De Simone2, C. De Bernardo3, and cancer. If so, longitudinal studies seeking to correlate depression L. Eibenschutz2, P. Grammatico1; and cancer should parse out cancers known to be associated with 1Medical Genetics, University “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 2San the H-ras gene. Second, existing studies fail to employ an accurate Gallicano Dermatological Institute, Rome, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, classification and diagnosis of depression. My hypothesis is that a San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy. depression/cancer correlation is caused by a dysfunctional H-ras About 10 % of melanoma is inherited in an autosomal dominant oncogene which acts primarily to disrupt neurometabolism, the fashion with variable penetrance and 50-80% of the families are serotonin and dopamine biosynthetic pathways specifically, and linked with 9p21. CDKN2A, located in 9p21, consists of three secondarily causes cancer over time. coding exons and encodes the cell cycle inhibitor, p16. This protein plays a role as a negative regulator of the cyclin D1/CDK4/p16/pRb P0163. Identification of Deoxyribonucleic Acid Copy signaling pathway, the major growth control pathway in the cell Number Changes in Larynx Carcinoma by Comparative cycle. In our study, on a wide sample of melanoma-prone families, Genomic Hybridization we found 8 pedigrees in which a CDKN2A mutation was evidenced, G. Luleci1, I. Keser1, A. Toraman1, G. Ozbilim2, K. Guney3; some already described in literature and some as a new mutation 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical (Pro48Thr, ivs1+2(T-C), 201delC). Analyzing clinical data of these Biology and Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty 8 families we observed that in 6 (75%) it was present at least one of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Antalya, Turkey, 3Akdeniz multiple primary melanoma (MPM). The presence of a MPM in a so University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Otolaryngology, Head large amount of the mutated cases brings us to consider CDKN2A and Neck Surgery, Antalya, Turkey. mutations as responsible to a high constitutional risk for melanocytes Carcinomas of the head and neck represent 5% of all human transformation. For this reason, we think relevant to include CDKN2A cancers, squamous cell carcinoma being the most important group. mutational screening in all the families in which there is one patient Head and neck carcinomas including laryngeal carcinoma have with MPM, even if not familial. been investigated recently by various molecular, cytogenetic, and In addition in 2 out of our 8 families a larynx carcinoma was also molecular cytogenetic techniques. present, supporting the hypothesis of a related risk for this tumor in In this study, comparative genomic hybridization(CGH) technique CDKN2A mutation carriers. was used to identify DNA copy number changes in 15 paraffin- Al last, we also observed, in 5 out of these 8 pedigrees, the presence embedded tissue samples of the larynx carcinoma. Of these patients, of only two melanoma patients suggesting the opportunity to extend 13 were male, and 2 were female. DNA copy number changes were CDKN2A mutations analysis also to families with less then three detected in 10 of the 15 patients(66.6%). While 3 of the 10 patients affected relatives, at least in Italian population. had polyploidy, other 7 patients were found to have gains and losses on different chromosomes. 5 cases had normal CGH profiles. The P0166. Mutational and expression analysis of the NF1 results of the study were compared with literature reported previously gene argues against a role as tumor suppressor in and similar findings were detected in chromosomes 5p, 7q, and 18p sporadic pilocytic astrocytomas in larynx carcinoma. Also, loss of chromosome 22q13-qter was found K. Wimmer1, M. Eckart1, B. Meyer-Puttlitz2, C. Fonatsch1, T. Pietsch2; as a novel site in a case with larynx carcinoma. 1Universität Wien, Institut für Medizinische Biologie, Wien, Austria, Although the number of tumor samples investigated is rather low, 2Universität Bonn, Institut für Neuropathologie, Bonn, Germany. our results suggest that the chromosomal loci which affect the Children with Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) have an increased differentation and progression of the larynx carcinomas can be risk for developing pilocytic astrocytomas (PAs). LOH studies detected by CGH technique. demonstrate frequent loss of the NF1 gene in NF1-associated PAs. Further, it has been demonstrated that loss of neurofibromin in a P0164. Cytogenetic and molecular response in CML NF1-associated PA is associated with elevated Ras-GTP levels. patients on Interferon-α 2b (IFN-α 2b) therapy using However, conflicting results on the role of the NF1 gene in the conventional cytogenetics and FISH analysis development of sporadic PAs have been reported. Therefore, we R. Talwar1, K. Kucheria2, V. P. Chaudhry2; investigated 14 sporadic PAs for NF1 mutation and for LOH within the 1All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, New Delhi, NF1 locus. The protein truncation test, which identifies approximally India, 2All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. 80% of the mutations found in NF1 patients, failed to detect NF1 Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is a clonal myeloproliferative mutations in 10 analyzed tumors. LOH analysis was unable to reveal disorder characterised by the presence of Philadelphia (Ph1) evidence for disruption of the NF1 gene in 11 informative cases. chromosome resulting from balanced reciprocal translocation, The GTPase-activating domain of the NF1 gene is expressed in t(9;22)(q34;q11) leading to the formation of bcr/abl fusion gene. two isoforms. Using real-time PCR we investigated the ratio of the Studies have shown that IFN-α therapy induces both cytogenetic isoforms in 14 sporadic PAs and compared it to the ratios in normal response (reduction in Ph+ cells) and molecular response (reduction adult tissues, glioblastomas and neuroblastomas. In accordance in the bcr/abl+ cells) in a significant proportion of CML patients with previous reports we found marked predominance of the type II thereby improving their prognosis and survival. To the best of our transcripts in PAs as well as in two glioblastomas and in all analyzed knowledge, no published reports are available from India using adult tissues including brain. In contrast, marked predominance of molecular methods for evaluation of minimal residual disease. the type I transcripts were observed in neuroblastomas. Our results The present study was conducted to evaluate the cytogenetic argue against a role of the NF1 gene as tumor suppressor in sporadic and molecular response in CML patients on Interferon-α 2b (IFN- PAs and suggest that the predominant expression of the type II NF1 α 2b) therapy. Sequential cytogenetic analysis was done using transcript in PAs reflects the differentiation stage of the cells rather standard methods in 45 CML patients on IFN-α 2b therapy up to than being a response to elevated cell proliferation. a variable period of 3 years. Further dual colour Fluorescence In Situ Hybridisation (FISH) analysis using specific probes for bcr and P0167. Characteriziation of differentially expressed abl genes was done to assess the molecular response. Complete candidate genes associated with gynaecological tumors cytogenetic response (CCR) was observed in 8 patients. Of these 8 A. Sadr-Nabavi1, M. Du2, B. Betz2, D. Schmidt1, E. Dahl3, S. Gelling3, patients in CCR, 4 were negative for the bcr/abl fusion gene implying B. Hinzmann3, P. R. Kreutzfeld4, R. Schmutzler4, A. Meindl1, D. a complete cytogenetic and molecular response while the remaining Niederacher2, G. C. C. Coordinator: A. Rosenthal3; 4 showed bcr/abl fusion signals representing residual disease. Thus 1Abt. Päd. Genetik der Kinderpoliklinik der LMU, München, Germany, Posters - Cancer Genetics 110 111 2Molekulargenetisches Labor der Universitätsfrauenklinik, Düsseldorf, U. Schagdarsurengin1, O. Gimm2, C. Hoang-Vu2, H. Dralle2, G. Germany, 3metaGen Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Berlin, Germany, Pfeifer3, R. Dammann1; 4Labor für Molekulare Onkologie, Universitätsfrauenklinik, Bonn, 1AG Tumorgenetik, Med. Fakultaet, University Halle, Halle, Germany, Germany. 2Klinik fuer Allgemein-, Viszeral- und Gefaesschirurgie, University More than 600 candidate genes were identified as differentially Halle, Halle, Germany, 3Dep. of Biology, Beckmann Research expressed in gynaecological tumors by “in-silico” approaches Institute, City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA. and fifty of them, considered as either putative tumor suppressor LOH of chromosome 3p21 is one of most frequent alterations in genes or oncogenes, were selected for further analysis in sporadic solid tumors. RASSF1A-isoform is epigenetically inactivated in a gynaecological tumors by the GCC (Gynaecological Cancer variety of human primary tumors. We investigated expression and Consortium). methylation status of RASSF1 gene in 38 primary thyroid tumors To confirm the electronic Northern data, seven putative TSGs were (1 PDTC, 5 MTC, 10 FTC, 9 UTC, 13 PTC) and 9 thyroid cancer investigated by hybridization of cancer arrays (Clontech cancer cell lines. In all cell lines the RASSF1A promoter CpG-island was profiling arrays) against gene-specific probes. Two genes (designated completely methylated and expression was absent. Treatment of bn39, bn40) were found to be expressed lower in up to 80% of breast these cell lines with DNA methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine or ovarian cancer samples compared to matched corresponding reactivated the transcription of RASSF1A. In 71% of primary normal tissues, respectively. These data could be supported by real thyroid carcinomas the RASSF1A-promoter was hypermethylated. time PCR (TaqMan) performed in matched tissue samples collected Methylation frequency was higher in aggressive forms of thyroid at our hospitals. carcinoma ( 80% of MTC, 78% of UTC and 70% of FTC) compared For each of the two determined TSG candidates, 20 LOH positive to 62% in more benign PTC. RASSF1A-inactivation was detected tumor samples were screened for mutations by the DHPLC in all stages of thyroid carcinoma scored by pTNM-classification. technique. No functional mutations were found in one downregulated Additionally, we analyzed the methylation frequency of CpG-island candidate gene, only one frame-shift mutation and one missense of cell cycle inhibitor p16INK4a in the same thyroid tumors. The mutation were detected in the other assumed TSG (bn40). To p16-gene was inactivated in 56% and 25% of cell lines and primary characterize three putative oncogenes, expression was analysed tumors, respectively. p16 methylation was detected in 56% of UTC, by hybridization of cancer arrays and assumed amplification was in 10% of FTC and in 25% of PTC, but not in MTC. In UTC, which determined by real-time PCR or quantitative differential PCR. One belongs to the most aggressive carcinomas in humans, the most candidate gene (bt11) was shown to be frequently over-expressed common combined inactivation of RASSF1A and p16 was detected. especially in ovarian cancer while gene amplification could not be In general, 90% of tumors with p16 inactivation were also silenced shown. for RASSF1A expression. However, RASSF1A hypermethylation Conclusions: About 30% of the nominated candidate genes identified was detected three times more frequently in thyroid cancers. Thus, by database screening were shown to be differentially expressed RASSF1A inactivation may play a crucial role in the malignancy of in-vivo. Down-regulation of gene expression in cancer tissues might thyroid carcinoma. be explained by epigenetic inactivation/activation mechanisms rather than mutations or gene amplification. P0170. Analysis of genomic copy number and expression of genes in the chromosomal band 8q11 in P0168. HNPCC - two different entities in regard of hepatoblastoma mutation analysis and clinical phenotype A. Zatkova1, J. Rouillard2, B. J. Lamb2, R. Kuick2, M. Eckart1, D. von Y. Müller-Koch1, H. Vogelsang2, G. Keller3, R. Kopp4, P. Lohse5, M. Schweinitz3, C. Fonatsch1, T. Pietsch4, S. M. Hanash2, K. Wimmer1; Gross6, U. Schiemann6, G. Baretton6, D. Aust6, B. Kerker6, G. Henke6, 1Institut für Medizinische Biologie,Universität Wien, Wien, Austria, J. Daum6, E. Holinski-Feder7; 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 1University, Dept. Medical Genetics, Germany, 2University, Dept. 3Abteilung für Kinderchirurgie,Universtitäts-Kinderspital Beider Basel, Surgery, Munich, Germany, 3University, Pathology, Munich, Basel, Switzerland, 4Institut für Neuropathologie, Universität Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Surgery, Munich, Germany, 5Department Bonn, Germany. clinical chemistry, Munich, Germany, 6University, Munich, Germany, Recently, the correlation of comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) 7University, Dept. Medical Gentics, Munich, Germany. results with clinical data in a large series of hepatoblastomas, has HNPCC is caused by heritable mutations in the DNA mismatch repair uncovered that gain or amplification of chromosomal 8q material is genes. associated with poor prognosis of this highly malignant childhood For 254 patients that fullfilled one of the Bethesda Kriteria 1-7, tumor. The minimal amplified region was defined to chromosomal mutation analysis for hMLH1, hMSH2 and hMSH6, microsatellite bands 8q11.2-q13. In an attempt to identify hepatoblastoma-related analysis and immunohistochemistry for hMLH1, hMSH2 and hMSH6 genes in this region we implemented a strategy that combined was performed. 25 pathogenic mutations and 24 missense variations restriction landmark genomic scanning (RLGS) and a genomic copy were found. Data concerning the sensitivity of microsatellite analysis number assay based on real-time PCR. RLGS analysis uncovered six and immunohistochemistry will be presented. chromosome 8 derived fragments amplified in one hepatoblastoma. The cohort included 51 families fullfilling the Amsterdam Criteria. Virtual genomic scann, a novel informatic tool for sequence prediction First, 11 patients with MSI-H tumors and truncating mutations. of RLGS fragments, identified the sequence of five of these Second 5 patients with MSI-H tumors without mutation in hMLH1, fragments. Thus, the critical region was defined to chromosomal band hMSH2 and hMSH6. Third 7 patients with MSI-H tumors and 8q11 extending at least between the two genes, SOX17 and Lyn. missense mutations in hMLH1 or hMSH2 or truncating mutations in Four microsatellite markers and genes located between or adjacent hMSH6. Fourth, 6 patients with MSS or MSI-L tumors with suspected to these genes as well as four control markers were selected for missense mutations in hMLH1 or hMSH2 or truncation mutatins in genomic copy number analysis. Seven of 19 tumors investigated hMSH6 and fith, 22 patients with MSS tumors without mutations in (37%) showed gain or amplification in this region, including three hMLH1, hMSH2 or hMSH6. tumors in which a gain was undetectable by CGH analysis. The Clinical and molecular data of the first and the fourth group revealed expression of five genes and ESTs, located within the newly defined differences concerning age of onset, tumor spectrum within the minimal amplified region was assayed by real-time RT-PCR in 10 families, tumor localisation and pathohistological features. There is an hepatoblastomas. The gene encoding the transcription factor PLAG1 earlier age of onset and a broader spectrum of tumors in the families showed increased RNA expression in all but one hepatoblastoma of group 1. Tumors are more right sided and more frequently show when compared to normal liver. The possible role of PLAG1 as an the typical HNPCC-associated histopathological features. In hMSH2 activator of fetal growth factor IGF2 in hepatoblastoma is currently endometrial cancer seems to cluster with mutations in exon13. Life investigated. expectancy of female mutation carriers is increased compared to male mutation carriers.These data point towards the existence of at P0171. Cytochrome P450 - CYP2D6 polymorphism in least two entities of hereditary colon cancer other than FAP. head and neck cancer patients M. Stefanovic1, A. Begonja1, E. Topic1, I. Curcic2, A. Simundic1; P0169. Frequent epigenetic silencing of the CpG island 1University Hospital “Sestre milosrdnice”, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Dubrava promoter of RASSF1A in thyroid carcinoma University Hospital, ENT Department, Zagreb, Croatia.110 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 111 We investigated the possible association of drug metabolizing female who presented first with a pulmonary chondroma at age 21. enzyme system CYP P450 CYP2D6 and its null alleles (CYP2D6*3, At age 27, she developed a primary gastric leiomyoblastoma. Seven *4, *5, *6, *7, and *8) with incidence of tumors in patients having years later, a total gastrectomy was performed following the discovery head and neck cancer (HNC). It is known that persons bearing two of two additional gastric tumors. Intriguingly, karyotypic analysis of null alleles poorly metabolize some common drugs (Poor Metabolizer PHA-stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed an apparently Phenotype – PM) as well as other foreign and carcinogenic balanced translocation t(1;19) (p11-13;p11-12). This chromosomal substances. Persons with only one disrupted CYP2D6 gene (bearing abnormality seemed to be inherited from her phenotypically normal one normal and one null allele) are considered to be Intermediate father. Possible mechanisms whereby such a familial translocation metabolizer phenotype (IM). We genotyped 145 controls, and 42 could have a pathogenic effect in our patient include a chimeric fusion HNC patients by Multiplex Allele Specific PCR on whole blood gene generated by a complex rearrangement, a de novo duplication DNA. Study results showed allelic frequencies for *3, *4 and *6 of a protooncogene or a de novo microdeletion in the translocated alleles (only alleles observed) in controls to be 1.4%, 11.0% and chromosomes disrupting a putative tumor suppressor gene at the 1.0%, respectively; among them we found 2.1% PMs and 22.8% breakpoints. This is the first report of a cytogenetic abnormality IMs. In cancer patient’s group allelic frequencies for *3, *4 and *6 associated with the Carney triad. The translocation breakpoints in were 1.2%, 19.0% and 3,6% respectively, and no other alleles were this patient may become candidate regions for susceptibility genes found; among them we found 2.4% PMs and 42.9% IMs. Results causing this uncommon disorder. Further genetic investigations of our study showed statistically significant difference for genotype are carried out by Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) to map frequencies (Chi-square; p=0.025) and predicted phenotype (Chi- potential genes in the 1p11-13 breakpoint region, interestingly square; p=0.034). IM phenotype showed to be responsible for containing the N-RAS and notch2 genes. increased risk to HNC (Odds ratio 2.6; 95%CI= 1.248 - 5.193). To confirm our preliminary findings, further study on a larger group is P0174. Hypermethylation of the 5´ promoter region planned. represses Caveolin-1 gene expression in a human E-mail: mario.stefanovic@zg.hinet.hr prostate cancer cell line J. Häusler, P. Geyer, J. Häussler, W. Vogel; P0172. Glutathione S-transferase polymorphisms University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. influence plasma antioxidants level and oxidative DNA LOH of chromosomal region 7q31.1 has been implicated in the damage. pathogenesis of many human cancers, including prostate cancer. A. Ficek1, M. Dusinská1, A. Horská1, K. Raslová1, H. Petrovská1, B. The genes encoding Caveolin-1 and -2 are localized at 7q31.1. Vallová1, M. Drlicková1, S. G. Wood2, A. Stupáková1, J. Gasparovic1, The Cav-1 promoter contains several CpG dinucleotides of which P. Bobek1, A. Nagyová1, Z. Kováciková1, P. Blazicek3, U. Liegebel4, A. four are methylated in two human breast cancer cell lines. They fail R. Collins2; to express Cav-1 mRNA, suggesting an epigenetic mechanism of 1Department of Molecular and Genetic Toxicology, Institute of Cav-1 gene regulation in these cell lines. We´re investigating the Preventive and Clinical Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Rowet role of Cav-1 in prostate cancer by investigating the expression of Research Institute, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 3Hospital of Ministry Cav-1 in human cell lines derived from normal prostate and prostate of Defence, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Friedrich-Schiller-Universitat, Jena, cancer. Our findings show that Cav-1 expression is absent from the Germany. cell line LNCaP on RNA and protein level. To test the hypothesis that Glutathione S-transferases (GST), xenobiotic detoxifying enzymes, DNA methylation in the promoter correlates with down-regulation involve in defences against oxidative stress and metabolism of plenty of Cav-1 gene expression, we determined the methylation status of carcinogens. Hence the GST polymorphisms are supposed to be additional prostate cell lines. A minimal promoter of Cav-1 contains significant determinants of individual cancer risk. seven CpG sites and we found a very heterogeneous methylation We screened 155- middle aged men (51 smokers and 104 non- profile at four of these. Only the promoter region of LNCaP showed smokers) for GSTT1null, GSTM1null and GSTP1b polymorphisms almost complete methylation. The functional importance of these and compared them with parameter of oxidative stress at the level of CpG sites was demonstrated by an in vitro reporter gene assay oxidative DNA damage measured in lymphocytes, and with plasma which revealed that the cav-1 promoter activity in vitro is regulated antioxidants level. by methylation of four CpG sites within its minimal promoter region. Smokers had on average significantly lower levels of plasma We conclude therefore that repression of the Cav-1 gene in LNCaP antioxidants and higher amounts of oxidised purines and pyrimidines cells is due to DNA methylation. Furthermore, results from bandshift measured in lymphocyte DNA. The observed genotype frequencies assays demonstrated that a yet unknown methyl-CpG-binding protein were represented as follows: 48% GSTM1null, 21% GSTT1null and interacts with the methylated Cav-1 promoter region examined and 11% GSTP1b/b. The GSTT1 null genotype was associated with that this protein is different from MeCP2. decreased Vitamin C concentration compared to GSTT1+ genotype, while Vitamin C was higher in GSTM1 null compared with GSTM1+. P0175. PRUNE and NM23 protein interaction: possible The homozygous GSTP1 a/a genotype was associated with implications in Neuroblastoma. significantly higher levels of GST activity measured in lymphocytes, A. D’Angelo1, A. Andre’1, V. Aglio1, S. Olivieri2, L. Garzia1, G. in comparison with the b/b genotype. Using multifactorial statistical Arrigoni2, R. Lanzi2, A. Ballabio1, M. Zollo1; analysis significant interactions were found between smoking, GSTP1 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy, genotype, plasma Vitamin C, and purine base damage in lymphocyte 2HSR San Raffaele, Milan, Italy. DNA. Vitamin C concentrations were substantially higher in b/b We report here a functional characterization of prune protein and its non-smokers compare with b/b smokers, whereas this phenomenon possible correlation with Neuroblastoma cancer. A newly identified was not observed neither in a/a nor a/b groups. The b/b smokers phosphodiesterase had on average about twice as much oxidised purine base damage (PDE) PDE11A was found to contain a catalytic site motif equally as the non-smokers with that genotype, and higher levels than the present in the human prune protein and corresponding to the third other smokers. In contrast, the link between smoking and oxidised DHH motif of prune. pyrimidines in DNA was seen only in the GSTT1 null group. A scintillation proximity assay was performed to investigate prune phosphodiesterase activity both on transiently transfected COS-7 P0173. Carney triad in a patient with balanced crude extracts and on the purified histidine-tagged prune protein translocation t (1;19) (p11-13;p11-12). produced by the Baculovirus expression system. We demonstrate V. van Scherpenzeel Thim, C. Verellen-Dumoulin, C. Sibille; that prune is able to act as a phosphodiesterase preferentially on Center for Human Genetics,UCL,St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium. cAMP substrate. Furthermore, prune is able to interact with NM23- The Carney triad is a rare association of gastric epithelioid H1, an antimetastatic protein but its interaction is impaired with leiomyosarcoma, functioning extra-adrenal paraganglioma and NM23-H1S120G, a mutation associated with advanced stages of pulmonary chondroma, affecting specifically young individuals. It Neuroblastoma. By in vivo co-immunoprecipitations and interaction probably has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. However, mating assays we demonstrate the interaction between nm23-H2 and the molecular basis of this unusual syndrome has not yet been a series of described nm23-H2 protein mutants. elucidated. We report a new case of incomplete Carney triad in a PRUNE protein is predominantly a cytoplasmic protein. By Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 112 113 immunofluorescence experiments we investigated prune and reduced intervertebral distances, elongated and serpentine fibulae. nm23 localization in SK-N-SH, SK-N-BE, SH-5YSY and IMR-32 She also had multiple polycystic kidneys and an interventricular Neuroblastoma-derived cell-lines. A prune predominant nuclear communication. Similarities between Melnick-Needles (MNS), Hajdu- localization was observed for the first time. Expression of prune Cheney (HCS) and SFPKS syndromes were reported, however MNS protein was examined by immunohistochemistry analysis on paraffin is rather a skeletal dysplasia rarely presenting ureteral abnormalities. embedded tissues from 5 Neuroblastoma affected patients revealing Peculiar facies, marked growth retardation, webbed neck, polycystic high protein expression kidneys, serpentine fibulae, and metatarsus adductus is typical of in the nucleus and its association with poor outcome. We are SFPKS. Both MNS and SFPKS do not present acro-osteolysis as preparing stable clones of SH-5YSY cells by transfection (pBABE HCS does. Only six cases were reported and further patients should retroviral vector) of prune cDNA in order to study the growth be identified in order to reinforce the phenotypic spectrum of SFPKS properties of the stabilized cells and isolate other putative prune and also to clarify if MNS, HCS and SFPKS are distinct entities or nuclear interactors by mono-dimensional SDS-page analysis and allelic disorders. Mass Spectrometry. P0178. Evidences of autosomal recessive inheritance in P 3. Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology unifocal subtype of fibromuscular dysplasia of the renal arteries. P0176. Single central incisor, pyriform aperture stenosis, C. A. Kim1, L. M. J. Albano1, R. B. Palhares2, S. Mesquita2, A. C. midfacial hypoplasia and limb abnormalities: a new Pereira3, J. E. Krieger4; syndrome? 1Instituto da Crianca, Genetics Unit, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Cardiology L. Basel-Vanagaite1, A. Kornecki2, M. Ludman1, Y. Ben-Ari3, P. Institute, INCOR, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Cardiology Inestitute, Sao Merlob4; Paulo, Brazil, 4Cardiology Institute, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tiqva, Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a group of nonatherosclerotic, Israel, 2Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Dana Children’s Hospital, Tel noninflammatory occlusive diseases that most commonly involve the Aviv Medical Center,, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Division of Pediatric Intensive renal and carotid arteries whose etiology remains unknown. Dominant Care Unit, Schneider Children’s Medical Center,, Petah Tiqva, Israel, inheritance with variable penetrance was demonstrated. Dysplasic 4Department of Neonatology, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tiqva, stenoses can be multifocal, unifocal and tubular. The most common Israel. manifestation of renal artery FMD is renovascular hypertension, Solitary median maxillary central incisor (SMMCI) has been reported between 30 to 50 years.Its prevalence is underestimated due to many as an isolated abnormality or in association with other systemic FMD cases with normotensive or asymptomatic hypertensive patient abnormalities including pituitary insufficiency, nasal pyriform aperture remain undiagnosed. We report on three sibs with unifocal FMD stenosis and holoprosencephaly. SMMCI can also be a feature of renal arteries, two of them with bilateral affected arteries associated recognized syndromes or chromosomal abnormalities. SHH and SIX3 to congenital cardiac abnormalities. Interestingly, all presented an mutations have been reported in patients with SMMCI. early onset of renovascular hypertension (2y-3y)with normal renal We report on an infant with a previously undescribed pattern function. Only one with unilateral renal stenosis is still alive at 5 years of malformations including brachycephaly, proptosis, midfacial old, after surgical correction. The others witj bilateral affected renal hypoplasia, SMMCI, abnormal ears, arachnodactyly, partial arteries died at about 3 years old. The parents were normotensive cutaneous syndactyly and joint contractures. CT scan revealed and although there was no consanguinity, we thought that a recessive pyriform aperture stenosis. At the age of eleven months, the patient pattern of inheritance should be considered in unifocal FMD of the has developmental delay and suffers from seizures. renal arteries. Laboratory investigations were within normal limits. Roentgenologic skeletal survey was normal apart from the finding of 11 pairs of P0179. Calcification of the basal ganglia ribs. CT scan of the brain was normal. BAER examination revealed G. M. H. Abdel-Salam, M. S. Zaki, N. A. Meguid; hearing loss on the left side. Chromosomal studies including high- Department of Human Genetics, National Research Centre, Cairo, resolution chromosomal analysis showed a normal female karyotype. Egypt. Sequencing of the exons IIIa and IIIc of FGFR2 did not reveal Calcification of the basal ganglia was observed in more than 30 mutations. medical conditions including infections, trauma and hemorrhage and We suggest that this combination of anomalies constitutes a unique many genetic syndromes. Diverse neurobehavioral and psychiatric, syndrome. Searching for mutations in the genes responsible for manifestations have been linked to this disorder. However, its etiology the development of the midline structures should provide a greater remains obscure. Eleven cases were investigated who showed understanding of the mechanisms underlying the development of this calcification of the basal ganglia on computed tomography (CT). Main unique combination of abnormalities. presenting neurological symptoms were loss of acquired milestones (3 cases), epilepsy (5 cases) and developmental delay (8 cases). Age P0177. Further delineation of Serpentine fibula-polycystic of onset and course of the disease were variable. Calcification in the kidney syndrome basal ganglia was bilateral in most of the cases (8 cases). Globus L. M. J. Albano1, R. M. Moyses2, M. F. Barba3, A. C. Paula1, C. A. pallidus was by far the most common site of calcification in the basal Kim1; ganglia. Further calcification in different parts of the brain rather than 1Instituto da Crianca, Genetics Unit, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Instituto da basal ganglia was present in (4 cases) cortical, subcortical, white Crianca, Cardiology Unit, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Instituto da Crianca, matter or dentate nucleus. Measurements of the size of calcification Radiology, Sao Paulo, Brazil. of basal ganglia and the neurological scoring were constructed. Majewsky et al. (1993) reported on female with serpentine fibulae Correlation of the neurological impairment and the size of calcification and reviewed one of the Dereymaeker et al. (1986) and Exner were non-significant. However, the neurological impairment was (1988) patients, believing that they represented a rare condition significantly inversely correlated with the head circumference named as Serpentine fibula-polycystic kidney syndrome (SFPKS) (p<0.002). In addition, the site of calcification inside the basal ganglia characterized by growth retardation, abnormal face, hirsutism, short was not pathognomonic. Parenatal consanguinity was documented neck, elongated serpentine fibulae, metatarsus adductus, deafness, in 9 cases and positive history of affected family members in 7 cases normal intelligence and polycystic kidneys. We reported on a emphasizing the major role of the autosomal recessive gene in the sporadic case of a 8-year-old woman with SFPKS brachycephaly, inheritance in these cases. We represent different phenotypes of thin upper lip with down turned corners of the mouth, wide nasal tip, this mysterious sign and highlights the importance of computed long and flat philtrum, dysplastic and dorsally rotated ears, large and tomography in verification of calcification to overcome the difficulties short neck, flat chest, widened and prominent distal regions of her in genetic counseling of such cases. arms, deafness, language disturbances and normal intelligence. X- Ray skeletal survey showed: bathrocephaly, sclerosis of mastoids, P0180. Primary intestinal lymphangiectasia congenital: absent frontal sinuses, diastasis of skull sutures, prominent parieto- report of one case. occipital synchondrosis, wormian bones, scoliosis, increased anterior I. R. Assumpcao1, A. Z. Pfeiffer1, Y. K. L. Koda1, K. A. Furuta1, C. J. height of the lumbar vertebral bodies with abnormal pedicles and Abe1, K. Yhira2, L. M. J. Albano3, C. A. Kim3;112 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 113 1Instituto da Crianca, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Dept Pathology of FMUSP, Jarcho- Levin Syndrome (JLS, Spondylothoracic dysplasia) is Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Instituto da Crianca, Genetics Unit, Sao Paulo, the severest form of vertebral malsegmentation syndromes with Brazil. reduced stature resulting from axial skeleton. The main features Intestinal lymphangiectasia is characterized by obstruction of lymph are short, immobile neck and small thorax with the patognomonic drainage from the small intestine and dilated lacteal vessels that “crab-like” rib cage associated with multiple vertebral defects, distort the villus architeture. Primary intestinal lymphangiectasia what frequently leads to respiratory problems and death in infancy. probably represents a congenital disorder of lymphatics and is often Carefully prenatal ultrasound examination during the second associated with lymphatic anomalies outside the gastrointestinal trimester should done for subsequent pregnancies. A clinically similar tract. Patients with this condition have a picture comparable disorders is Spondylocostal dysostosis (SCD). The main features to experimental thoracic duct drainage with lymphedema, are abnormalities of vertebral segmentation and of the ribs, including hypogammaglobulinemia, lymphocytopenia, skin anergy and multiple hemivertebrae, vertebral clefting and fused, hypoplastic impaired allograft rejection. We reported on a sporadic case from a vertebrae, rib fusions and deletions with a non-progressive nonconsanguineous and healthy parents, a 9 months girl with kyphoscoliosis. Survival is much better and neural tube defects lower leg progressive lymphedema (since 15 days of life), only rarely occur. Cases are sporadic or familial, both recessive and right palpebral ptosis, severe chylousascite and chylothorax, dominant autosomal inheritance has been reported. The identification hypogammaglobulinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and lymphopenia. of genes affecting somitogenesis will be assist better classification. Endoscopy revealed a severe edema and a white-tipped villi Recently mutations in the recessive form were demonstrated in the appearance with well-circumscribed white plaques of varying sizes Notch pathway gene, DLL3, mapped at 19q13. We describe here throughout the proximal duodenum. Small-intestinal biopsy showed six cases of multiple vertebral segmentation defects. Two newborns numerous dilated lymphatic vessels within the lamina propria and with the classical features of JLS, both had respiratory problems submucosa. There was no evidence of lymphomatous transformation with “fan-like” chest deformities and one associated with thoracic at the proximal small bowel. Lymphoscintigraphy did not revealed meningomyelocele and club foot deformity. The remaining four infant any lower leg lymphatic vessels. Medium-chain triglycerids on dietary presented features of SCD. These had short neck and trunk, different and albumin associated with diuretic therapy decreased the enteric degree kyphoscoliosis and occasional spina bifida. All six patients protein loss, improving not so much the lymphedema, that became were sporadic, and parental consanguinity were present by half softier. Serum albumin and immunoglobulins levels were increased. of them. We believe that appropriate classification of these similar No signs of colestasis neither Yellow-nail, Lymphedema-distichiasis, phenotypes will improve molecular research and genetic counselling Turner, Noonan or Hennekam syndromes were observed. Primary concerning recurrence risk, management, prognosis and prenatal intestinal lymphangiectasia has been described in association with diagnosis. lymphoma in few cases. Thus, we consider important to establish the definitive diagnosis of this condition and to perform an endoscopic P0183. Prenatal Diagnosis Of Dysmorphic Syndromes evaluation of the proximal small bowel, in order to detect a By Routine Fetal Ultrasonographic Examination Across lymphomatous transformation. Europe C. Stoll1, M. Clementi2; P0181. AAAS mutation in Triple A syndrome: A case- 1Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 2University of Padova, control study. Padova, Italy. M. Yaghoobi, L. Gholamrezai, F. Imanzadeh, M. Sohrabi, A. A. Objectives Sayyari, S. Benfield; Ultrasound scan in the midtrimester of pregnancy is now a routine Research Unit, Dep.of Gastroenterology, Mofid Medical Center, part of antenatal care in most European countries. The objectives of Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. this study was to evaluate the prenatal diagnosis of non chromosomal dysmorphic syndromes by fetal ultrasonographic examination. Introduction: Mutation in AAAS gene has been proposed as the Methods underlying mechanism of triple A syndrome. We have studied these Data from 20 registries of congenital malformations in 12 European mutations in a family in order to determine whether the healthy family countries were included in the study. member is involved. Results Method: A family with involved triple A and double A syndrome as There were 2454 cases with congenital heart diseases, including 104 well as alacrimia itself comprised study population. Control group syndromes, 49% of them were detected prenatally. was from the noninvolved members of the family. 10 cc of peripheral 1130 cases with renal anomalies including 64 syndromes, 83% blood sample were obtained from each member. DNA was extracted of them were detected prenatally, 250 cases with limb reduction from Buffy coat layer and stored in 4 oC. Sequencing analysis was deficiencies including 38,12 were syndromes diagnosed prenatally. performed for the exon 10 of each member. Prenatal diagnosis was performed in 7 out of 7 cases with Results: Proband was a 17 years old boy with triple A. He had two gastroschisis, in 12 out of 14 of cases with omphalocele and in 37,5% sisters; A 19 years old otherwise healthy and a 12 years old with of cases with intestinal anomalies (24 out of 64). double A syndrome. They have been born of a consanguineous There were 553 cleft lip and palate (CL(P)) and 198 cleft palate (CP) marriage. Aunt of their grandfather was involved by alacrimia 73 recognised syndromes. Prenatal diagnosis was done in 51 CL(P) according to the family history. Sequencing analysis revealed a (53.1%) and 7 CP (13.7%). single-basepair insertion in exon 10 of the AAAS gene (1-BP INS, Few anencephalic cases were syndromic. Out of 290 cases with 1071T) in proband and the younger sister. Interestingly, we found the spina bifida, 18 were recognized syndromes, 17 of them were mutation in his father which was otherwise healthy. Unfortunately, the diagnosed prenatally. All 11 syndromic encephaloceles were grandparents were not alive at the time of the study. Other members diagnosed antenatally. of the family showed no mutation in the AAAS. Conclusions Conclusion: It seems that 1-BP INS, 1071T which was reported In conclusion this study showed that around 50% of the recognized previously in turkey is the responsible gene for the disease in Iran. syndromes can be detected antenatally by the anomaly scan. We propose that the mutation in AAAS alone can not induce triple A However the detection rate varied with the type of syndromes and in involved cases. with the policy of prenatal screening between countries. P0182. Spondylothoracic dysplasia (Jarcho-Levin P0184. Polish group of PWS patients - clinical, syndrome) and Spondylocostal dysostosis, the cytogenetic and molecular investigations confusing vertebral malsegmentation syndromes. Report A. Z. Szpecht-Potocka, E. Obersztyn, E. Bocian, J. Bal, T. of six cases Mazurczak; A. Semiç1, N. Elçioglu2, S. Yalçin3, T. Biren4; National Research Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. 1Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Dep. of Pediatric Introduction: We present results of the clinical, cytogenetic and Genetics, Marmara Univ. Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Dep. of molecular studies carried out in the group of 77 patients with verified Orthopedics, Marmara University Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Dep. of clinical diagnosis of Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) selected from 202 Radiology, Marmara Univ. Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey. patients with tentative clinical diagnosis of PWS. Methods: Clinical Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 114 115 manifestation, family data, history of pregnancy, parental age and distress. Characteristic features of nMFS and CCA were seen at anthropometric traits were analysed and compared in two groups of physical examination. An echocardiogram showed marked prolapse patients with deletion and mUPD. Cytogenetic analysis was routinely and regurgitation of both mitral and tricuspid valves. Neither performed using HRBT in all patients. FISH was done in all cases gastrointestinal, nor ocular abnormalities were present. Despite which were diagnosed in our genetic unit. Methylation analysis, gene vigorous treatment, death occurred at 62 hours from cardiac failure. dosage analysis for SNRPN and polymorphism analysis for loci The visceral anomalies suggested the diagnosis of nMFS. Molecular within the PWS/AS region are included in our molecular diagnostic analysis confirmed this diagnosis with the detection of a new FBN-1 procedure. Results: PWS diagnosis was confirmed by methylation missense mutation at nucleotide 3165 in exon 25 (C1055W). test in 77 (38%) patients. Among them deletion was detected in 40 In conclusion, nMFS and severe lethal CCA can be clinically (25%) patients, mUPD in 11 (14,2%) and imprinting mutation in 1 distinguished by visceral anomalies. The FBN-1 exon 25 mutation in (1.3%) patient. Detection of the molecular defect was impossible in our patient confirmed the diagnosis of nMFS and is in agreement with 6 (7,8%) patients because of uninformative polymorphism analysis the previously described genotype-phenotype correlation. results. For 19 patients the procedure for the purpose of molecular defect detection is in progress. Detailed comparison of phenotype P0186. Bowen syndrome ? and anthropometric evaluation will be presented in the group of E. Geán1, A. Martínez1, B. Domenech2, E. González-Bosquet1, M. deletion and non-deletion patients. Discussion: Our results of Sostoa3; clinical and molecular investigations are comparable with those from 1Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital published analyses. The numerous group of clinicaly missdiagnosed Pius de Valls, Tarragona, Spain, 3Centre de Diagnòstic Prenatal, patients indicated on difficulties in the process of PWS diagnosis. Barcelona, Spain. It points to how much still needs to be done to increase practical Case history: Healthy non consanguineous parents, no previous knowledge of PWS natural history and clinical symptoms among miscarriages. medical doctors in Poland. First pregnancy: Ultrasonogram at 22 weeks revealed severe intrauterine growth retardation and a set of malformations: corpus P0185. Clinical and cytogenetic analysis of patients with callosum agenesis, sloped forehead, hypertrophic crystalline lens, chromsome 18 aberrations. microretrognathia with lower maxilla hypoplasia, interventricular M. Babicz, K. Kaczanowska, M. Lejman, D. Przadka, A. Gaworczyk, septal defect, bilateral pyelic ectasia, hypoplasia in 2nd phalange D. Winnicka, J. R. Kowalczyk; of both index fingers, malpositioned feet and ambiguous genitalia. Childrens Univ. Hospital, Depart. of Pediatric Hematology and Karyotype: 46,XY. Onkology, Cytogenetic Laboratory, Lublin, Poland. Voluntarily termination of gestation. Necropsy confirmed the We would like to report 12 cases of chromosome 18 aberrations that ultrasonogram findings. were evaluated recently in our laboratory. The purpose of the study Second pregnancy: Ultrasonogram at 24 weeks revealed growth was to analyze the cytogenetic, clinical and available familial data retardation, bilateral pyelic ectasia and moderate retrognathia. of these patients. Cytogenetic findings: the GTG banding technique Parents decided to continue with pregnancy. 35 weeks: demonstrated in 8 cases the presence of trisomy 18. The remaining ultrasonogram showed growth retardation, prominent orbits and karyotypes were the following: 46,XY, r18 and 46, XY, t(4;18). Clinical retrognathia; echocardiography revealed pericardial effusion data: in all cases the family history showed no special disorders. without morphological cardiac alterations. 36 weeks: delivery was All the infants with trisomy 18 ( 7 girls and 1 boy -ratio which induced. Neonatal exploration: growth retardation, microcephaly, confirms the female predominance observed in this syndrome) were microretrognathia, dysplasic ears, festooned gums, craniosynostosis, diagnosed at birth and in all cases the physical examination revealed hypospadias, cryptorchidia, pulmonary artery stenosis with characteristic phenotypical features: low birth weight, low-set ears, persistence of the ductus, aracnodactyly in fingers and toes, bilateral protuberant occiput, characteristic positioning of the hands, limitation glaucoma and generalized arthrogryposis. Karyotype: 46,XY. At age 3 of thigh abduction and cardiac malformations. The phenotype of months, the infant died with diabetes mellitus type I and hypertrophic the patient with r18 shared the features of 18p.- and those of 18q- cardiomyopathy. Necropsy report: weight 1.1 kg, cardiomegaly with syndrome. Low birth weight, cryptorchidism and micrognathia were myocardial hypertrophy and multiple septal infarcts, microcephaly, the only physical abnormalities observed in a boy with t(4; 18). diffuse cortical anomalies, severe myelinization delay. Outcome: as expected 11 out of 12 infants bearing trisomy 18 died Diagnosis: The died patient was compatible with non-typical Seckel shortly after the birth. It is noteworthy that one girl survived the first Sd. and Bowen Sd. The previous fetus was compatible only with year of life which is unusal for the patients with a free homogenous Bowen Sd. trisomy 18. Infants with aberrations other than trisomy 18 are both Conclusions: Because both Seckel and Bowen Sd. are infrequent alive. entities, our belief is both cases correspond to Bowen Sd. Recurrence risk for these parents is 25% per pregnancy. Prenatal P0186. Phenotype and differential diagnosis of a neonatal diagnosis is limited to ultrasonographic findings. Marfan syndrome due to a new FBN-1 exon 25 mutation N. Revencu1, G. Quenum1, V. van Scherpenzeel Thim1, L. Collard2, P0187. Child with del 11q23- ter - therapeutic problems G. Verellen2, A. De Paepe3, C. Verellen-Dumoulin1; K. Kaczanowska; 1Center for Human Genetics, UCL, St Luc, Brussels, Belgium, Children`s University Hospital, Lublin, Poland. 2Neonatology,UCL, St Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 3Departement of Jacobsen syndrome is a rare cytogenetic abnormality, the Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Gent, Belgium. literature reports about 30 children with this aberration. Main Neonatal Marfan syndrome (nMFS) is the most severe presentation features of affected patients are: psychomotor development of Marfan phenotypes. nMFS is characterized by flexion contractures, retardation, trigonocephaly, microcephaly, dysmorphy ( low set ears, arachnodactyly, crumpled ears, loose redundant skin and visceral hypertelorism). anomalies : pronounced atrioventricular valve dysfunction and Here we present a boy with the diagnosis of Jacobsen syndrome. sometimes ectopia lentis. Death usually occurs within the first year of Reason for refferal was dysmorphy. During physical examination life from heart failure. we found; low birth weight, microcephaly, psychomotor retardation, nMFS results from mutations clustering in exons 24 to 32 of the trigonocephaly, hypertelorism, wide nose with aplastic bridge, fibrillin-1 gene (FBN-1). Until now, only 19 mutations have been low set and dephormed ears, clinical features of laryngomalatia. described. Our cytogenetic examination revealed: 46, XY del 11q2- ter ( G- This disorder has to be differentiated from severe lethal Congenital banding).We decided to present the boy because of therapeutic Contractural Arachnodactyly (CCA), caused by mutations in the problems, i.e; laryngomalatia, reccurent infections of lower respiratory fibrillin-2 gene (FBN-2). Severe lethal CCA is characterized by a tract, especialy pulmonary infections, renal malformations, reccurent nMFS-like appearance, but there is no ectopia lentis and visceral infections of genitourunary tract. Severe mental retardation required anomalies are different : cardiac septal defects, interrupted aortic neurological care and neurologic disturbances and delayed physical arch and gastrointestinal abnormalities. development were observed as well. We describe a newborn male, born from nonconsanguineous We want to underline the fact, that child with dysmorphic features healthy parents. At birth, he presented with a severe respiratory requires cytogenetic examination and the care over child is a multidisciplinary problem.114 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 115 P0188. Two new cases of the Clark-Baraitser syndrome abnormalities of growth, delayed sexual development and mamillar E. Tabolacci1, V. Leuzzi2, J. M. Opitz3, G. Neri1; and apocrin gland hypoplasia. We describe a three-generation family 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Roma, with variable expression of ulnar/fibular hypoplasia, ulnar ray defects Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche e Psichiatriche dell’Età and short stature. The proband had ulnar hypoplasia with missing Evolutiva, Università “La Sapienza”, Roma, Italy, 3Department of IV-Vth fingers, fibular hypoplasia on the right, bilateral club feet, Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake growth retardation, hypoplastic midface, ASD and hemangiomas. She City, UT. had normal mamillary tissue and normal sweating. The mother had The Clark-Baraitser syndrome of multiple congenital anomalies, short stature, midfacial hypoplasia, hypoplastic ulna and hypoplasia tall stature, macrocephaly and mental retardation, has been in a of the carpal bones in the ulnar ray (brachydactyly type IV) on the limbo for many years. In the original report (Am J Med Genet 26: right without other associated malformations. A maternal grandfather 13-15,1987), Clark and Baraitser suggested that their patients, two had mild unilateral fibular hypoplasia, and a maternal grandaunt brothers and a carrier mother, may have the Atkin-Flaitz syndrome. had shortening of the IVth metacarpus of the left hand. Segregation In the subsequent description of affected cousins (Am J Med Genet studies did not confirm linkage to the locus (D12S79) of the Pallister 57:380-384,1995), Baraitser et al. favored the view that all of their UMS syndrome (MIM 181450). The patients may have a previously patients had a condition distinct from the Atkin-Flaitz syndrome. We undescribed syndrome. support the same view, by describing two brothers, who do not have the Atkin-Flaitz syndrome and strongly resemble Baraitser’s patients. P0192. Cranioectodermal dysplasia: two new Egyptian These boys are obese, macrocephalic, one of them excessively cases with expansion of the phenotype. tall and both have a characteristic face with square forehead, H. H. Afifi, S. A. Temtamy, M. I. Mostafa, M. S. Zaki; prominent supraorbital ridges, bulbous tip of nose, short philtrum, Human Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Cairo, gap between upper central incisors, large ears. Genitalia are normal. Egypt. They also have big hands and feet and advanced bone age. They Cranioectodermal dysplasia is a rare syndrome characterized by are moderately-to-severely retarded, with a quiet but stubborn craniofacial, ectodermal and skeletal dysplasia. We report two new personality. On brain MRI they have lateral ventricular dilatation, cases, an eleven-year-old boy and a 2-year-old girl. The variability of cortical and cerebellar vermis hypoplasia. The fragile X syndrome clinical manifestations included dolicocephaly with or without sagittal was ruled out by DNA testing and the Simpson-Golabi-Behmel suture synotosis, sparse hair, thin nails, brachydactyly, and advanced syndrome can also be ruled out for lack of specific signs. The FG bone age. Varied dental anomalies consisted of microdontia with syndrome may be worth testing, once the gene has been identified. discrepancy of eruption and shedding, together with labial and However, our prevailing view is that these cases confirm the jaws abnormalities. These cases are the first Egyptian cases of existence of the Clark-Baraitser syndrome as a nosologically distinct cranioectodermal dysplasia. Neuroimaging showed various changes entity that should be added to the list of X- linked mental retardation in the form of periventricular hypodense areas and frontal atrophic syndromes. changes. Fundus examination, electro-retinography, visual evoked potential, electro-cardiography, audiometry, IQ evaluation, abdominal P0190. Kabuki syndrome: clinical data in 21 patients, sonar, kidney function tests, serum calcium, phosphorus and alkaline literature review and guidelines for preventive phosphatase were all normal. Advanced bone age in our two cases, management which was not previously reported, expands the phenotype and C. T. R. M. Schrander-Stumpel; indicates that cranioectodermal dysplasia is both a morphogenetic Department of clinical genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands. and maturation disorder. Kabuki syndrome (KS) was first described in 1981 independently by Niikawa et al. and Kuroki et al. Since than, over 250 reliable cases P0193. Cotsirilos syndrome in twins from unaffected have been reported from many countries. Etiology of KS is still parents unknown. K. Hadzsiev1, S. Funke2, E. Morava1, J. Karteszi1, O. Bartsch3, K. In close collaboration with the Dutch network of Kabuki syndrome, 21 Mehes1; patients were studied. There were 7 males and 14 females, ranging 1Dep. Med. Genet. and Child Development, Pécs, Hungary, 2Dep. from 2 years to 34 years. In addition, we reviewed the data of 260 Obst. and Gyn., Pécs, Hungary, 3Institut für Kliniksche Genetik KS patients (127M and 133F) in literature and compared them with Technische Univ., Dresden, Germany. those in our group. In this presentation we focus on the medical data In 1987 Cotsirilos et al. described a family with 2 sibs and their and tables reviewing the data will be presented. Psychological - and mother presenting a Rubinstein-Taybi-like phenotype (MIM 180850). language/speech data are reported separately. Autosomal or X-linked dominant inheritence was suggested. In general, facial features are characteristic with long palpebral We report on newborn male twins of healty unrelated parents with fissures, a thin upper lip and full lower lip with ‘lip pits’ without broad terminal phalanges of hallux, short stature, microcephaly, down classical pits. Many patients have hypodontia with at least 2 upper slanting palpebral fissures, epicanthic folds, ptosis of eyelids, beaked incisors missing. Hands are small. The fingers show fetal fingertip profile of nose, low-set ears, high palate and a single palmar crease. pads. Mental retardation generally is moderate and the KS individuals A prominent metopic ridge was present, more prevailingly in one of have a positive personality. the sibs,who also had pectus excavatum and hypospadias. We propose guidelines for preventive management. In early Early neurodevelopment was normal. childhood the hypotonia, feeding problems and joint laxity pose major There were no cardiac or eye anomalies. The cranial ultrasound problems. The cleft palate needs surgery; recurrent ear infections and examination showed no brain malformation. X-ray examination of possible hearing loss are important issues. Growth and development the skull revealed partial cranio-synostosis at the metopic suture and should be closely monitored. Overweight can occur in early puberty. hypertrophy of bone and solid tissues of halluces. Both children had a normal karyotype at 550-band resolution. FISH P0191. Autosomal dominant ulnar/fibular ray defect: a with DNA probes RT100 RT191, RT 166 (16q13.3:CREBBP) were possible new syndrome normal. E. Morava1, M. Czakó2, K. Hadzsiev3, G. Kosztolányi1, K. Méhes4; Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome presents with broad hallux and typical 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development,University facial features. The lack of typical cardiac and ophthalmolgic features of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2MTA-PTE Clinical Genetic Research and the presence of metopic ridge in our patients did not support Group,University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 3Department of Medical this diagnosis. In craniosynostosis syndromes with broad hallux Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, (Crouson, Apert) polydactyly/syndactyly is caracteristic, however 4Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, MTA-PTE it was excluded by the x-ray examination in our cases. br />The Clinical Genetic Research Group,University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. observed phenotype fits most probably into Cotsirilos syndrome and Postaxial oligodactyly with or without limb defects is most commonly supports the primary observers’ suggestion that it might be a distinct an isolated anomaly. There are a few syndromes presenting with entity. ulnar ray defects and postaxial finger malformation/reduction, however, these occure mostly sporadically. The highly penetrant ulnar-mammary syndrome includes postaxial ray defects, Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 116 117 P0194. Byelorussian Down Syndrome Registry to the control group (0/100), comprising women who experienced - rare cytogenetical abnormalities and clinical data physiological menopause. No mutation was found in the group of characterization. EM patients. Furthermore, the likelihood of finding the mutation was statistically different for familial (5/65; 7.7%) (Fisher’s exact test, N. Rumyantseva, A. Polityko, I. Naumchik, T. Asadchuk; P=8.6X10-3) and sporadic (2/95; 2%) (Fisher’s exact test, P=0.23) Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus. POF conditions. Moreover, the analysis of pedigrees showing the We reviewed Down syndrome (DS) cases, registered in National running of both the 769G→A mutation and POF strengthens the Registry of Chromosomal Abnormalities during 1983-2000 years. concept of the disease heterogeneity, since the POF phenotype was Patients with mental retardation, congenital malformations and not always associated with the mutation. During this work, we also DS phenotype were studied by conventional cytogenetic method evidenced the prevalence in the POF patients (80.3%) in regard to (GTG-banding, lymphocytes). Among 909 detected Down syndrome the control group (66.7%) of the C allele of a SNP, located in the cases 834 patients with full trisomy 21 (included 18 cases with 5’UTR of the INHa gene. Although these data tend to indicate that mosaicism) and 75 patients with DS due to de novo and inherited the INHa gene can be considered a candidate gene for premature Robertsonian translocations (1 mosaic karyotype) were found. The menopause, the assessment of its true diagnostic value requires following rare chromosomal abnormalities were observed: numerical further investigations. aberrations - 48, XXY, +21 (2 cases); structural unbalance - 46,XX, inv dup (21) (two patients, in one case breakpoints were additionally investigated using FISH); complex rearrangements included 2 P0197. Meier-Gorlin syndrome: New clinical findings and cases full trisomy 21 with balanced reciprocal translocations - exclusion of BMP5 as a causative gene 47,XX,t(11;21)(q21;q22)mat,+21; 47,XY, t(12;22)(p11.2;q13)pat,+21 E. M. H. F. Bongers1, A. Toutain2, H. Viëtor1, A. Verrips3, B. Otten4, and 6 cases pericentric inversions - 47,XY, inv(7)(p12q21.1)mat,+21 J. M. Opitz5, A. Fryer6, P. Sarda7, R. C. M. Hennekam8, H. van (1 case); 47,XX, inv(9),+21 (5 cases). Mosaic forms presented Bokhoven1, B. C. J. Hamel1, N. V. A. M. Knoers1; as numerical abnormalities - 47,XY,+21/48,XY,+21,+21 and 1Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center 47,XY,+21/46,XX as structural 46,XX,t(21;21)/46,XX aberrations Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Medical and complex rearrangements 48,XY,+21,+mar/46,XY. All individuals Genetics, Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France, 3Department of with DS including cases with rare cytogenetic variants and complex Pediatric Neurology, University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, abnormalities demonstrated typical DS manifestations. In 2 mosaic Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, University cases the patients with low rate of the trisomic cells (8% trisomic Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Division of metaphases) showed mild mental delay and less typical dysmorphic Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Human Genetics, and features. The cytogenetical and clinical data of DS will be discussed. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Primary Children’s Medical Center, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 6Mersey Regional Clinical P0195. Pseudoachondroplastic dysplasia in a 4-years old Genetics Service, Royal Liverpool Children’s Hospital, Liverpool, boy. United Kingdom, 7Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 8Department of I. Naumchik, N. Rumyantseva, N. Nehai; Pediatrics and department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Institute of Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus. Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Pseudoachondroplasia (PSACH) is a spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGS) or ear, patella, short stature syndrome characterized by dysproportionate short stature with relatively long (MIM 224690) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, characterized trunk, short bowed arms and legs and normal skull and face. On by microtia, patellar a-/hypoplasia, and growth retardation. The most the basis of severity of radiographic findings Hall and Dorst (1969) serious aspects are feeding problems and recurrent respiratory classified PSACH into 4 types, 2 dominant (I, 177150 and III, 177170 infections in early infancy. Here, we present the results of growth- MIM) and 2 recessive (II, 264150 and IV, 264160 MIM). In some , neuromuscular-, and immunological investigation in the largest cases gonadal mosaicism was proposed. cohort of MGS patients (8) described in literature. Endocrinological FP was the only child of young healthy nonconsanguineous parents investigations showed normal IGF and growth hormone test results in of average height. He was born after 37 wk pregnancy with BW most patients. Growth hormone therapy resulted in minimal/no effect 3000 g (75th percentile) and BL 48 cm (75th percentile). His motor in all four cases that received treatment. In two sporadic patients development was normal. Bowing of the legs and abnormal gait were available for neuromuscular examination, proximal weakness and a-/ present from 18 months. At 4 years of age he was 88 cm tall (3rd hypotrophic ventral muscle groups of the upper and lower extremities percentile) with good intelligence and showed normal skull, relatively was found. Light microscopy of quadriceps muscle biopsies revealed long trunk, exaggerated lumbar lordosis, and asymmetric bowed legs. muscle fibre hypoplasia in one, but normal appearance in the other Radiographs showed widened metaphyses, small epiphyses of the patient. Immunological studies showed decreased numbers of long bones with delayed ossification, mild platyspondyly. Laboratory cytotoxic memory T-cells (CD8+ /CD45RO+) in the three examined testing for metabolic diseases was normal. PSACH was diagnosed infants. although the sub-type of the disorder was not verified. Based on the striking similarities between MGS and the murine short Detection of PSACH subtypes in early childhood is difficult due ear phenotype caused by homozygous mutations in the BMP5 gene, to overlap the main clinical and radiological signs and limited Lacombe et al. [Ann Genet, 1994;37:184-191] proposed BMP5 as pathological changes for young children. We will compare our data candidate gene for MGS. Recently, the BMP5 gene was sequenced with those in the literature and discuss the differential criteria of the in one MGS patient, and no mutations were detected [Cohen et al., sub-types of PSACH. Am J Med Genet, 2002;107:48-51]. Simultaneously, we excluded the BMP5 locus as candidate region by linkage analysis in two P0196. Mutation analysis of the inhibin alpha gene in an consanguineous families, including one family with three affected Italian survey of women affected by ovarian failure sibs. Homozygosity mapping in consanguineous MGS families is A. Marozzi1, C. Porta1, W. Vegetti2, P. Crosignani2, M. Tibiletti3, E. presently being performed as a first step towards the molecular Ginelli1, L. Dalprà4; identification of the gene responsible for MGS. 1Dept. of Biology and Genetics -University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2I Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology - University of Milan, Milan, P0198. Alstrom syndrome - the overlooked syndrome? Italy, 3Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences - Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy, 4Department of Experimental and Case report and review. T.Datkhaeva, E. Elias and Environmental Medicine and Medical Biotechnology - University of E. Sujansky. Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Milan-Bicocca, Monza, Italy. University of Colorado School of Medicine, the Children Patients affected by premature ovarian failure (POF) (n=157), early Hospital, Denver, UCHSC. menopause (EM) (n=36) and primary amenorrhoea (n=12) were T. Datkhaeva1, E. Elias2, E. Sujansky1; analysed for the missense mutation (769G→A transition) in the exon 1University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, CO, 2The 2 of the inhibin alpha gene (INHa). The incidence of the mutation was Children Hospital, Denver, CO. statistically significant within both the POF (sporadic and familial) (7/ Severe early-onset inherited cone dysfunction, secondary rod 157, 4.5%) (Fisher’s exact test, P= 0.030) and primary amenohrroea degeneration and obesity are the hallmarks of Alstrom syndrome, a (3/12, 25%) (Fisher’s exact test, P=9.6X10-4) patients, in regard very rare autosomal recessive disorder.116 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 117 We present a 2 1⁄2 year old male first seen in ophthalmology at age was short with a bulbous tip, the philtrum was simple, the maxilla 8 months with nystagmus, retinal degeneration and bilateral high hypoplastic. The muscle tone was generally reduced. The EEG was myopia. Other than repeated otitis media, he has been healthy. He abnormal. X-ray showed thin ribs and an vertically absent sacrum, has shown normal cognitive development. The patient’s father and which could not be suspected clinically.Sonographic investigations two paternal second cousins have retinal abnormalities. revealed a tethered cord with a very low lying conus medullaris Physical exam at age 10 months disclosed a weight of 50th% for age inserting in a small lipoma. Hearing was severely impared. Standard 2-years. Mildly dysmorphic features included telecanthus, narrow chromosomal analysis was normal, but subtelomeric analysisis using and high palate and equinovarus. Alstrom syndrome was suspected. a comercial multitelomere FISH.kit(Cytocell) revealed the absent Brain MRI, hearing tests and renal ultrasound were normal. His signal on 7qter. The parents chromosomes will be studied. karyotype was normal (46,XY). When reviewed at 27 and 30 months We stress that children with micrcephaly and absent sacrum should he wad found to have progressive visual loss, hypertriglyceridemia be looked for a cryptic deletion on 7q. and progressive obesity, despite caloric restriction. DNA-testing for Alstrom syndrome mutations on chromosome 2 is pending. P0201. Gorlin Syndrome in a patient with deletion of the The differential diagnosis of cone-rod dystrophy presenting in early distal part of chromosome 9q and fine mapping of the infancy is broad, but when associated with early obesity should break points with Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization suggest the diagnosis of Alstrom Syndrome. Sensorineural deafness, (FISH). cardiomyopathy, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes may not present S. E. Boonen1, Z. Tümer2, N. Tommerup2, D. Stahl3, T. Rosenberg4, until later in childhood. In contrast to patients with Bardet-Biedl S. Kreiborg5, V. Kalscheuer6, K. Brøndum-Nielsen1; syndrome, patients with Alstrom syndrome display normal cognitive 1John F. Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Wilhelm Johannesen development, and normal digits. It is important that clinicians and Centre for Functional Genome Research, IMBG, Panum Institute, ophthalmologists consider Alstrom syndrome in the differential University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Clinic in diagnosis of retinal dysfunction. DNA testing is now available to Dermatology, Hørsholm, Denmark, 4The National Eye Clinic for the confirm the diagnosis, and allow optimal subspecialty care for these Visually Impaired, Hellerup, Denmark, 5School of Dentistry, University complex patients. of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. P0199. Microsatellite mapping and screening of a We present a 20 year-old male with many nevi of the skin and three candidate gene, TRPC5 (Transient Receptor Potential basal-cell carcinomas who was referred by a dermatologist for further Channel) in a second family with Arts syndrome investigation. Previously a chromosome analysis was carried out L. S. Raffaele1,2, J. Christodoulou1,2, B. Bennetts1,2, R. Ouvrier1; showing the karyotype 46,XY,del (9)(q21.3;q31) de novo. PTCH 1Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children, Westmead, Australia, located at 9q22.3 was shown by FISH to be deleted confirming 2University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. the diagnosis of Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome or Gorlin Arts syndrome was first described in a Dutch family with X-linked Syndrome. In addition he has developmental delay, dental and ataxia, muscle weakness in response to infections, deafness, loss of cardiac malformation and dysmorphic features, probably caused by vision in early childhood and a fatal course. We describe a family with loss of chromosomal material around PTCH. Further characterization two affected brothers and a maternal uncle who died at 2 years of of the deletion showed the proximal breakpoint at 9q22.2 and the age of a “muscular dystrophy” without having developed any speech. distal breakpoint distal to 9q31.2. Further fine mapping will be The two brothers have profound sensorineural deafness, peripheral presented. neuropathy with generalised muscle weakness and, in the older boy, symptomatic optic atrophy. They are predisposed to severe muscle P0202. A family with Seathre Chotzen syndrome and weakness during recurrent infections which has led to mechanical mutations in the TWIST and FGFR2 genes ventilation on a number of occasions. M. Stuhrmann1, S. Morlot2, R. Stephan3, W. Kress4; To localise the region for this syndrome, an exclusion mapping 1Institut fuer Humangenetik, Hannover, Germany, 2Genetische Praxis, approach was taken, using 33 microsatellite markers covering the Hannover, Germany, 3Staedtisches Krankenhaus, Hildesheim, X chromosome. DNA was available from the affected brothers, their Germany, 4Institut fuer Humangenetik, Wuerzburg, Germany. normal sister, parents, maternal grandparents and an unaffected Most cases with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS), a relatively maternal uncle. Two candidate regions were identified: Xq23 between frequent autosomal-dominant craniosynostosis syndrome, are due to DXS 1106 and DXS 8064 (~13cM), and Xq27 between DXS 1227 mutations in the TWIST gene. Other SCS patients carry the missense and DXS 8091 (~21.4cM). The candidate region Xq21.33-q24 was mutation P250R in the FGFR3 gene, leading to a similar phenotype. identified in the original family, so the Xq23 region was deemed most The classical SCS phenotype includes brachycephaly or acrocephaly likely. Databases were searched for likely candidate genes. TRPC5 and partial cutaneous syndactyly of hands and feet. was selected as the most likely because of its involvement in Ca2 The phenotypic expression of SCS is highly variable also within flux, and its expression in mammalian brain and Drosophila eye. families. These variability is very likely due to an influence of Screening of this gene is in progress. To date one A>G change has modifying genes. Under the assumption that special alleles of been identified at 919-42 (intron 1) in the affected boys, their normal the FGFR1, 2 or 3 genes may be such modifiers, we investigated father and maternal grandfather. It is therefore likely to be a common several members of a German SCS family. Two members of this polymorphism. family, a 6 months old boy and his father, displayed the classical SCS phenotype. With the exception of partial cutaneous syndactyly, P0200. Absent sacrum in terminal deletion of the long no further symptoms were present in the boys paternal uncle, arm of chromosome 7:a further case grandmother and grand-grandmother. E. Steichen-Gersdorf1, O. Rittinger2, I. Gaßner1; Both the boy and his father carried two mutations: D161X in the 1Universitätsklinik f. Kinder-und Jugendheilkunde, Innsbruck, Austria, TWIST gene and S252L in the FGFR2 gene. D161X had previously 2Klinische Genetik, Landeskinderklinik, Salzburg, Austria. been described in a SCS patient, and S252L was associated with a Small deletions of chromosome 7qter are rarely reported. The mild Crouzon phenotype. No other family member carried D161X. literature contains 7 cases with deletions distal to 7q35. In However, S252L was present in all family members with syndactyly. conventional cytogenetics these deletions may be overlooked, so that We conclude that D161X arose de novo, leading to the classical SCS clinical characteristics have to be elaborated to further delineate a phenotype, while S252L was associated with cutaneous syndactyly specific syndrome. only and spread from the paternal grandmother over the whole family. Case report: The girl was born as the second child to a 22 years To the best of our knowledge, this is the first family in which both a old mother and a 28 years old father. She was born at 39 weeks of TWIST and a FGFR2 mutation were present in SCS patients. gestation. She had low birth weight with 2625g (5th centile), length: 47cm(10th centile), head circumference:30,8cm(<10th centile). The P0203. Association of PAI-1 gene 4G/5G genotype with cry was weak and she had severe problems with sucking, so that Coronary Artery Disease gavage feeding was necessary. The most striking features were G. Balta1, O. Onalan2, A. Oto2, A. Gurgey1, C. Altay1; microcephaly with a narrow forhead and large dysplastic ears with 1Hacettepe University, Pediatric Hematology Unit, Ankara, Turkey, a wide exernal meatus. The palpebral fissures slanted up. The nose 2Hacettepe University, Department of Cardiology, Ankara, Turkey.Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 118 119 The relation of PAI-1 gene promoter 4G/5G genotype and the risk of 1A) which are spliced to exons 2-13 of GNAS are imprinted in all developing Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) is still controversial. The tissues tested. Expression is exclusively maternal for NESP55 and objective of this study is to evaluate the role of 4G/5G genotype on paternal for XLAS and 1A. development of CAD. Distributions of 4G/5G genotype were studied We have screened for sequence changes in all the exons and in consecutive CAD patients with Myocardial Infarction (MI, n=158), splice junctions of GNAS1 in a cohort of patients with AHO and Stable Angina Pectoris (SAP, n=124) and in 282 unrelated healthy found a variety of mutations. We have confirmed that imprinting of controls. 1- The frequencies of both 4G/4G and 4G/5G genotypes NESP55 and exon 1A is conserved in lymphoblastoid cell lines. In were 33% and 48% respectively in CAD patients with MI and 26% AHO patients with mutations in exons 2 - 13 of GNAS from whom and 40% respectively in controls, the differences in the frequencies lymphoblastoid cell-lines were available, we have tested directly for of both genotypes were statistically significant (OR: 2.3 and 2.2; the mutation in the NESP55 and 1A cDNA transcripts. In 3 sporadic 95% CI 1.3-4.0 and 1.3-3.6 respectively). 2- There was statistically patients with PPHP we have confirmed the mutation is present in the significant differences in 4G/5G genotype between CAD patients 1A transcript, but not NESP55 indicating paternal origin. In 6 patients with SAP (57%) and control (40%) (OR: 1.9; 95% CI 1.2-3.2). 3- with AHO and PHP Ia we have confirmed the converse indicating Comparison of the frequencies of 4G/4G genotype in patients with MI maternal origin. With the discontinuation of PTH for stimulation (33%) and SAP (17%) was statistically significant (OR: 2.6; 95% CI testing, the clinical application for predicting the endocrine phenotype 1.3-5.4). Hyperlipidemia appeared to be an additional risk factor for in AHO patients will be discussed. development of MI in patients with 4G/4G genotype (OR: 3.0; 95%CI 1.5-6.2). Although smoking is an independent risk factor (OR: 1.7; P0206. A case of Zimmermann-Laband syndrome with a 95% CI: 1.1-2.8), it did not effect the risk of developing MI associated chromosomal translocation t(3;8)(p13;q24.1) with 4G/4G genotype. The results of the study suggested that 4G/4G M. Stefanova, T. Krastev, D. Atanassov; and 4G/5G genotypes may be associated with an increased risk of Higher Medical Institute, Plovdiv, Bulgaria. developing MI while presence of only 4G/5G genotype seemed to be Zimmermann-Laband syndrome (ZLS) is a rare autosomal dominant related to the risk of developing SAP. This study was supported by disease characterized by gingival hyperplasia or fibromatosis, Hacettepe University research grant (9902101003). hypoplasia of the finger- and toenails, hypoplastic changes in the terminal phalanges of fingers and toes, coarse facial features, P0204. Coffin-Siris syndrome in a girl with a 15qter hepatosplenomegaly, inconsistent mental retardation (Pfeiffer et al, deletion encompassing the IGF-1 receptor gene. 1992). All reported cases have normal karyotype. Molecular basis of P. Failla, L. Ragusa, O. Galesi, L. Castiglia, R. M. Ragusa, A. this condition remains unknown. Ragusa, C. Romano; Here we report on an apparently balanced chromosomal aberration, Oasi Institute, Troina, Italy. t(3;8)(p13;q24.1) in a mother and her daughter, both with typical ZLS We report on a 11.5-year-old girl with features of multiple congenital features characterized by gingival hyperplasia, finger- and toenails anomalies/mental retardation overlapping those of Coffin-Siris hypo- and aplasia and course facial features, including large nose, syndrome (MIM 135900) and a deletion on 15 qter, not seen by thickened lips and flashy ears. None of the closely related family standard karyotype, but only by multiFISH subtelomeric assay. members were affected with ZLS, nor had a chromosomal aberration. Weight, length and OFC were all below the third centile at birth. It is suggested that the causative gene for ZLS is located at the Impaired sucking and swallowing were referred up to 8 months. translocation breakpoint(s). Developmental delay was noted since the very beginning. She shows now severe mental retardation, dwarfism (height 102 cm), P0207. Segregation of a t(1:3)(q42.3;p25) Translocation microcephaly, large mouth with flat philtrum, unilateral palpebral Resulting in Different Recombinant Chromosomes in ptosis, hirsutism on the lombosacral area. Hands and feet are very Multiple Family Members small with shortening of fifth fingers and fourth and fifth toes, and C. Kozma1, A. A. Slavotinek2, J. M. Meck1; nail hypoplasia of fifth fingers and of second, third, fourth and fifth 1Georgetown University, Washington, DC, 2National Human Genome toes. X-ray examination reveals very short terminal phalanx of the Research Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD. fifth fingers and toes, double epiphisis on second, third, fourth and A subtle familial balanced translocation involving the terminal regions fifth methacarpal bone and short middle phalanx of fifth finger. The of 1q and 3p was identified in a large family by high-resolution bone age is severely retarded (6.1 years). Growth hormone, IGF-1, karyotype analysis and confirmed by (FISH) analysis. IGFBP-3, thyroid function are normal. As additional features the girl In this family, segregation of a balanced t(1:3)(q42.3;p25) has multicistic kidney with mild renal failure. Previous reports by chromosome translocation in two phenotypically normal sisters led McPherson et al. (1997) and McGhee et al. (2000) assigned a locus to two types of viable unbalanced complements which corresponded for the Coffin-Siris syndrome to the 7q32-q34 region. Our report to two distinct phenotypes in affected individuals. The proband had may raise the chance of a second locus for such syndrome in the inherited the derivative chromosome 3 resulting in partial trisomy of 15qter region. We conclude highlighting the presence in the 15q25- chromosome 1q and partial monosomy of chromosome 3p. A paternal q26 region of the IGF-1 receptor gene, which may be a clue for the uncle and cousin had the reciprocal rearrangement with a derivative etiology of the phenotype and possibly for the Coffin-Siris syndrome. of chromosome 1 resulting in partial monosomy for chromosome 1q and partial trisomy for chromosome 3p. P0205. A novel approach for determining the parental While profound mental and physical retardation, poor survival, origin of GNAS1 mutations in sporadic patients with congenital heart defects, and neurologic abnormities were Albright’s Hereditary Osteodystrophy using overlapping characteristic for both rearrangements, facial dysmorphism was quite imprinted transcripts: Clinical application for predicting distinct for each recombinant. Individuals who had the derivative endocrine phenotype. chromosome 3 had a long face, wide eyebrows, small palpebral L. C. Wilson1, S. J. Rickard2; fissures, hypertelorism, prominent glabella, a large tip of the nose, 1Institute of Child Health & Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, long philtrum with thin upper lip, and low set-ears with prominent United Kingdom, 2Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom. helices. In contrast, family members with the derivative chromosome Albright’s Hereditary Osteodystrophy (AHO) results from 1 had a tall forehead with bifrontal narrowing, full and large cheeks, heterozygous deactivating mutations in the GNAS1 gene which and large simple ears. encodes the alpha subunit of the adenylyl cyclase stimulatory In this kindred, the ratio of normal to abnormal individuals born to G-protein, Gs. Associated clinical features include short stature, balanced carriers is believed to be 1:1.5. This suggests that the obesity, brachymetaphalangia, ectopic ossifications and learning recurrence risk for carriers is at least as great as 50%. disability. Inheritance is autosomal dominant but modified by genomic imprinting. Maternal transmission is associated with the endocrine P0208. A Variant of Whistling Face Syndrome or A New features of pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHPIa) whereas paternal Syndrome?: A Case Report transmission is usually not (pseudo-pseudohypoparathyroidism, M. Ikbal, A. Tastekin, R. Ors, B. Erdogmus; PPHP). Ataturk Universty, Erzurum, Turkey. GNAS1 comprises 13 exons and the imprinting appears to be tissue We present a 4-hour old male infant born at term to healthy parents specific. However, 3 discrete upstream exons (NESP55, XLAS, exon who related as first cousins, with spontaneous vaginal delivery 118 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 119 after an uncomplicated pregnancy. His weight, length and head malformation was observed. Causal parental pericentric inversion circumference were 2250 g, 43 cm and 33 cm, respectively. The was reported in a number of cases with similar breakpoints, but boy showed immobile face, hypertelorism, blepharophimosis, the children were mostly severely affected with short survival. This antimongoloid eye slant, bulging cheeks, small nose, small mouth, report should draw attention to some interesting details: (i) Loss of symmetric clenched fingers, camptodactyly, ulnar deviation of the most distal region of 3p may be noticed without phenotypic effect the hands. These clinical findings suggested ‘’Whistling Face (Knight, J Med Genet 1995).(ii) Prediction of the phenotype seems Syndrome’’. In addition, intrauterine growth retardation, microcephaly, difficult even in well-described conditions like 3qter-syndrome (iii) In a microphthalmos, micrognathia, bilateral incomplet choanal atresia, given pericentric inversion, survival would be more probable in great laryngomalasia, low and malforme ears, short neck, wide spaced duplication plus a small subtelomeric deletion than vice versa. nipples, pelvicaliectasia, uretheral dilatation, absence of one costa, sandal gap and weak primitive reflexes were determined. P0211. Trigonocephaly and associated urinary anomalies Chromosomal analysis was normal (46, XY). We suggested that this in mother and son patient is a variant of Whistling Face Syndrome or a new syndrome L. C. Enache1, I. Dimofte2, P. D. Balaban3, R. Airinei4, A. Popa2, V. Broasca Madar5; P0209. Blepharophimosis to craniostenosis: the human 1Cell and Molecular Biology Deparment, UMF “Gr.T.Popa”, Iasi, and murine phenotypic spectrum related to TWIST Romania, 2Medical Genetics Department, Faculty of Medicine, haploinsufficiency Constanta, Romania, 3Biochemistry Department, Faculty of Medicine, H. Dollfus1, G. Kumaramanickavel2, P. Biswas3, C. Stoetzel4, R. Constanta, Romania, 4Faculty of Medicine, Constanta, Romania, Quillet4, M. Denton5, M. Maw5, F. Perrin-Schmitt4; 5Management and Public Health Department, Faculty of Medicine, 1IGBMC and Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France, 2Sankara Constanta, Romania. Nethralaya Medical Institution Research Foundation, Chennai, A mother and her son are described with neonatal trigonocephaly, India, 3Anadalok, Calcutta, India, 4IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, multiple suture synostosis; shallow orbits; unusual nose; deviation of 5Biochemistry Department, Dunedine, New Zealand. the terminal phalanges of fingers 1, 2 and 5; and broad toes which Introduction: The TWIST gene, a bHLH transcription factor, is radiologically may show duplication of the terminal phalanx. mutated in patients with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS). Twist Untreated, the condition leads to a disfiguring oxycephaly with null/+ mice have been found to reproduce the main clinical features hypotelorism. of SCS. This appears to be the first documented instance of autosomal The aim of this work is the analysis of the phenotypic spectrum dominant trigonocephaly. related to haploinsufficiency in the TWIST gene through the study of The importance of the minor anomalies in its recognition and its good a large Indian family and the observation of the murine phenotype. prognosis are emphasized. Material and Methods: The TWIST gene was a candidate gene in a large Indian family presenting with an autosomal dominant phenotype P0212. Clinical study of a case of Chondrodysplasia initially classified as Blepharophimosis-Epicanthus Inversus Punctata Conrady-Hunermann type Syndrome (BPES) linked to 7p21. C. Rusu1, I. Cernescu2, M. Volosciuc1, M. Covic1; The eyelid phenotype of twist null/+ mice bred on different genetic 1University of Medicine, Iasi, Romania, 2Children’s Hospital, Iasi, backgrounds was observed. Romania. Results: A new nonsense mutation, at codon 82, was detected for We are presenting a case of chondrodysplasia punctata Conradi- 16 members of the family (excluding the 7p21 locus as the second Hunermann type in order to illustrate this rare entity and discuss BPES locus as initially suggested). the importance of different features for the diagnosis, differential The clinical reappraisal of these 16 individuals carrying the mutation diagnosis and genetic counselling. identified a complete SCS phenotype for only 4 patients (25%). Our proband is a male infant, first child of a healthy, young, 75% of the patients did not show craniostenosis, 25% had a unrelated couple, first examined in the Maternity Hospital (4 days phenotype considered to be normal and 75% of the patients had old). Clinical features: mild dysproportionate short stature (short eyelid anomalies. Isolated eyelid anomalies, without any cranial limbs with contractures); dysmorphic face (coarse face, frontal anomalies, were also observed on Twist null/+ mice bred on a mixed bossing, flat, broad nose, macrostoma, abnormal ears); ichthiosiform background. erithroderma with curled, linear distribution, keratotic papules Conclusions: The clinical analysis of the Indian family confirms the (fingers and toes); club foot. 7 months later physical examination wide variability of the phenotype related to TWIST haploinsufficiency showed: dysproportionate short stature (short limbs, rhizomelic ranging form a normal phenotype, an isolated eyelid malformation segment mainly affected), the same dysmorphic face, depigmented to severe craniostenosis. In parallel, the wide phenotypic variability curled linear areas of skin (trunk, abdomen and limbs), follicular was also observed in twist-null/+ mice bred on different genetic atrophoderma and bilateral club foot (ortopedically treated). X-ray backgrounds. investigation: stippled calcifications (proximal humeral epiphyse and sacral area), short humeral and femoral bone and delayed P0210. Dup(3)(q26>qter) & del(3)(pter>p25) Due ossification of the femoral head. Karyotype: 46,XY. We have To Paternal Pericentric Inv(3) But With Phenotypic established the diagnosis of chondrodysplasia punctata Conradi- Abnormalities Not Consistent With Both Well-known Hunermann type. Detailed positive diagnosis, differential diagnosis (of dysproportionate short stature and linear ichthiosiform erithroderma) Clinical Syndromes - A Case Report and problems of the genetic counselling will be provided. R. Puttinger1, G. Kronberger1, J. Kraus2, M. R. Speicher2, O. In conclusion, we present a case of chondrodysplasia punctata Rittinger1; Conradi-Hunermann type (AD) to discuss different diagnostic 1Klinische Genetik, Landeskinderklinik, Salzburg, Austria, 2Institut für aspects. Humangenetik, TU, Muenchen, Germany. Cytogenetic studies remain the cornerstone in defining mental retardation syndromes associated with dysmorphic features. P0213. Molecular Analysis In Patients With Mayer- Chromosome 3 structural aberrations to a considerable extent result Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser Syndrome from unbalanced recombinations. We report on a 5 year old boy J. Zenteno1, S. Carranza-Lira2, S. Kofman-Alfaro3; who by detailed cytogenetic procedures was diagnosed as having a 1Genetics,Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Hosp distal deletion 3p as well as a duplication (3)(q26>qter) due to a large “Luis Castelazo Ayala” IMSS, Mexico City, Mexico, 3Hospital General pericentric inv(3) inherited from his father. In addition to conventional de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico. karyotyping, final diagnosis was achieved using multiprobe telomer Müllerian agenesis, also known as Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser testing (Cytocell) and region-specific FISH probes. Theoretically our syndrome (MRKHS) is the second most common cause of primary patient should express both the partial dup (3)(q26>qter) and the amenorrhea. The syndrome involves the absence of the fallopian deletion (3)(p25>pter) syndromes. In contrast we noted a mild but tubes, the uterus, and the upper third of the vagina in otherwise apparent dysmorphic pattern with distinct features - square face, normally developed females. To date the etiology has not been temporal indentation, broad eyebrows, full cheeks, bulbous nose, and elucidated and the search for molecular variants in these patients full lips - suggestive of a mitigated partial dup 3p syndrome. No major has been focused to genes involved in the Müllerian regression Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 120 121 system. We present the results of molecular studies in the AMH, AMH the proposita. receptor, and GALT (galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase)genes A bone marrow dysplasia is documented, and could represent a in a group of 12 Mexican patients with MRKHS. Methods: DNA major aspect of the karyotype/phenotype correlation, and of the extraction from blood leukocytes, PCR amplification of all exons and prognostic problems for this child. all exon/intron junctions of the AMH and AMHR genes, and PCR amplification of exon 10 of GALT. Results: No mutations were found P0216. Identification of a TP63 gene R298Q mutation in a in any of the patients in the AMH or AMHR. However, we identified family with EEC/ADULT syndrome phenotype. 5 new polymorphisms: two in intron 6 of the AMHR gene, 1 in exon E. Spadoni1, H. van Bokhoven2, H. Scheffer2, C. De Giacomo3, C. 1 of the AMH gene, and two in exon 5 of the AMH gene. All three Danesino1; polymorphisms in the AMH gene change the encoded aminoacid. 1Università degli Studi di Pavia - Dip. Patologia Umana ed Ereditaria - When compared with 30 control alleles AMH exon 1 polymorphism Sez. Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2Department showed a preliminar association with the disease. The GALT N314D of Human Genetics - University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen, allele, previously associated with the disease, was observed only Netherlands, 3Clinica Pediatrica - IRCCS San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. in one of our patients. These results demonstrate that mutations G.N., a boy, presented at birth with: absence of right hand middle at the AMH or AMHR genes are not a common cause of MRKHS. finger, skin syndactyly of feet, polydactyly of right foot and bilateral Polymorphisms at the AMH or AMHR genes may contribute to obstruction of tear ducts. At physical examination, at 4 years of age, develop the phenotype. we noted an albinism-like appearance with very lightly pigmented hair and skin, dryness of skin and high photosensitivity, brittle and P0214. Maternal Heterodisomy for chromosome 14, dysplastic nails with pitting, hypoplasic teeth and hypoplastic nipples. and 13/14 Robertsonian Translocation, in a female He suffers from chronic conjunctivitis. His mother, C.R. (who had with normal mental development, short stature and never been investigated before), presented: dry and lightly pigmented dysmorphic features skin with high photosensitivity and “dermatitis-like” lesions of face and L. Giunti, E. Lapi, S. Guarducci, U. Ricci, A. Cecconi, E. Andreucci, hands, brittle and dysplastic nails with pitting and dysplastic teeth with M. Ottaviani, M. L. Giovannucci Uzielli; absence of a permanent canine tooth. She now has dark blonde hair University of Florence, Firenze, Italy. but she had lighter hair in childhood. She also suffers from chronic Maternal Uniparental Disomy for chromosome 14 was reported conjunctivitis. The clinical phenotype we observed in G.N. suggested in the literature in about ten subjects, after the first description by differential diagnosis between EEC (ectrodactily, ectodermal Temple in 1991. A distinct maternal UPD(14) phenotype is emerging dysplasia, cleft lip/palate) and ADULT (acro-dermato-ungual-lacrimal- from the published data, but the clinical spectrum is only partially tooth) syndromes. According to autosomal dominant inheritance and homogeneous. variable expressivity, recognized for both syndromes, we thought We report on a new case of maternal heterodisomy for chromosome C.R. could be mildly affected be the same disorder of his son. TP63 14 in a thirty years old female, referred to our Centre, with her gene (3q27) mutations have recently been identified in patients husband, for genetic counseling aimed to procreation. with either EEC or ADULT syndrome. Mutation analysis in this gene Physical examination of the proposita showed a completely normal revealed a heterozygous R298Q mutation in both the patient and mental development, with short stature recalling hypochondroplasia, his mother. The same mutation had been previously identified in a but associated with unrelated dysmorphic features. large ADULT syndrome family. The proband and his mother, and Cytogenetic analysis showed a balanced, de novo, Robertsonian other family members who are likely to be equally affected, will be translocation 45,XX,der(13;14). Based on the cytogenetic results, we further investigated to better define clinical diagnosis and genotype- performed the molecular analysis for UPD (14), by using a battery of phenotype correlation. microsatellites markers in the lymphocites DNA of the proposita and her parents. P0217. Report of a Rare Case of Fibula Aplasia and A maternal heterodisomy for chromosome 14 was demonstrated by Complex Brachydactyly several informative markers, derived from different regions of short M. Kheirollahi, B. Azadeh; and long arms: we confirmed these results by means of a paternity Medical Genetics Counselling Center, Welfare Organization, Isfahan, testing with normal biparental contribution. FISH analysis was also Islamic Republic of Iran. completed. From the clinical point of view, of special interest is the This fact that there is not fibula in the human body is one of the long and well documented natural history of this patient, that adds clinical signs of several rare syndromes which is often autosomal new elements to the clinical spectrum of this rare disorder. We also recessive. The case of study is a four-year-old girl in whom this report data on the skeletal morphology and development, and clinical fact that there is not the bi-directional fibula has been observed. No phenotype at different ages. mental retardation is observed in this child. In radiographic studies no fibula as well as phalanges and P0215. De novo partial duplication of chromosome 15, metacarpus are visible in the child’s right hand. The tibia bones are resulting from an unbalanced translocation of an extra very short. The family pedigree of this child shows that her parents had family marriage with the relative of aunt’s son-aunt’s daughter segment 15p13-q22 on the short arm of a chromosome 8, (F=1/16). But, no other similar case wase observed in the family. in a child with severe and global development delay This case was compared with fibula aplasia and complex S. Guarducci, L. Giunti, U. Ricci, E. Lapi, A. Cecconi, S. Coviello, I. brachydactyly (MIM: 228900). As a result, though there were many Sani, I. Giotti, M. L. Giovannucci Uzielli; similarities, some differences were observed in this case. University of Florence, Firenze, Italy. The proposita is a newborn female of Albanian origin, referred at age P0218. Detection of 5FU-toxicity-related variants in the 23 days, for severe prenatal and postnatal growth, “anaemia” and dysmorphic features. DPYD gene by denaturing HPLC. Cytogenetic analysis showed, in all metaphases of the proposita, E. Gross1, K. Seck1, S. Neubauer1, H. Hellebrand2, A. Meindl2, S. an abnormal short arm of chromosome 8, with the presence of extra Riemer3, J. Mayr3, V. Lutz3, M. Kiechle1; material of unknown origin, translocated on the 8p23 band. The 1Dept. of Gynecology, Technical University, Munich, Germany, chromosomes of the parents were normal. 2Medizinische Genetik, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Molecular cytogenetic analysis was performed to characterise this Germany, 3Roche Diagnostics, Penzberg, Germany. chromosomal rearrangement. FISH, using a chromosome 8 and A decreased dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) activity chromosome 15 painting probes, demonstrated an apparently has been described in cancer patients with intolerance to the pure, partial Trisomy of chromosome 15. Molecular analysis, using fluoropyrimidine anticancer drug 5-fluoro-uracil (5FU). So far, 17 microsatellite DNA markers mapping to the short and long arms of inherited mutations probably related to this impaired enzyme function chromosome 15, showed that the duplication was of maternal origin. were found in the DPYD gene. We performed a research-based Proximal Trisomy 15q is a rare disorder and the clinical spectrum population study to unravel new mutations and to get sufficient data is not well characterised. Microcephaly and cardiac malformation, to determine genotype-phenotype relations in the DPD deficiency described a few times, are also present in this new patient. syndrome. The entire coding region and the exon/intron boundaries of Mental retardation is to be expected: it is not yet well assessable in the DPYD gene were screened by denaturing HPLC (DHPLC). DPD 120 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 121 protein levels were quantitatively analyzed by ELISA and DPD mRNA reported by Ohdo et al. (1986). The exact aetiology of this syndrome levels were determined by using a DPD mRNA Quantification Kit. has not been established yet. Here we report two new unrelated Several polymorphisms and intron variants were frequently detected cases of OBS and review the literature. in 160 German individuals. The 85T>C mutation as well as the Both our patients had moderate developmental delay, peculiar facies 1601G>A substitution, both controversially discussed as mutations with blepharophimosis, ptosis, broad nasal bridge, flat nasal tip, flat with relation to 5FU-toxicity in the literature, could be detected in philtrum, small mouth, and low-set dysplastic ears, and muscular various individuals with normal DPD protein level and additionally hypotonia in neonatal period. in a patient showing toxic reactions under CMF chemotherapy. Case 1 was born prematurely on 35th week of pregnancy with Finally, the splice mutation IVS14+1G>A and the frameshift mutation proportionate failure to thrive (-3.0 SD). Soon after the birth the heart 296delTCAT which result in truncated proteins devoid of activity were defect was diagnosed (supravalvular aortic and pulmonary stenosis). found in the heterozygous state in our population study. The data Clinical evaluation at age 4.5 years showed proportionate failure to are correlated with DPD protein- and DPD mRNA expression level. thrive (-3.0 SD). Her teeth were peg-like, irregular and with dysplastic The rapid and sensitive screening of cancer patients for mutations enamel. Clinodactyly of 5th fingers was also observed. associated with 5FU-intolerance might be useful prior to the onset of Case 2 was born at term with low birth weight (-3.0 SD). She chemotherapy because the risk for 5FU-related toxicity is not entirely had probably some alcohol exposure during the pregnancy. Our rare. We show that the DHPLC technology could be a reliable tool for examination at age 7 years revealed failure to thrive (-2.5 SD), mutation detection in pharmacogenetics. microcephaly (-4.0 SD), high palate, dental hypoplasia, hypertrophic gingivitis, bilateral cross-bite, anterior open bite, ear canal stenosis, P0219. A third case of progressive macrocephaly with and café au lait spot. dilated Virchow-Robin spaces on MRI Overall 16 cases have been described until now. Our patients show G. Viot; similar features to the previously reported patients with OBS. All Unité de Génétique Clinique, Maternité Port-Royal, Paris, France. previously described had blepharophimosis and developmental We report the case of a boy referred for a quickly progressive delay. The second most common finding was dental abnormalities. macrocephaly. He was the first child of young non-consanguineous Features, occurred in two-third of the cases, were ptosis, broad and healthy parents. The family history was unremarkable. and/or flat nasal bridge, distinctive nasal tip, dysmorphic and/or small Clinical evaluation revealed at 6 months of age a head circumference ears, failure to thrive and muscular hypotonia. (HC) at +5 SD whereas the HC was +2 SD at birth. Neurologic exam was normal except a minor axial hypotonia. Neither associated P0222. CATCH phenotype: 6 cases from Estonia, three dysmorphic features nor delayed motor development were noted at confirmed by FISH this time. No signs of intracranial pressure were present. Magnetic R. Jordania1, O. Bartsch2, T. Zõrjanova1, L. Kallas1, E. Rattasep1, K. resonance images showed prominent Virchow-Robin spaces Uibo1; in occipital regions without increased size of the ventricles or 1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Institut für Klinische involvement of the cerebral white matter. This pattern is usually a sign Genetik, Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany. of storage disease but after investigations, there was no argument The CATCH phenotype (Cardiac abnormalities, Abnormal face, in favor of lysosomal disorder or muco/oligosaccharidosis. We also Thymic hypoplasia, Cleft palate, Hypocalcemia) comprises excluded a mitochondrial disorder. developmental defects of the 3rd and 4th pharyngeal pouches and The present case appears similar to those reported by Artigas et other areas. Frequency is 1 in 4000 live births. Clinical signs are al. in 1999, which exhibited a progressive macrocephaly with an highly variable. About 90% of affecteds demonstrate the typical 22q11 onset in the first year of life, dilated Virchow-Robin (DVR) spaces deletion, which in 10-20% of cases may be inherited. - We report on within the white matter of the cerebral convexities and normal 6 unrelated infants, age newborn to one year, who showed clinical neurodevelopmental status. Our reported case agrees with the signs of the CATCH phenotype and were seen at Tallinn Childrens hypothesis that macrocephaly with DVR can be considered as a Hospital. Complications during pregnancy (drug,alcohol abuse, new entity. Follow-up of our very young patient in the future will be threatened abortion) occurred in 4 families. All subjects demonstrated necessary to confirm the good neurological prognosis of this entity. dysmorphic signs. Five had a congenital heart defect (truncus arteriosus communis [3 cases]; tetralogy of Fallot; combined ASD P0220. Molecular genetic delineation of de novo 7p11-p14 and VSD). In one child, thymus aplasia was observed during cardiac deletions in Greig syndrome surgery. Two out of three investigated probands showed reduced E. Petek1, C. Windpassinger1, S. W. Scherer2, K. Wagner1, P. M. numbers of T and B lymphocytes. Hypocalcemia was observed in Kroisel1; 5 children. - FISH studies were performed in 4 children using a set 1University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Hospital for Sick Children, of 4 DNA probes, (i) BAC 201c11 that detects the common large Toronto, ON, Canada. and the proximal 22q11 deletion (area, HIRA/D22S553/D22S609), We have identified six children with a de novo deletion (ii) BAC 219g6 detecting the common large but not the proximal involving the chromosomal band 7p13 associated with Greig 22q11 deletion (area, HCF2), (iii) BAC 384d8 (ARSA, 22q13, cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) and various other clinical reference probe) and (iv) PAC 323N1 that detects the DGS2 area features. Here we want to focus on the delineation of the phenotype on chromosome 10p14. Three children demonstrated the typical in all patients in particular on those symptoms, that are not typically common large 22q11 deletion.For diagnostic purposes and genetic related to GCPS like a moderate psychomotor retardation, seizures, counselling, we now aim to maintain a stringent policy of studying all muscle fibre anomalies, cardiac anomalies, hyperglycaemia or our patients with probably CATCH phenotype for the presence of the hirsutism. We studied genotype-phenotype correlation in our patients, 22q11 deletion. by using the combination of classic cytogenetics, FISH, and the analysis of polymorphic DNA markers. All deletion breakpoints were P0223. Juvenile Hyalin Fibromatosis in three sibs from a precisely mapped and based on these results in combination with consanguineous family: Clinical, histopathological and genomic sequence data available by now, we were able to identify imminohistochemical findings several candidate genes mapped to the deleted chromosomal S. Balci1, S. Kulacoglu2, O. Senoz3, I. Vargel4, Y. Erk4, S. Onder5, A. segments. Gokoz5, A. N. Akarsu6; This research was supported by grant #9522 from the 1Hacettepe University, Department of Clinical Genetics, Ankara, Oesterreichischen Nationalbank to E.P Turkey, 2Numune State Hospital, Department of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey, 3Numune State Hospital, Department of Plastic and P0221. Ohdo blepharophimosis syndrome: report of two Reconstructive Surgery, Ankara, Turkey, 4Hacettepe University, new unrelated cases and review of literature Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Ankara, Turkey, K. Õunap, 19641, R. Zordania2, P. Laidre3, R. Nõmmela4; 5Hacettepe University, Department of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey, 1Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tallinn Children’s Hospital, 6Hacettepe University, Gene Mapping Laboratory, Ankara, Turkey. Tallinn, Estonia, 3Infants’Home of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Clinics of Juvenile hyalin fibromatosis (JHF; Murray-Puretic-Drescher Stomatology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Syndome; OMIM #228600) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder Ohdo blepharophimosis syndrome (OBS) is a rare condition first characterized by progressive tumors in the skin and scalp, flexion Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 122 123 contractures of joints. We have observed a consanguineous family of 90 patients (2-17 years) were evaluated over a period of 3 years. from Urfa, Turkey with three affected (8 and 3 years old boys and Growth pattern of these patients was compared with New and Old 1 year old girl) and two normal sibs. All affected sibs were normal Indian growth Standards and thalassemic patients from New Delhi. at birth. Flexion contractures and multiple subcutaneous fibrous Results: Growth pattern of patients shows that they were significantly tumors initiated in a range in between two months to 4 years of shorter than New Indian Growth Standards . There was no significant life. The hyalin tumors were distributed in the scalp, face, ear cup, difference between height and weight of our patients and thalassemic chin, back and legs. These lessions progressively enlarged and patients from New Delhi. Although our patients above the age of 11 later ulcerated. All sibs had severe growth and motor retardation. years were short, the prepubertal patients were taller and heavier Histopathological evaluation of these masses revealed homogenous than 35 years old Indian growth Standards. This suggests that our eosinophilic matrix with single cells or cords of spindle shaped patients are experiencing secular trend in height and weight. cells. Histochemically, the extracellular matrix was periodic acid Conclusion: We attribute gain in height and weight to better treatment schiff (PAS) positive and diastase resistant.Alcian blue, toluidin regime. Better treatment and management can improve growth of blue and congo red were negative. In reticulin preperation, the TM patients. However, this is possible provided financial support from cellular areas were rich with reticulin fibers. Immunohistochemically, national and international agencies is available. vimentin was strongly expressed in both spindle shaped and single round cells. In some areas, these cells also showed actin positivity P0226. Molecular characterization of an inv(6)(p12q16) in suggesting myofibroblastic nature. Altogether these findings support a girl with CHAR syndrome JHF diagnosis. Interestingly, myeloid cells show an apparent M. Valduga1, C. Philippe1, V. Bourdon1, C. Marchal2, C. Ragage3, P. intracytoplasmic vacualization in these patients. Neither a locus or a Jonveaux1; gene have been reported for JHF as yet. Investigating homozygosity 1Laboratory of Human Genetics, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, in inbred families is a very efficient tool to identify new genetic 2Department of Pediatrics, Thionville, France, 3Department of localizations. Thus, this family with 10 informative meiosis will be a Radiology, Metz, France. good source to identify JHF locus using homozygosity mapping. CHAR syndrome, first described in 1978, is an autosomal dominant disorder comprising facial dysmorphy, digital abnormalities and P0224. Parkes - Weber - Klippel - Trenaunay Syndrome patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). Facial dysmorphy seems to be the M. Kuklik1,2, J. Spatenka3, I. Marik4; major criterion to establish clinical diagnosis: wide-set eyes, ptosis, 11st and 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Prague 5, Czech Republic, strabismus, flat nasal bridge, short philtrum, large triangular mouth 2Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Faculty Hospital Motol, with duck-bill lips, low-set ears). An incomplete penetrance of the Cardiological Centre, Prague 5, Czech Republic, 4Out - Patient´s patent ductus arteriosus is observed in several families, intelligence Dept. of Orthopaedics, Prague 3, Czech Republic. is usually normal. Missense mutations with dominant negative effect The syndrom Parkes - Weber - Klippel - Trenaunay is a heterogenic in the TFAP-2ß gene localized in 6p12 were recently described. clinical unit of hemihypetrophia of the limb and the adequate part TFAP-2ß encodes a transcription factor expressed in neural crest of body, angiodysplastic changes with varices and other facultative cells, it was shown that this gene is also involved in ductal, facial characteristics. and limb development in the mouse. We report the case of a young Hemangiomatosis and affections of the skin, soft tissues and woman born in 1978 who presents with a typical CHAR syndrome adjacent bones and a partial hypertrophy (mainly of the lower limbs) facial dysmorphy without any cardiac anomalies. The karyotype are the substance of the disease. shows a pericentric inv(6)(p12q16), the breakpoint on 6p is located The Parkes - Weber - Klippel - Trenaunay syndrome is an associated within the region 6p12 harboring the TFAP-2ß gene. Using FISH, mesodermal and ectodermal dysplasia of congenital and polygenic we have demonstrated that the TFAP-2ß locus is disrupted by the character. 6p12 breakpoint, however we did not detect any junction fragment by The authors investigated the group of 23 patients with this diagnosis Southern blot analysis with the TFAP-2ß cDNA. We assume that the for a long period of time. There were provided the complex pediatric breakpoint is close but outside the TFAP-2ß coding region, the use and genetic examinations, including genealogy and anthropometry. of pulse field gel electrophoresis should clarify this point. This young Phenotypic characteristics of this biomechanically important disease woman recently underwent amniocentesis for prenatal chromosome were photographically documented. analysis for her first pregnancy. The foetus inherited the maternal The genealogic examination found the microsymptoms in the inv(6)(p12q16) and ultrasonic scan showed the same phenotype as families, such as varices cruris. observed in the mother (facial dysmorphy without cardiac anomalies). The genetic examination has a specific position in the complex of the clinical examinations. It estimates the risk of the affection in offsprings P0227. Syndactyly type-I: study of six large Indian and brothers and sisters, i.e. the relatives of the 1st. degree. pedigrees with variable expression The majority of the cases were isolated with good genetic prognosis. U. Radhakrishna1, U. Ratnamala1, U. Chalapathi Rao1, K. Sudhakara Rarely we found the transmission in two generations with remarkable Rao1, M. Ravindrababu1, U. Radhakrishna1, J. V. Solanki2; deviations. 1Green Cross Blood Bank & Genetic Centre, Ahmedabad, India, The patients are often treated for other /symptomatic/ diagnosis. 2Department of Animal Genetics & Breeding, Veterinary college, Biomechanical and therapeutical aspects of the disease are Gujarat Agriculture University, Anand, India. discussed. Hereditary syndactyly was classified into five different types. Syndactyly type-I (SDTY1) (OMIM 185900) involves complete or P0225. Secular Trend: Better Growth Of Indian partial bilateral syndactyly between third and fifth fingers which Thalassemia Major Patients Compared To Old Indian is occasionally associated with fusion of the distal phalanges. Growth Standards Feet are rarely affected. It may be an isolated condition. The A. Saxena1, S. R. Phadke2; genes responsible for SDTY1 and SDTY2 have been mapped to 1Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institue of Medical Sciences, chromosome 2q34-q36 (Am J Hum Genet 67:492-97, 2000; Am Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India, 2Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute J Med Genet 104:147-151, 2001 and 2q31 (Hum Molec Genet 4: of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India. 1453-1458,1995), respectively.We have studied six large Indian Beta Thalssemia major is one of the commonest single gene disorder pedigrees with an autosomal dominant SDTY1. Pedigrees consist in India with a mean prevalence of 3.5 %. Short stature and delayed of 157 individuals, including 65 affected (31-males/34 females). puberty, which affect individual’s personal image, are common Severity of the phenotype was quite variable among the families complications associated with thalassemia major (TM) patients. Such and no skipping of generation was observed. In five families, 39 problems have psychological implications which deter an individual members were bilaterally affected with typical features of syndactyly from participating in peer group activities. In developing countries, type-1 affecting the 3rd and 4th fingers and 18 members had only thalassemic patients are at a high risk of developing endocrine unilateral findings. Few of these also had unilateral partial syndactyly deficiencies and hence growth failure. We evaluated growth pattern of 2nd and 3rd toes. In the sixth family, complete unilateral or bilateral of TM patients to see if they are experiencing secular trend in height syndactyly affecting 3rd, 4th and 5th fingers was observed. Few of and weight as has been observed in the world populations. the affecteds in this family had unilateral elongation of 2nd and 3rd Material: Height, weight, serum ferritin and pretransfusion hemoglobin toes with syndacytly. Phalangeal bones were not affected in any of 122 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 123 these families, eventhough the nails are involved in 15 affecteds. involved with other chromosomal partners. This observation will help Linkage studies with markers closely linked to SDTY1 and SDTY2 will establish the correlation of this critical chromosomal region and the either confirm allelism to these loci or provide evidence for genetic clinical features. heterogeneity. P0230. A new case of terminal 2q37 deletion diagnosed in P0228. Aortic root dilatation is not demonstrated in EDS adulthood. patients. L. Pasquier1, K. Fourcade1, C. Henry2, F. Le Mee2, S. Odent1; J. De Backer, B. Loeys, F. Malfait, M. De Pauw, D. Mathys, A. De 1Service de Génétique Médicale Hôpital Pontchaillou, Rennes, Paepe; France, 2Laboratoire de Cytogénétique CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. France. EDS (Ehlers Danlos Syndrome) is commonly mentioned in the Among terminal 2q37 deletion, very few cases (Reddy et al 1999) context of heritable connective tissue diseases with cardiac have already been described in adulthood. We report on one young involvement. Among these abnormalities aortic root dilatation is female, 19 years old, with mild mental delay, obesity, joint hyperlaxity. frequently reported. Unlike in Marfan patients, where aortic root The diagnosis was suspected because of dysmorphic features dilatation is one of the major criteria, literature data in EDS patients leading to Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy (AHO) - like phenotype. are controversial. The phosphocalcic level and routine resolution karyotype were We report on aortic root diameter measurement with normal in blood, but this de novo 2q37 deletion was confirmed by a echocardiography in a prospective cohort of 40 patients with specific subtelomeric 2q probe (FISH). established EDS. According to the clinical criteria from the This patient might help us to give more specific informations, as Villefranche Nosology (1) 6 were classified with classical EDS, 23 medical follow-up, to parents of an affected young child, even if the with hypermobile EDS and 11 with vascular EDS. range of clinical findings is wide. In fact, we compare our patient with The mean age of the patients was 24.7 (4-41) yrs and 30% were cases already reported in litterature. male. Mean BSA was 1.54m² Mean aortic diameter at the sinuses of Valsalva was 26.9mm (SD P0231. Glomuvenous Malformation (“glomangioma”) Is A 4.6mm). Mean aortic diameter at the supra-aortic ridge was 23.8mm Distinct Clinicopathologic And Genetic Entity (SD 3.69mm). L. Boon1,2, J. Mulliken3, O. Enjolras4, M. Vikkula2; For each patient we compared the aortic root diameter with the 1Division of Plastic Surgery, Center for Vascular Anomalies, Cliniques population based norms (Roman et al (2)). None of the patients universitaires St-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, showed aortic dilatation at the sinuses of Valsalva. One 17y old Belgium, 2Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Christian de female patient with hypermobile EDS had an aortic diameter at the Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology, Université catholique de Louvain, supra-aortic ridge that was slightly higher than 2SD Brussels, Belgium, 3Division of Plastic Surgery, Center for Vascular In conclusion, we could not demonstrate aortic root dilatation in our Anomalies, Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, 4Consultation des series of 40 patients with EDS. This is important with respect to the Angiomes, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France. management and genetic counselling in EDS. Longitudinal follow Glomuvenous malformation (“glomangioma”) (GVM) is a cutaneous up studies are necessary to evaluate the evolution of aortic root vascular lesion histologically characterized by ectatic vein-like diameters in this patient group. channels with mural “glomus cells”. Discovery of the molecular 1. Beighton et al, Am J Med Genet;77(1):31-7. basis for GVM permitted delineation of the clinical phenotype and 2. Roman et al, American journal of cardiology;64(8):507-12. comparisons between GVM and other venous anomalies. Clinical data based on physical examination, and review of medical P0229. Clinical phenotype of a familial translocation records and clinical slides was compiled for 1716 patients with t(3 ;5)(p23 ;p14) with partial trisomy 3p2 and partial inherited or sporadic venous anomalies. Diagnosis was histologically monosomy 5p. and/or genetically confirmed for all inherited venous lesions and Y. Alembik1, E. Ginglinger2, C. Lagier-Tourenne3, E. Flori3, F. Girard- most sporadic lesions. The data were statistically analyzed using the Lemaire3, E. Jeandidier2; Fisher’s exact test (two-tailed) with SYSTAT software (version 10, 1Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 2Centre Hospitalier, http:// www.spssscience.com/systat). Mulhouse, France, 3Hôpital de Hautepierre, Laboratoire de We identified 30 patients with sporadic GVM, 105 with inherited GVM, Cytogénétique, Strasbourg, France. 1548 with sporadic venous malformation (VM), and 33 with inherited Trisomy3p and monosomy 5p are characterized by facial mucocutaneous venous malformation (CMVM). GVMs, accounting for dysmorphism, mental retardation and malformations. 5% of venous anomalies, were frequently inherited (78%), whereas We report two siblings with partial trisomy 3p2 and partial monosomy venous malformations were rarely familial (2%). GVMs always 5p. involved skin and subcutis, in contrast to CMVMs and VMs (p<0,001). The first baby was a stillborn female with pulmonary hypoplasia, GVMs had a distinct raised cobblestone appearance. Trauma intrauterine growth retardation. She presented with facial was reported as an inciting factor for appearance of new lesion by dysmorphism, flat face, hypertelorism, large anterior fontanel, patients with inherited GVM (p=0,007), in contrast to patients with almond-shaped eyes, simian palmar crease, abnormal cerebral CMVM. None of the patients with extensive GVM presented with maturation, hepatomegaly and bilateral renal cysts. Familial history coagulopathy, in contrast to patients with large VM. was negative. This is the largest series of patients with cutaneous venous The second child was a male born with hypotrophy, auricular anomalies. It establishes clinical criteria for differential diagnosis septal defect, genital hypoplasia, cryptorchidism and hypospadias, between GVM and other subtypes of venous anomalies. This microcephaly, partial corpus callosum agenesis and brachydactyly. differential diagnosis is essential as the treatment and outcome are Facial dysmorphism was obvious with a flat face, hypertelorism, different. (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be) large forehead, small nose, short filtrum, thick everted inferior lip, microretrognathia, short neck, and dysplastic ears. At the age of 6 P0232. Inherited Capillary Malformation Is Associated years, he had a severe mental retardation, no language but a normal With A High Flow Vascular Malformation growth. L. Boon1, J. Mulliken2, A. Bataille1, B. Lengele3, G. Vittu4, R. Both cases in the same family were suggestive of a cryptic Vanwijck5, M. Vikkula6; chromosomal anomaly as the standard caryotype was normal. 1Center for Vascular Anomalies, Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, Extensive metabolic screening was normal but high resolution Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Division caryotype with incorporated BrDU revealed a cryptic translocation of Plastic Surgery, Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, 3Center for confirmed by 3 and 5 chromosomal painting and specific FISH, due to Vascular Anomalies, Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, a non-balanced translocation transmitted by the maternal grandfather Belgium, 4Division of Neonatology, Hôpital Pédiatrique Saint-Antoine, : 46, XY, der(5)t(3 ;5)(p23 ;p14)mat) Universite catholique de Lille, Lille, France, 5Center for Vascular We compared the clinical phenotype to other trisomy 3p and Anomlies, Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, monosomy 5p cases and observed marked trisomy 3p2 clinical 6Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Chrsitian de Duve Institute features as described in other cases where this region is also Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 124 125 of Cellular Pathology, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, 5 females), aged 2 to 25 years, by FISH, using 12 BAC probes Belgium. covering the 12q21.2q22 region at average intervals of about 1 Mb. Capillary malformation (CM) is a common cutaneous vascular The patients presented with mental retardation (17/17), typical facial anomaly occurring in 0,3% of neonates. Except for rare reports of appearance, with high forehead, bitemporal constriction, bulbous familial nuchal CM (“stork bite”), CM is considered sporadic. Clinical nose, low set and posteriorly angulated ears, palpebral ptosis and diagnosis is usually straightforward, however, CM can masquerade downslanting eyes (17/17), ectodermal abnormalities, consisting a high-flow vascular lesion, i.e., stage one AVM or AVF. We identified of thin, sparse and curly hair, absent or sparse eyelashes and several families with inherited CM. We clinically examined each eyebrows, keratosis pilaris, or hyperkeratotic skin patches (17/17), family member, noted all vascular anomalies and collected informed speech delay (17/17), short stature (16/17), heart defect (14/17) consents and blood samples. and relative macrocephaly (12/17). No microdeletion was detected Inter- and intrafamilial variation was observed, from nuchal CM in any of the patients. Based on these results, we conclude that persisting throughout life and extending below the hairline, to solitary CFC syndrome is unlikely to be caused by a microdeletion in the or multiple CM disseminated all over the body. Seven of our families 12q21.2q22 region. We suggest that Rauen et al.’s case could with inherited CM had a member affected with a high-flow vascular represent a different chromosomal syndrome, with some phenotypic malformation: three with either AVM (n=2) or AVF (n=1). Four families resemblance to the CFC syndrome. had two members with AVM (n=8) including Parkes Weber syndrome (n=3), AVM with multiple CM (n= 3), and intraosseus AVM with P0235. Computer-Assisted Recognition of Syndromic cutaneous blush (n=1) or with extensive CM (n=1). Faces These data confirmed autosomal inheritance of CM. The high D. Wieczorek1, H. S. Loos2, C. von der Malsburg2, B. Horsthemke1; incidence of high-flow vascular malformations within families with 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitaetsklinikum Essen, Germany, inherited CM suggests genetic predisposition for AVM and/or AVF in 2Institut für Neuroinformatik, Ruhr-Universitaet Bochum, Germany. these families. (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be) Syndromes are often defined by a specific facial appearance. Experienced geneticists usually make a diagnosis through immediate P0233. Chromosomal aberration in a girl with pattern recognition. We have investigated how well a computer can craniosynostosis syndrome. do this. In view of the fact that patients with a syndrome look more M. Havlovicova1, M. Malikova1, V. Krutilkova1, D. Novotna1, M. similar than unrelated individuals do, we have chosen a pattern Simandlova1, A. Janda2, K. Michalova3, V. Brysova4, A. Baxova5, P. recognition program that was developed to identify a person by Goetz1; matching his face to faces stored in a database. It is not based 1UBLG,Prague Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 21st Children Clinic, on anthropometric measurements, but uses digital photographs Prague Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 33rd Medical Dpt., General of 256x256 pixels which are subjected to a Gabor Wavelet Faculty Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty of Charles University, Transformation to create a vector with 40 complex coefficients Prague, Czech Republic, 4Childrens Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech (jet) for every pixel. For the purpose of this study, each face was Republic, 5General Teaching Hospital of First Faculty of Medicine, automatically labeled with 48 nodes. The jets attached to each Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. node of a face were then compared to the jets of all nodes at the We describe a case of a girl with craniosynostosis syndrome and same fiducial points of every face in the data base (bunch graph). finding of chromosomal aberration. Classification was based on a majority decision of all analysed Fenotype: Severe failure to thrive, psychomotoric delay, hypotonia, nodes of a face (jet voting). Analysis of 32 innerfacial nodes from skull malformation ( craniosynostosis of sagittal and coronal sutures). 55 frontal view photographs of patients with mucopolysaccharidosis Facial features consists of severe coloboma of the right palpebrae, type III (n=6), Cornelia de Lange (n=12), fragile X (n=12), Prader- high prominent forehead and frontal bossing, flattened face with Willi (n=12), and Williams-Beuren syndrome (n=13) revealed correct beaked nose, long philtrum, narrow lips, dysplastic ears, preauricular syndrome recognition in 42/55 (76%) of the patients. In another four pit. Other features were clinodactyly of the fifth fingers, umbilical patients (7%), a correct and an incorrect diagnosis scored equally hernia, ventricular septal defect and optic nerve atrophy. well. Our results indicate that it may be feasible to develop a program In our index case a 46,XX, del (10) (q25-qter) was proven by which may aid the clinical diagnosis of genetic syndromes and the cytogenetic analysis. study of genetic variation of facial patterns. In this region gene FGFR2 is located , mutation of this gene results in various disorder: Crouzon sy, Pfeiffer sy, Jackson -Weiss, Apert sy, P0236. MPZ and PMP22 genes mutations in Croatian Seather Chotzen sy. patients We assume that the phenotype in our patient is in causal relationship B. Grskovic, G. Ferencak, A. Stavljenic-Rukavina; with the chromosomal 10 q deletion. However, cases previously Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis, Zagreb University School of reported in the literature had less dysmorphic features, than our Medicine and Clinical Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. propositus. Possible explanation of this observation will be discussed. Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is the most common genetic Molecular cytogenetic methods and DNA analysis of the critical disorder of the peripheral nervous system. The major CMT1 form region is further proceeding. is associated with 1.5 Mb tandem duplication in band 17p11.2-p12 containing the gene for the peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22). P0234. Cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome: molecular Point mutations have been found in PMP22, myelin protein zero aspects (MPZ) (CMT1B phenotype), connexin 32 (Cx32) (CMTX phenotype) M. I. Kavamura1,2, R. Lecce1, M. Zollino1, D. Brunoni2, J. M. Opitz3, and early-growth response 2 (EGR2) genes which have important G. Neri1; role in the CMT pathogenesis. 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Aim of this study was to investigate mutations in MPZ and PMP22 Rome, Italy, 2Centro de Genética Médica, Universidade Federal genes in Croatian patients with different neuromuscular and de Sao Paulo - Escola Paulista de Medicina, Sao Paolo, Brazil, neurodegenerative diseases. 3University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT. We employed single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome is a rare disorder described (SSCP) for mutational screening. PCR products with altered mobility by Reynolds et al.[1986] in eight unrelated patients with very patterns were sequenced to analyze the type of mutation. similar facial appearance, mental retardation, failure to thrive, A novel Ser8Ser mutation was found in exon 1 of the MPZ gene in congenital heart defect, short stature and ectodermal abnormalities. two heterozygous subjects, in a father with mild CMT2 phenotype All patients diagnosed with CFC syndrome are sporadic, born to and his daughter with normal clinical data. Thr118Met polymorphism non consanguineous parents and had normal chromosomes on was found in exon 5 of the PMP22 gene. For the first time we found conventional cytogenetics. heterozygosity for 118Met allele with nemalin myopathy. The second Rauen et al. [2000] reported on a patient with CFC phenotype and heterozygous patient for 118Met allele had CMT1 disease. an interstitial deletion of the 12q21.2q22 chromosome region. The We conclude that the occurrence of the 118Met allele does not authors concluded that a gene responsible for the CFC syndrome usually cause CMT1 and is not a clinically relevant disease marker. is likely to reside in this chromosome region. We looked for microdeletions within this region in 17 CFC patients (12 males and 124 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 125 P0237. Kabuki make-up syndrome in three Turkish P0240. Donohue syndrome (MIM 246200) in a boy with Patients 13q12.3-q21.2 deletion. F. Ozkinay, T. Cankaya, O. Cogulu, C. Ozkinay; D. Greco1, C. Cuoco2, M. Di Rocco2, C. Romano1; Ege University,Faculty of Medicine,Dept.of Pediatrics,Subdivision of 1Oasi Institute, Troina, Italy, 2G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy. Genetics and Teratology, Izmir, Turkey. We report on a boy showing features suggesting Donohue syndrome Three Turkish patients, a female and two males; 15, 8, 2 years of age (MIM 246200) and a deletion on 13q12.3-q21.2 region, seen by with Kabuki Make-up syndrome were reported. All three individuals standard karyotype. After an uneventful pregnancy from unrelated had the cardinal features of the syndrome such as motor and mental parents with a negative family history, he was born small for retardation, peculiar facies including long palpebral fissures, large gestational age. Developmental delay has been referred from the malformed ears, depressed nasal tips. Two cases showed postnatal very beginning. Failure to thrive not caused by celiac disease and growth retardation; one case had a history of recurrent otitis media, poor growth continued up to 3 years when a diagnosis of growth all they had normal chromosomal composition. In one of them hormone impairment was made. Before this diagnosis he had two pedigree analysis indicated that the condition showed autosomal sudden episodes of fasting hypoglicemia, which continued during dominant inheritance with variable expression. . treatment with recombinant growth hormone, up to the last one Additionally cranial MRI of one of them revealed hypoplasic corpus reported 4 months ago. We have observed him for the first time at collosum and periventricular leukomalasia which has not been the age of 7.9 years. He has moderate mental retardation, short described before in this syndrome. stature, long elfin-like face with large everted ears, thick lips and gum hypertrophy, joint hyperlaxity and wrinkled loose skin. Donohue P0238. Antigliadin antibodies and antiendomysial syndrome has been already associated to mutations in the insulin antibodies in Down syndrome children receptor gene, on 19p13.2. The 13q12.3 region is the breakpoint of O. Cogulu1, F. F. Ozkinay1, C. Gunduz1, T. Çankaya1, S. Aydogdu2, F. our deletion on the centromeric side, but also the region where the Ozgenc2, N. Kutukculer2, C. Ozkinay1; insulin-regulating transcription factor CDX3 (MIM 600297) maps. 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine,Dept.of Pediatrics,Subdivision CDX3 works as homeodomain protein binding an A/T-rich sequence of Genetics and Teratology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of in the promoter of the insulin gene (MIM 176730). We hypothesize Medicine,Dept.of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey. that the deletion of CDX3 may be involved in the clinical features of Celiac disease, also known as gluten-sensitive enteropathy is our patient and provide a new candidate for the genotype of Donohue a chronic inflammation disease of the small intestinal mucosa. syndrome. Detection of antigliadin and antiendomysial antibodies in serum is important in diagnosis and screening of celiac disease. Ig A P0241. 3p- Syndrome in a girl with an apparantly antiendomysial antibodies have greater sensitivity compared to balanced translocation (3;5) antigliadin antibodies. It has been reported that the prevalence J. van den Ende1, A. Laridon2, J. Wauters1, M. Nöthen1; of celiac disease is higher in Down syndrome children as the 1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2University Hospital of other autoimmune conditions. In this study, 32 Down syndrome Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. children (22 male / 10 female) have been evaluated for antigliadin The 3p- syndrome results from deletion of a terminal segment of antibodies and antiendomysial antibodies. Total blood count and the short arm of one chromosome 3, and is characterized by mental immunglobuline values were in normal levels. There was no known retardation, growth failure, hypotonia, and multiple congenital disease or no abnormality in biochemical levels at entry into the anomalies, such as microcephaly, blepharoptosis, hypertelorism, study. [The youngest was 2 year-old and the oldest one was 17 ear anomalies, heart defects and deafness. The constellation of year-old (average: 6.55±3.88)]. None of the 32 children had known symptoms depends on the extent of the deletion. celiac disease at entry. Six out of 32 patients (18.75%) were found Most deletion breakpoints are at 3p25-26, and among the genes to be serological positive, 5 (15.63%) were found to have antigliadin mapped in region 3p25-3pter are ATP2B2 (involved in cardiac antibodies’ levels above normal; and 5 (15.63%) to be antiendomysial development), the VHL gene (involved in Von Hippel Lindau disease) antibodies positive. In four patients (12.5%) both AGA Ig A levels and the CALL gene (possible role in brain development). were above normal and AEA Ig A were positive. One patient (%3.3) In most cases of 3p-syndrome the deletion arose de novo. was only AGA Ig A positive, and one (%3.3) was only AEA Ig A We describe a female patient who was presented to us soon after positive. Duodenal biopsies of two cases out of 6 serological positive birth showing the following features: intrauterine growth retardation, cases showed villous atrophy (males with both AEA and AGA single umbilical artery, hypotonia, microcephaly, blepharoptosis, positive), and two cases revealed normal mucosa (male with both hypertelorism, micrognathia, low set ears, ear pits, a long philtrum AEA and AGA positive, male with only AEA positive). and a thin upper lip. At follow up at the age of 6 months an 1 year she showed severe reflux, developmental delay, and a thickened artrial P0239. Clinicopathological features of the foetus with 21q-. valve at ultrasound of the heart. O. Kirillova, M. Gornaya, T. Semenova, T. Kuznetzova; Chromosomal analysis showed an apparantly balanced translocation Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, (3;5)(p25;q31.1) inherited from the healthy father. Further Russian Federation. subtelomeric studies of the patient showed a terminal deletion of the A male foetus with multiple malformation was found by ultrasound short arm of chromosome 3. Possible mechanisms are discussed examination at 25-26 weeks` of gestation. Cytogenetic investigations and the importance of subtelomere studies is stressed in apparantly revealed a 46,XY,del(21)(q22) karyotype in of the umbilical cord balanced translocations with very small segments involved. blood lymphocytes. Molecular analyses showed that the deletion occurred on the maternal chromosome between markers IFNAR and P0242. Craniosynostosis, branchial cyst and inguinal D21S1255, including “critical region” of Down`s syndrome (21q22.3). calcifications, an unusual presentation of AHO (Albright In view of the poor fetal prognosis, the woman elected pregnancy hereditary osteodystrophy) termination. The autopsy revealed: intra-uterine growth retardation, Y. van Bever1, J. van den Ende1, A. Jespers2, F. Eyskens3, M. hydrocephaly, facial dysmorphy characterized by microcephaly, Aldred4, M. Nöthen1; hypertelorism, low-set deformed ears, micrognaty, microphthalmy, 1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2General Hospital dextrocardia, polycystic lungs, skeletal abnormalities including Middelheim, Antwerp, Belgium, 3University Hospital of Antwerp, deformity of the chest, 13 ribs on right, flexion contractures of the Antwerp, Belgium, 4Leicestershire Genetics Centre, Leicester, United right foot, deformities of the fingers, hypoplastic fallus bound by Kingdom. chordee, hipoplastic scrotum. Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) is characterized The histological pictures of the different fetal tissues showed by phenotypic signs that typically include brachydactyly and pathological immaturity of the liver, kidney, suprarenal glands, lien, subcutaneous calcifications occurring with or without hormone hypoplasia of eye chambers. The lung was contained of the multiple resistance toward PTH or other hormones such as thyroid hormone cyst cavities of different forms. The placenta showed the indication or gonadotropins. We were presented a male dysmature baby born of pathological differentiation of villous maturation with frequent after 36 weeks of pregnancy. On exam, he showed a trigonocephalic, persistence of embryonic forms of villi, which are non specific lesions asymmetric skull, abnormally formed orbits, a branchial cyst and and can be observed in a variety of other conditions. subcutaneous calcifications around the ankles and in the inguinal Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 126 127 region. Laboratory investigations showed a transient hypoglycemia Imrovment of motor development and cognitive functions has been and a hypothyroidism. The patient was treated with L-thyroxine and achieved during 1 year follow-up and symptomatic treatment. had an operation of a metopic suture synostosis. The diagnosis of AHO was confirmed by identifying a mutation (701G→A)in the P0245. GNAS1 gene. While the majority of symptoms of our patient are Clinical and molecular genetic investigation of the typical for AHO, to our knowledge, a branchial cyst has not yet classic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in Russia been reported in AHO. Coincidence or genetic relationship will be M. Kournikova1, O. Blinnikova2, A. Semyachkina3, G. Mutovin2, S. discussed and a follow-up of the patient will be presented. Tverskaya1, A. Polyakov1; 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian P0243. Ectrodactyly in the Genetics Clinics Federation, 2Russian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian B. G. Kousseff; Federation, 3Institution for pediatric and children surgery, Moscow, USF Genetics Program, Tampa, FL. Russian Federation. Ectrodactyly is encountered in mendelian traits as well as in rare Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heterogeneous group of chromosomal anomalies and as sporadic. The anomaly occurs connective tissue disorders characterized by skin hyperextensibility, during organogenesis and recently its pathogenesis is better impaired wound healing, joint laxity, tissue fragility, skeletal understood (Wolpert, 1999). Retrospective analysis of the 48 deformities and other changes. “Classic” EDS type (Villefranche probands with confirmed or suspected ectrodactyly evaluated at the Nosology, Beighton et al., 1997) which includes EDS types I (MIM USF genetics/dysmorphology and prenatal clinics between 1/2/82 130000) and II (MIM 130010) is the commonest variant of the EDS and 12/31/00 is presented. The probands were part of the 38,706 with genetic heterogeneity. Mutations in type V collagen, COL5A1 probands/families evaluated during the period. They were retrieved and COL5A2 genes, have been shown to underlie this type of EDS using patient database. Ectrodactyly/split hand was one of the 3 in some cases. Thirty four patients from 21 families with diagnosis of primary diagnoses. Four of the 48 were no shows in the clinic and EDS I or II types and their 21 relativies were clinically investigated. To were excluded. There were 27 males and 17 females. Twenty-two evaluate the role of COL5A2 gene mutations in this group of patients of 44 were Caucasian, 9 Hispanic, and 9 African-American matching skin biopsy samples were taken from 6 patients with EDS I and 5 the racial ratio of the population of West Central Florida. Typical patients with EDS II. We isolated mRNA from cultured fibrobasts and lobster claw anomaly type I was present in 19 and atypical in 25. made RT-PCR to get cDNA . Eleven pairs of primers for about 4,5 Two had chromosome anomaly, t(13q14q) with maternal class A kb mRNA COL5A2 were designed and carried out the PCR-SSCP 1 diabetes mellitus in one and another with complex chromosome analysis. We have found the absence of first fragment including rearrangement with 6 breaks on chromosomes 2,3,5,11, and 13 the first ATG codon in EDS II patient. The clinical signs included resulting in interstitial deletion 13q. Two probands had mothers thin skin with moderate hyperextensibity, easy bruising, joint laxity, with diabetes mellitus but no other anomalies to diagnose diabetic scoliosis, pectus excavatum, flat feet, myopia, retinal bleeding and embryopathy. Eleven of the 44 had positive family history indicative varicose rectal veins. Other manifestations were striae and recurrent of autosomal dominant trait with reduced penetrance. Fourteen of hyperbilirubinemia, which are not typical for EDS. The study is in a the 44 had associated anomalies implying syndromes. Among them progress now. were 3 probands with ectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-cleft palate. This study showed that ectrodactyly has 1. varied phenotypes difficult P0246. The natural history of human dermatosparaxis to classify and 2. is genetically heterogeneous. As to a candidate (Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome VII C) gene only the probands with chromosomal abnormalities implied F. Malfait1, B. Loeys1, P. De Coster2, A. De Paepe1; chromosome 13. 1Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium, 2Centre for Paediatric Dentistry, Ghent University P0244. Cockayne syndrome type II Hospital, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium. E. G. Simeonov1, V. Kleijer2, D. M. Avdjieva1, S. A. Shopova1, B. I. Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) type VIIC (human dermatosparaxis) Dimitrov1; is a recessively inherited connective-tissue disorder, characterized by 1Section of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatric Hospital, extreme skin fragility, premature rupture of the membranes, umbilical Medical Faculty, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Erasmus University, Rotterdam, hernia, blue sclerae, characteristic facies and joint laxity. Like the Netherlands. animal model it is caused by defects of procollagen-I-N-proteinase- Cockayne syndrome/CS/ is an autosomal recessive dysmorphic activity, resulting in an inability to cleave the N-terminal propeptides syndrome,caused by defects of transcription-coupled DNA repair due of procollagen-I-N-chains. Electron microscopy typically consists to truncating mutations, point mutations, or deletions of CSA(chr.5) of a characteristic “hieroglyphic” pattern of collagen fibrils. To date and CSB(10q11-q21) genes.CS manifests a wide clinical spectrum only 7 human cases have been recorded, most of them being aged including CS type I, the “classical” form; CS type II(connatal form), under 2 years. We report the clinical follow-up history of one of the a more severe form with symptoms present at birth,CS type III, a first reported patients (20 months;Nusgens et al, 1992). Now, at the milder form; and xeroderma pigmentosa-Cockayne syndrome (XP- age of twelve, marked skin fragility and easy bruisability continue CS).Patients with “connatal” CS have evidence of growth failure at to predominate the clinical picture. During the past years, she birth, with little or no postnatal neurological development. Congenital encountered several problems due to extreme tissue fragility, such cataracts or other structural anomalies of the eye as well, as as spontaneous bladder rupture, persisting bladder diverticulae with arthrogryposis or early postnatal contractures of the spine (kyphosis, recurrent urinary infections, and rupture of the diaphragm with para- scoliosis) and joints may be present.This group overlaps clinically esophageal hiatus hernia after vomiting. On physical examination, with two genetic conditions bearing different names, the cerebro- she presents with an old appearance, with sagging skin and oculo-facial syndrome (COFS) and Pena-Shokeir type II syndrome. excessive wrinkles in her face and on hands and feet. Her stature is The authors present clinical observations of a 3 year old girl/DOB- below P3. Joint hyperextensibility is very mild. She presents several 24.04.98/,second child of healthy,unrelated parents/father-30,mother- unusual oral and dental anomalies. Being of normal intelligence, 32/.The girl was born 18 days before term/W-1900 gr.,L-44 cm./ she was confined to home education untill the age of ten because and manifested developmental delay and repeated respiratory of her extreme vulnerability. Now she attends a school for physically infections during the first year of life.Photosensibility has been noted handicapped children. at 11 months.At 2 2/12 yrs. she is underweighed/wSDS - -2.71/ EDS VIIC appears to be a severe debilitating disease due to lifelong ,microcephalic/hcSDS -3.5/,with short neck,dysmorphic face,mild skin and tissue fragility. thoracic kyphosis,unsteady gait and moderate mental retardation/IQ Nusgens et al, Nat Genet 1:214-17, 1992 - 44/.Abnormal retinal pigment distribution has been detected.Routine laboratory investigations,chromosome analysis and CT scan P0247. Locus heterogeneity in lymphedema-cholestasis showed normal results.Cockayne,Bloom,Rothmund-Thompson and syndrome (Aagenaes syndrome) COFS syndromes have been discussed.DNA repair studies on skin A. R. Janecke1, T. Müller2, A. S. Knisely3, Ø. Aagenaes4, L. Bull5, M. fibroblasts disclosed strongly inhibited DNA synthesis after UV- Frühwirth2, H. Ellemunter2, G. Utermann1; irradiation,thus confirming the diagnosis of CS.Mutation analysis is in 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, University of progress. Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics; University 126 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 127 Hospital Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Institute of Liver Studies, Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, U.K., Royal Free King´s College School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United and University College Medical School, London, U.K., London, United Kingdom, 4Ulleval University Hospital of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 5Liver Kingdom, 7Edith Cowan University, Western Australian Institute for Center Laboratory, San Francisco General Hospital, University of Medical Research, Perth, Australia, Perth, Australia. California, San Francisco, CA. For variety of social and cultural practices various Gypsy groups in Lymphoedema – cholestasis syndrome (LCS, Aagenaes syndrome, our country represent genetic isolates with a very high rate of some MIM 214900) is the only form of hereditary lymphoedema associated autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorders. During the last 7 with cholestasis. Most patients are of Norwegian origin. A locus for years we identified several single gene disorders limited to specific LCS, LCS1, has recently been mapped to chromosome 15q in the traditionally endogamous Gypsy groups in Bulgaria: original extended kindred reported by Aagenaes and coworkers. We 1. Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type Lom (HMSNL) have studied a family of Serbian gypsies in which a child born to is a severe demyelinating peripheral neuropathy associated with consanguine parents had LCS, and performed linkage and haplotype sensorineural deafness, mapped to chromosome 8q24 (Kalaydjieva analysis at marker loci (D15S979, D15S202, D15S996, D15S127, et al., 1996, 1998) and caused by a truncating mutation in the N-myc FES, IP15M9, D15S158, D15S963, D15S652) spanning the LCS1 downstream-regulated gene-1 (Kalaydjieva et al, 2000). The disorder region on 15q. This excluded the disease locus from this region, affects different endogamous Gypsy metagroups belong to the implying locus heterogeneity for LCS. Wallachian Gypsy group: Kalderas, Kopanari and Lom Gypsies. 2. Congenital cataracts facial dysmorphism neuropathy (CCFDN) P0248. Bilateral Congenital Ptosis and Variable Toe syndrome is a novel multisystem genetic disorder which combines Anomalies: A New Autosomal Recessive Syndrome? both developmental abnormalities and a progressive neurological N. A. Al-Sanna’a1, A. S. Teebi2; deficit (Tournev et al., 1999). The most important features of 1Division of Pediatrics, Dhahran Health Center, Dhahran, Saudi the syndrome include congenital cataracts and microcorneae, Arabia, 2Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for dysmorphic facial features and small stature, mental retardation, a Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. predominantly motor peripheral neuropathy and hypogonadotropic Congenital ptosis with digital anomalies among other manifestations hypogonadism. The CCFDN syndrome was mapped on 18q23 (D. has been reported in a variety of syndromes. Here, we describe Angelicheva et al., 1999). two Saudi Arabian brothers with congenital ptosis and variable toe 3. Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type Russe anomalies including hypoplasia, clinodactyly, bifid great toe, partial (HMSNR) is a severe, progressive, sensorimotor neuropathy with syndactyly between the second and third toe, overriding toes, prominent sensory loss in association with an intermediate reducton and absent toe nails. Both children have displayed normal growth in nerve conduction velocity (P.K. Thomas et al., 2001). Linkage and development with no evidence of other system involvement. analysis localized the HMSN-R gene to chromosome 10q23, in close Their karyotypes were normal. The parents are first cousins and proximity to the EGR2 gene (T. Rogers, 2000). phenotypically normal. An older brother has an isolated ptosis with no digital anomalies. P0251. A Jagged 1 gene mutation for abdominal We think this constellation of anomalies in this family represents a coarctation of the Aorta in Alagille syndrome new autosomal recessive entity with variable statement. A. Raas-Rothschild1, E. Shteyer2, I. Lerer3, A. J. J. T. Rein4; 1Department of Human Genetics,Hadassah Hebrew University P0249. Clinical and genetic heterogeneity and ethnic Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Department of Pediatrics, Hadassah differences in Bulgarian FSHD patients Hebrew University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Department of B. Tzankov1, I. Tournev1, M. Janpierre2; Human Genetics, Hadassah Hebrew University Hospital, Jerusalem, 1Department of Neurology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, Israel, 4Department of Pediatric Cardiology,Hadassah Hebrew 2Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Pathology, Hopital Cochin, University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel. Paris, France, Paris, France. Structural cardiac defects such as peripheral pulmonary stenosis are FSHD is an AD inherited desease, associated with a deletion within well described in Alagille syndrome (AGS), which is transmitted in an the telomeric portion of chromosome 4. The gene responsible for autosomal dominant inheritance. Haploinsufficiency of the Jagged 1 development of the disease is still unknown. FSHD presents with a gene (JAG1) has been shown to cause Alagille syndrome. Abdominal high degree of clinical variability, with respect to age of onset, severity coarctation is an uncommon vascular congenital anomaly and has and pattern of muscle involvement. Twenty patients from 7 families been described only twice in AGS. We report on two more patients and eight sporadic cases were studied. The families were of different with coarctation of the abdominal aorta in AGS. ethnic origin- bulgarian, turkish and gipsy. The disease started Recently, Loomes et al (Hum-Mol-Genet. 1999; 8(13): 2443-9) have before the twentieth year of age in 90 % of cases. We determined shown that Jagged1 gene is expressed in the developing heart and significant inter- and intrafamilial clinical variations in the course of in multiple associated vascular structure including the descending the FSHD. Some of our families showed phenomenon of anticipation. aorta. Jones et al (J Med Genet 2000;37:658-662) studied the tissue In most of the cases additional features, like cardiac disturbances, expression of JAG1 in human embryo and noticed that JAG1 was deafness and retinal vasculopathy were found. Mental retardation also expressed in the developing aorta. We performed molecular and schisophrenic psychosis were specified in the members of the analysis of the Jagged1 gene in one of our patients with AGS and two most severely affected turkish families. Some of the patients abdominal coarctation and found a mutation deletion (1485 Del CT). presented with a phenotype of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy or This corroborates with Loomes and Jones studies and confirms that another unusual phenotype. coarctation of aorta might be a part of the Alagille syndrome. This Some of the cases were genetically determined as being connected additional report brings the number of children with Alagille syndrome with the FSHD1 locus in 4q35. Sizes of the fragments were and coarctation of abdominal aorta to four and emphasizes the need inversely connected with the clinical severity of the disease. Several to follow children with Alagille for the development of coarctation of patients were not connected with the locus, which instituted genetic the abdominal aorta. heterogeneity of FSHD for Bulgarian patients. P0252. Two cases of coincidence of monogenic P0250. Three novel AR neuropathies in Bulgarian autosomal linked neurodegenerative disorders and the Gypsies chromosomal abnormality of gonosomes. I. L. Tournev1, P. Thomas2, D. Angrlicheva3, T. Rogers3, R. King4, B. V. Matoska1, T. Marikova2, H. Petra2, Z. Musova2, D. Novotna2, M. Ishpekova5, B. Youl6, D. Chandler3, V. Guergeltcheva1, A. Savov5, A. Havlovicova2, P. Seeman3, E. Seemanova2, P. Bauer2, J. Kraus3, A. Shmarov5, L. Kalaydjieva7; Zumrova3, R. Mazanec4, P. Goetz2; 1Medical University - Sofia, Ethnic Minorities Health Problems 1Institute of Biology and Medical Gentics, Prague, Czech Republic, Foundation, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Institute of Neurology and National 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, U.K., London, 3Child Neurology Clinic, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech United Kingdom, 3Edith Cowan University, Perth, Australia, 4Royal Republic, 4Neurology Clinic, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Free and University college Medical School, London, U. K., London, Republic. United Kingdom, 5Medical University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6National We present here two cases of autosomal monogenic disorder Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 128 129 in combination with numeric failure of gonosomes. Though a rare entity and to discuss the importance of the features for the the coincidence of abnormality of gonosomes and X-linked diagnosis and the management of the family. neurodegenerative disorder is not unexpected finding, the combination with autosomal gene disorder is quite rare. P0255. Chondrodysplasia punctata 1, X-linked recessive The first case is the four-month old girl with the symptomatology of (CDPX1) and Ichthyosis associated with 46,Y,der(X)t(X;Y)( spinal muscular atrophy. Chromosomal abnormality 47,XXX was p22.31;q11.21) karyotype in the son of a mother carrier of found, and SMN1 gene dysfunction was diagnosed by DNA analysis. the derivative X chromosome The proband died at the age of 8 month. E. Andreucci, S. Guarducci, L. Giunti, E. Lapi, A. Cecconi, U. Ricci, The second case is a patient followed up from the age of 2 years I. Sani, S. Coviello, E. Anichini, M. Ottaviani, A. Lasagni, M. L. because of the symptomatology of HSMN and progressive growth Giovannucci Uzielli; retardation. Her maternal grandfather died at the age of 46 having University of Florence, Firenze, Italy. neurodegenerative disorder (HMSN -FRDA??). DNA analysis We report a new case of CDPX1 and ichthyosis in a newborn with encrypted the specific duplication of the 17p11.2-p12- the CMT1A. the characteristic phenotype, both clinical and X-ray, of this X-linked The chromosomal investigation revealed de novo 45,X/46XY (1:2) recessive disorder. Cytogenetic analysis showed his karyotype to karyotype. be 46,y,der(X)(p22.31;q11.21). The psychometric testing is not well Supported by grant IGA MZ 6506-3 and VZ 111300003. applicable because of the age of the child, but the psychomotor development was apparently delayed at age 8 months. The STS P0253. Interdisciplinary strategies design: evaluation activity is obviously deficient. The mother is a carrier of the derivative of sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) pedigrees from X chromosome and has carrier levels of STS activity: she is patients classified as indeterminate. The importance of somewhat short of stature and has mildly short arms. professional formation FISH studies were performed on metaphase chromosomes M. B. Bravo-Luna1, A. Spadoni2, M. T. Trincavelli3, A. Jannelli4, G. using Xyqtel, Xyptel, STS and KALI Xp22.3 region probe with Dotto5, M. C. Fumagalli2, M. Dalmasso6, M. Chinellato3; DXZ1 chromosome X control probe (ONCOR). A battery of DNA 1CIUNR-Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Rosario, Argentina, 2Esc. polymorphic markers was used to localize the Xp breakpoint de Fonoaudiologia-Fac. Cs. Medicas -UNR, Rosario, Argentina, 3Esc. (DXYS233, DXS996, DXS6837, DXS1139, DXS6834, DXS1130, de Fonoaudiologia-Fac. Cs Medicas-UNR, Rosario, Argentina, 4Esc. DXS237, DXS278, DXS987). In the mother we also performed the Fonoaudiologia, Fac. Cs. Medicas-UNR, Rosario, Argentina, 5Esc. de study of DNA markers from Y chromosome, to well determine the Fonoaudiologia-Fac. Cs. Medicas-UNR, Rosario, Argentina, 6Esc. de location of the Yq breakpoint in the derivative X chromosome. Fonoaudiologia-Fac. Cs Medicas UNR, Rosario, Argentina. The mapping studies indicate the precise location of the well Prevalence of genetic SNHL is low in Argentina (12%). We attempted characterised genes, SHOX, CDPX1 (arylsulphatase E), steroid to revise the diagnosis of SNHL, according the worldwide accepted sulphatase (STS), and Kallmann (KALI) genes. Further analyses are in classification: genetic, environmental, indeterminate to estimate the progress to better establish a phenotype-karyotype-genotype correlation. actual prevalence of the genetic component, exerting prevention, and guiding of groups at risk, institutions and professionals closed P0256. Costello syndrome: report of three patients with involved. A qualified population of SNHL patients (n=260), aged 0- typical manifestations. 15yr attending public/private services, and educational institutions of A. Babamohammadi1, G. Babamohammadi1,2, Y. Shafeghati3, M. Rosario, is divided as follows: genetic (10%), environmental (51%), Karimi-Nejad1; indeterminate (39%) groups. Further familial information to draw the 1Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetic Center, Tehran, Islamic corresponding pedigrees was obtained (n=101probands), detecting Republic of Iran, 2National Research Center for Genetic Engineering syndromic and non-syndromic SNHL cases. This investigation and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3University of provided us with two perspectives: 1) adequate training of the staff Welfare and Rehabilitation, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. to prepare the pedigrees; 2) counselling of subjects at risk. It is to Costello Syndrome is an extremely rare disorder characterized be noted the importance of improving the professional practice to by growth delay after birth (postnatal), leading to short stature; construct a “new professional”. Regarding counselling of subjects at excessive, redundant loose skin on the neck, palms of the hands, risk it is admitted that: A) transfer of results (diagnosis, prognosis) fingers, and soles of the feet; development of benign (non- must warrant privacy, based on psychological, sociocultural, ethical cancerous) growths (papillomata) around the mouth (perioral) and and philosophical principles. B) there is a well known impact nostrils (nares); mental retardation; and/or characteristic facial produced by “knowing oneself and the own expectations”, thus appearance. Other physical features may include the development it is convenient to provide psychological support and/or preserve of dry hardened skin on the palms of the hands and the soles of the the subject emotionally, as well as to suggest a consultation with feet (palmoplantar hyperkeratosis), abnormally deep creases on specialists. C) The task must be centred on the patient. We do not the palms and soles, and/or abnormally flexible joints of the fingers adhere to directiveness, conversely, emphasising the patient and/or (hyperextensible). There is an increased incidence of congenital family -and other subjects at risk- decision. Hence, it is obligatory to abnormalities of the heart and thickening of the heart muscle called a organize workshops for professionals focused mainly on prevention cardiomyopathy. Characteristic craniofacial features may include an and promote the re-enactment of the individual and collective abnormally large head (macrocephaly); low-set ears with large, thick construction of the professional profile. lobes; unusually thick lips; and/or abnormally wide nostrils (nares). Most cases are sporadic and a significant increase of mean paternal P0254. Menkes syndrome - clinical study of a family age has been reported, suggesting de novo dominant mutations. The O. Brumariu, C. Rusu, I. Cernescu, G. Stan; exact cause of Costello Syndrome is unknown. We report three new Childrens Hospital, Iasi, Romania. patients with typical clinical findings and emphasize the importance of We present a case of Menkes syndrome in order to discuss the clinical experience for diagnosis of this disorder. importance of different clinical features and the management of the patient and his family. Our proband is a 5 Mo old male infant, second P0257. Duplication of intrachromosomal insertion child of an young, apparently normal, unrelated couple. Physical segments 4q32-q35 confirmed by comparative genome examination revealed mild growth deficiency, microcephaly, sparse, hybridization and FISH hypopigmented, kinky hair, pale skin, expressionless face with full S. Park1, Y. Kim1, M. Lee1, H. Ryu2; cheeks and hypotonic muscles. Radiologic investigation showed 1SamsungCheil Hosp. Lab. of Medical Genetics, Seoul, REPUBLIC wormian bones in the lambdoid sutures and widened metaphyses OF KOREA, 2SamsungCheil Hosp. Dep. of Obstetrics & Gynecology, of the long bones. Hair microscopic examination showed pili torti. Seoul, REPUBLIC OF KOREA. Serum levels of copper and ceruloplasmin were low. Based on the A 35-year-old man with oligozoospermia was referred for clinical features and specific investigations we have establishes chromosomal analysis. In routine cytogenetic analysis, the patient the diagnosis of Menkes syndrome. Detailed differential diagnosis was seen to have an additional material of unknown origin on the with other XLMR entities and other syndromes with pili torti will terminal region of the short arm of chromosome 4. To figure out be provided. The management of the family will be discussed. In the origin of the unknown material, we carried out high-resolution conclusion, we present this case of Menkes syndrome to illustrate banding, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and comparative 128 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 129 genomic hybridization (CGH). CGH showed a gain of signal on context with cardiomyopathy (g-sarcoglycan) or cardiac hypertrophy the region of 4q32-35. By using whole chromosome painting and (acyl-coA dehydrogenase). In addition to these genes our analysis subtelomeric region probes for chromosome 4, we confirmed the revealed so far 8 novel and unknown genes which are differentially aberrant chromosome as intrachromosomal insertion duplication of expressed in the heart of SHR. Mapping of these novel genes with 4q32-35. We didn’t carry out parent’s chromosome analysis, but we respect to rat chromosome segments harboring known QTLs for predicted one of parents might have a ins(4)(p16q32q35) because cardiac hypertrophy and analysis of their expression pattern might be the abnormal chromosome was a type of possible recombinants from relevant to understand processes leading to cardiac hypertrophy in crossing over in carriers with the between-arm intrachromosomal rat and man. insertion of chromosome 4. Duplication often leads to some phenotypic abnormalities, however, our patient showed almost P0261. High prevalence of a screening detected, HFE- normal phenotype except for sperm counts. unrelated, mild idiopathic iron overload (possible hereditary hemochromatosis) in Northern Italy. P0258. A family with Nievergelt type mesomelic dysplasia M. Grasso1, G. Barosi2, S. Ansaldi1, L. Pillitteri1, L. Salvaneschi3, M. - case report Martinetti3, M. Marchetti2, U. Bodini4, A. Reggiani5, F. D’Agostino6, G. E. Kurvinen1, R. Jordania2; Nalli7, E. Arbustini1; 1Tallinn Children`s Outpatient Clinic, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Tallinn 1Cardiovascular Pathol. and Molec. Diagn. - Res.Transplantation Children`s Outpatient Clinic, Tallinn, Estonia. Lab. , IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Laboratory of Mesomelic dysplasia - a heterogeneous group of bone dysplasias Medical Informatics, IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, with disproportionate shortening of middle segment of limbs. Clinic 3Immunoematology and Transfusion Service, IRCCS Policlinico is variable. AD, AR, X-linked heredity forms have been described. S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 4Transfusion Service, Istituti Ospedalieri, We report family where two offsprings 27 year old son and 24 Cremona, Italy, 5Division of Medicine, Istituti Ospedalieri, Cremona, year old daughter with short height (-2SD). Both patients showed Italy, 6Transfusion Service, Ospedale Civile, Lodi, Italy, 7Division of radiologically hypoplastic and shortened tibia and fibula, shortened Medicine, Ospedale Civile, Lodi, Italy. radius and curved ulna.Madelung deformation, radio-ulnar and In Italian population, typical HFE mutations account for 64% of overt tarsal synostosis were diagnosed. Mental development is normal. hereditary hemochromatosis (HH)(versus 100% in other countries of Both parents were phenotypically healthy with normal height. AR Celtic descent).A common HFE-unrelated disease was hypothesized. mesomelic dysplasia was suspected and low risk for sick offsprings One thousand and fifty candidate blood donors were screened by future children was prognosed.During sons` wife pregnancy fetal iron tests,C282Y and H63D HFE mutations in a region in North Italy. tibia shortening was diagnosed sonographically on 18 th week of Subjects with repeated fasting transferrin saturation of 45% or more pregnancy. Parents´s detailed radiological investigation revealed and no secondary iron overload were defined as probands with in mother deviation of ulna. Therefore AD mesomelic dysplasia idiopathic iron overload. To assess the inheritance of iron overload, (Nievergelt) type was diagnosed. Newborn baby clinical and relatives of probands were screened. radiological investigation confirmed diagnose.Family members careful The overall frequency of idiopathic iron overload probands was investigation usually is helpful for correct diagnosis and prognosis 3.43% (95% confidence interval, 2.32 to 4.52). 8.4% of them during genetic counselling. had genotypes associated with HH (compound heterozygous for H63D/C282Y or homozygous for H63D HFE mutations). 91.6% had P0259. A new polyepiphyseal dysplasia with extreme atypical genotypes: 47.2% were heterozygous for C282Y or H63D delay in ossification and normal stature in sibs HFE mutations, and 44.4% had wild type homozygote genotype.Iron A. Verloes1,2, C. Garel3, M. Hassan3, C. Baumann1; overload was familial in 33.3% of probands with atypical genotypes 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, (1.04% of the overall population). Pedigree analysis excluded linkage 2INSERM E9935, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Radiology of heterozygous HFE mutations with iron overload (cumulative lod Dept, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. score -2.41) and documented a recessive non HLA-linked locus We report on a pair of dizygotic twins born to consanguineous accounting for iron overload in wild type homozygote genotypes. parents, showing both an extreme delay in skeletal maturation None of the probands had clinical signs of iron accumulation; in (roughly corresponding to a newborn at age 4 10/12), mild males, serum ferritin positively correlated with age (r=0.63, P<0.01), metaphyseal irregularities, and a phenotype associating normal to and the regression model predicted a serum ferritin of 700 ng per large stature (+1 to + 2 SD) with normal growth pattern, long fingers, millilitre at the age of 58. generalized small joint hyperlaxity with flat feet, genua valga, and Conclusions. In Northern Italy an HFE-unrelated, mild idiopathic low normal intellectual development. This combination appears to iron overload is highly prevalent. A recessive locus accounts for iron represent a new AR - or possibly XLR - skeletal dysplasia belonging overload in at least 1.04% of the overall population. to the polyepipyseal dysplasia spectrum of disorders. P0262. Assessing Dental Phenotypes P0260. Identification of differentially expressed genes A. Bloch-Zupan1,2, P. Ashley1, N. Attari1; during development of cardiac hypertrophy in rat 1Department of Paediatric Dentistry, Eastman Dental Institute for Oral T. Hahn, D. Schlote, I. Hansmann, M. Schlicker; Health Care Sciences, University College, London, United Kingdom, Institut für Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie, Martin-Luther- 2Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom. Universität, Halle-Wittenberg, Germany. More than 5878 gene loci for inherited human diseases and Cardiac hypertrophy is an adaptive response to chronic increased disorders are listed in OMIM of NCBI database with over 1250 workload and is associated with changes of gene expression. To related to oral-dental-craniofacial diseases and disorders. Dental identify candidate genes contributing to the initiation or progression of defects are seen in numerous of these syndromes. Each dental cardiac hypertrophy we have screened differential gene expression abnormality or phenotype: number, shape, size, structure, colour, in the heart of spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) at different eruption, corresponds to specific genetic and developmental issues. stages of their development. Up to 4 weeks after birth the animals Today more than 200 genes regulating tooth development have are normotensive. Males first develop hypertension around 12 weeks been identified (http://bite-it.helsinki.fi). Unfortunately these dental pp and hypertrophy of the left heart ventricle around 26 weeks pp. phenotypes are vague and poorly described in the genetic literature. We established a subtractive hybridization system based on cDNA The involvement of a specialised dentist in a genetic diagnostic and selection and suppression PCR using mRNA from these stages. counselling clinic provides a dental examination and therefore dental Subtractive hybridization using age groups 4- versus 12- as well as phenotypic data to the genetic team. Systematised data collection 12- versus 26-weeks identified 145 different cDNA clones. Screening and recording of this information are necessary as these observations of these clones revealed 56 cDNAs as candidates for differentially may relate to rare undiagnosed conditions that might in the near expressed genes during development to cardiac hypertrophy. future be revisited and accurately diagnosed. Explaining the oral Northern blot analysis of 42 cDNAs identified 16 genes to be components of the disease to the patients and their families as well upregulated in cardiac tissue of SHR in comparison to the wild type as coordinating appropriate dental referrals according to treatment Wistar-Kyoto rat. In silico analysis of cDNA sequences identified needs is also important. This service will contribute to the general several known genes which are being discussed already in the wellbeing and dental health care of the patient.Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 130 131 P0263. Families with multiple idiopathic impactions of twin brother has none of the afore mentioned features. She was teeth thoroughly investigated and cytogenetic analysis revealed a 46,XX J. Handzel, M. Kuklik; t(6;7;8;12) karyotype. This was confirmed by FISH analysis. 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University Prague, Prague, Czech Her family was tested and this chromosomal aberration was not Republic. found in either her twin or her parents. We therefore present this case We are presenting six families with apparently new genetic disorder of de novo 46,XX t(6;7;8;12) translocation. characterized by: 1)special unwillingness of the permanent teeth to eruption: eruption is P0266. The Macrocephaly-Cutis Marmorata often delayed or incomplete, or the affected teeth remain impacted Telangiectatica Congenita Syndrome. Report of six 2) permanent molars are always affected, other type of teeth less patients and definition of the diagnosis criteria. often F. Giuliano1,2, A. David3, S. Sigaudy2, V. Cormier-Daire4, P. Edery2, J. 3) teeth in infra-occlusion develop ankylosis J. C. Lambert1, N. Philip2; 4)the disorder is resistant to orthodontic treatment 1Hôpital Archet II, Nice, France, 2Hôpital La Timone Enfants, Less frequently occuring signs are: Marseille, France, 3Hôpital Mère-Enfants, Nantes, France, 4Hôpital 5) submersion of deciduous molars Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. 6) delayed eruption of deciduous dentition The macrocephaly-cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita 7) submersion of some permanent teeth syndrome (M-CMTC) was recently defined as a new overgrowth 8) rarely hyperodontia in permanent molar region or syndrome characterized, in particular, by specific neurologic and 9) transposition of cuspids and bicuspids cutaneous conditions. Previously, this disorder was just described as Our families could by divided in two groups according to the type of « cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita syndrome with additional affected teeth and other features, genealogical analysis shows in clinical features ». Since then, 39 patients were reported with a high both groups very probably autosomal dominant type of inheritance. degree of phenotypic variability. But, the occurence of the disorder in three generations, higher female We report 6 additional cases, in particular, we describe the first sex ratio and genealogic data showing no male to male transmission patient with an arterial dysplasia (Nishimoto desease) and cardiac suggest in one group even X-linked dominant inheritance. malformations (atrial septal defect and atrial septal aneurism). Moreover, the analysis of our cases and a review of the literature P0264. Constitutional mosaicism for a partial trisomy 8 in allowed us to delineate the diagnosis criteria of the M-CMTC. a patient with a Chromosome Breakage Syndrome These data suggest that major diagnostic criteria clearly comprise a S. Sodia1, W. Emberger1, L. Rauter2, E. Petek1, H. Zierler1, K. neonatal hypotonia, a macrocephaly >>2 S.D., a cutis marmorata, a Wagner1, P. M. Kroisel1; midline facial naevus flammeus, a hypertelorism, and abnormalities 1Medical Biology & Human Genetics, University of Graz, Graz, at the cerebral imaging. Minor criteria are represented by a 2,3 Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics,LKH-Leoben, Leoben, Austria. syndactyly of the toes, a facial or body hemihypertrophy, some We report on a male infant with mosaicism for partial trisomy 8 and distinctive facial features, a naevus flammeus of the upper lip and /or a generally increased chromosome instability. He was born at term, the philtrum and a hydrocephaly. We propose that the presence of, birth weight 2940 g, head circumference 30 cm (< 3rd percentile). at least, five of the six major criteria or four major criteria with three Due to microcephaly, failure to thrive and additional dysmorphic minor criteria are necessary for the diagnostic of M-CMTC. facial features as sloping forehead, retrognathia, low set ears and clinical suspicion of fragile X syndrome the patient was subjected for P0267. A balanced 9;18-translocation associated with cytogenetic and DNA analysis at an age of 3 month. There were no growth retardation, speech impairment, deep-set eyes genetic disorders or anomalies in family history, except one patient and prominent nose. with Down Syndrome. By molecular genetic analysis of FMR1 I. Bache1, Z. Tümer1, S. Markus2, S. Ebner2, C. Lundsteen3, V. gene a FRAXA syndrome could be excluded. However cytogenetic Kalscheuer4, H. H. Ropers4, N. Tommerup1; results showed a mosaic for a marker chromosome in about 25% 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, of all mitoses and a high number of chromosomal rearrangements, University of Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Gemeinschaftspraxis für in particular balanced and unbalanced translocations preferentially Medizinische Genetik, Regensburg, Germany, 3Dept of Clinical involving chromosomes 7,8 and 14 with decreasing relative Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Max-Planck- incidence. Multicolour FISH and whole chromosome paint Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. analysis demonstrated that the marker chromosome is derived We describe a four-year-old boy with growth retardation below the from chromosome 8 leading to the following karyotype: mos third percentile, hyperactivity, no speech development, deep set eyes, 47,XY,+mar.ish der(8)(wcp8+) [7] / 46,XY [23]. Improved banding long brushy eyebrows and a broad, prominent nose. The karyotype analysis performed subsequently allowed to specify a terminal showed a balanced translocation 46,XY,t(9;18)(q31.2;q21.3). The deletion with a breakpoint at 8q21.1 in the aberrant chromosome phenotypically normal father carried the same balanced translocation. 8. So far there is no indication for a hematological anomaly or High resolution comparative genomic hybridization did not reveal malignancy, but a cytogenetic analysis of fibroblasts was also not any imbalance in the proband. By fluorescence in situ hybridisation performed yet to confirm a constitutional mosaicism. It is interesting with BAC probes the breakpoint regions have been narrowed to 500 that the breakpoint in 8q21 is identical at the cytogenetic level with kb on 18q21 and distal to CAPE on 9q31.3. Initially, the diagnosis of the Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome (NBS1) gene locus. Therefore Floating-Harbor syndrome was considered, which is a rare disorder further molecular studies will be performed. of unknown etiology characterised by prenatal onset of short stature with delayed bone age, language delay and a triangular face with P0265. Clinical Description of a New Patient with a de a prominent nose and deep-set eyes. However, some features Novo t(6;7;8;12) Karyotype including the metacarpo-phalangeal profile and the postnatal onset of E. Spanou Aristidou1, P. C. Patsalis1, N. Rose1, C. Sismani1, V. the short stature were not characteristic for this syndrome. Although Christophidou Anastasiadou1,2; the association between the translocation and the clinical features 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, may be a chance finding, this translocation presents the first potential 2Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. lead to the identification of chromosomal regions and candidate We present a 2.5 year old girl with global developmental delay, genes associated with Floating-Harbor like features. This possibility dysmorphic features and a complex translocation as follows: 46, will be tested in a panel of patients with classical Floating-Harbor XX t(6;7;8;12). This child was born at 35 weeks gestation following syndrome. a complicated twin pregnancy. Her birth weight was on the 10th percentile. She was first seen at the age of eight months presenting P0268. The Phenotype of a Boy with a Complex with developmental delay, compared to her twin brother, and soft Chromosomal Translocation dysmorphic features. Her developmental milestones remained V. Christophidou Anastasiadou1,2, E. Spanou Aristidou1, G. delayed and she also had behaviour disturbances. A.S. has a round Stylianidou2, N. Rose1, C. Sismani3, P. C. Patsalis3; face with a prominent metopic ridge, short upslanting palpebral 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, fissures, a mildly depressed nasal bridge and a long philtum. Her 130 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 131 2Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3The Cyprus This observation has a significant impact on genetic counseling Institute of Neurology and Gene, Nicosia, Cyprus. of sporadic cases of BPES. In case of the paternal mosaicism an We present a 15 year old boy with dysmorphic features, a seizure accurate evaluation of the mosaicism distribution in the germinal disorder, learning difficulties, and a chromosomal constitution of cells could provide an important tool to assign an accurate risk of 46,XY,t(2;3;15). recurrence in the family. P.D. was born at 37 weeks gestation with a birth weight just below the 50th percentile. He was diagnosed as having an arrested P0271. Haplotype Analysis of Related ATM Markers hydrocephalus (a CT scan revealed dilatation of the ventricles) Facilitate Prenatal Diagnosis in Iranian Ataxia at the age of 6 months. He had frequent urinary tract infections, Telangiectasia Patients which were attributed to vesicoureteral reflux (this resolved itself). B. Bayat1, M. H. Sanati1, A. Aleyasin1, A. Farhoudi2, M. Moin2, A. He had constipation attributed to dolichosigmoid. On examination Isaian2; he was found to be a short young man, with a head circumference 1National Research Center for Engineering and Biotechnology above the 95th percentile. He had synophrys, a high nasal bridge, (NRCGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Children’s Medical long columella and hypoplastic nostrils. His philtrum was upturning Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and his chin prominent. P.D. also had rhizomelic shortening of his Ataxia Telangiectasia is an autosomal recessive disorder in 1/40000 upper limbs. He was on treatment for seizures. He was thoroughly to 1/100000 in reported populations. There is 25% possibility for investigated and found to have a 46,XY,t(2;3;15) karyotype, by having an affected child when parents are carrier for ATM gene giemsa banding and FISH. mutation. There is no cure available for this disease and prenatal His family was also tested, except for his father who is deceased, and testing is strongly recommended in preventation of this disease. were all found to have normal karyotypes. Although preference method is the direct mutation analysis of ATM We believe that this is a de novo translocation in either the father or gene, but large size of the ATM gene with 63 exons and the large the son. number of possible mutation in patients considerably limit the facibility of mutations analysis as a choice in diagnosis. Indirect method is a P0269. Complete Hydatiforme Moles And Coexistent better tool when parent are not carrier of founder mutation and pass Viable Foetus. Report of 4 Cases different mutations to their children. Indirect molecular diagnosis M. P. Audrezet, P. Marcorelles, J. J. Chabaud, M. J. Le Bris, A. using ATM related molecular markers facilitate prenatal diagnosis of Collet, M. De Braekeeler, P. Parent, C. Ferec; AT children. In this study four molecular markers: D11S2179,D11S1 CHU, Brest, France. 787,D11S535,D11S1343 are genotype in 18 unrelated families from Complete hydatiforme mole coexistant with a normal fœtus is a rare different region of IRAN. Those markers are amplified using extracted obstetric pathology, the incidence reported varying from 1/10000 to sequence primers from Gene Bank with their described PCR 1/100000. It results from fertilization of an empty egg by a hapoid conditions. The amplified products were separated using denaturing sperm which duplicates without cytokinesis and restores diploidy, or PAGE gels, and the data were analyzed to detect their pattern of by two sperms. inheritance in each family. In all families segregation of alleles were Outcome depends on maternal criteria of gravity : the risk of recording to mandelian inheritance and affected chromosomes persistent trophoblastic disease (PTD) is higher than is single were distinguishable form unaffected ones. All carriers and affected complete mole and seems to be correlated to zygocity mechanism patients were diagnosed accurately. Thus this method is effectively identified by molecular analysis. usable in prenatal diagnosis of ataxia telangiectasia. We report 4 well-documented cases of complete hydatidiform mole (CHM) coexistent with a twin-live fetus (CHMLF). All of them were P0272. A new congenital disorder of glycosylation in a spontaneous pregnancies, 2 ended by delivery of a live-born baby, girl. the 2 others were terminated because of maternal pre-eclampsia D. Hèron1, D. Geneviève1, B. Bader-Meunier2, N. Seta3; associated with intra-uterine fetal death. 1Département de Génétique, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, If cytogenetic studies are sufficient for determining the ploidy, France, 2Service de Pédiatrie Générale, Hôpital Bicêtre, Paris, molecular analysis are necessary to confirm the mecanism. France, 3Biochimie A, Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France. Genomic DNA was extracted from the placenta, molar tissue and Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG syndromes) are a new peripheral blood leucocytes of parents. Using 10 microsatellites group of inherited metabolic disorders. They are characterised by a marquers, we showed the paternal origin the molar tissue, and defect in the synthesis of the glycan chain of the glycoproteins. To homozygosity of the mole was confirmed in the four cases. date, 8 enzymatic defects are identified. Here we report on a girl with As very rare, more cases are needed to predict the outcome. a new type of congenital disorders of glycosylation. Expectant management can be only discussed in absence of She was the third child from healthy consanguineous Tunisian maternal complications, associated with a normal fetal karyotype. parents, born at 35 weeks gestation after an uneventful pregnancy However, treatment criteria are still to be improved and diligent by caesarean section. Birth weight was 2440 g (-1 SD), length 49 maternal follow-up is always warranted in post-partum. cm (+1 SD), and head circumference 33 cm (+1 SD). Poor sucking, generalised hypotonia, facial dysmorphism and hypocalcemia P0270. Paternal costitutional mosaicism in familial bpes marked neonatal period. Cardiac and transfontanellar ultrasounds M. Piemontese1, P. Gasparini2, L. Zelante1; and blood chromosome with 22q11 in situ hybridisation were normal. 1IRCCS CSS, S. Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2TIGEM, Napoli, Italy. At 6 months she had failure to thrive, feeding difficulties requiring Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epycanthus inversus syndrome (BPES ) is tube feeding and gastrostomy, severe psychomotor involvement, an autosomal dominant disorder recently ascribed to mutations in major hypotonia, progressive microcephaly and frequent ORL and the FOXL2 gene, a forkhead transcription factor. In type I BPES a respiratory infections. At 18 months, she was not able to sit and complex eyelid malformation is associated with premature ovarian speech. Cerebral MRI was normal. Coagulation factors, serum failure (POF), whereas in type II BPES the eyelid defect occurs as cholesterol level and hepatic function were normal. Metabolic an isolated entity. Here, we report a family with one child affected investigations were normal. Immunologic investigations showed by BPES.Both parents were clinically unaffected , and there was no a low IgG level with normal IgA, IgM . Iso electric focusing and family history of an eyelid defect. western blot analysis showed a mild hypoglycosylation of proteins Screening for mutations in the FOXL2 gene in the patient using but phosphomannomutase and phophomannose isomerase activities direct sequencing revealed a frameshift deletion in the coding region, were normal, excluding CDG Ia and Ib. The patient’s fibroblasts giving rise to a truncating protein.The same mutation was found in showed a incompletely assembled dolichol linked oligosaccharides both peripheral blood and fibroblasts of the father in mosaicism with with 7 mannose residues secondary to an inefficient addition of a percentage of about 25%. A reexamination of clinical findings in the last mannose containing branch that is required for protein N- the father revealed, indeed, a minimal reduction of the horizontal glycosylation. Molecular biology investigations are in progress. diameter of the palpebral fissures. This study reports the first documented case of costitutional mosaicism in BPES and serves as a reminder that mosaicism should be considered in every case when a mutation is found. Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 132 133 P0273. Spectral karyotyping study of three patients with involvement. These combinations including Arima, Senior-Löken constitutional supernumerary chromosomal markers. and COACH syndromes, have been considered by some authors E. S. Ramos1, L. Martelli1, J. Karaskova2, J. Huber1, L. D. R. Giuliani1, as variants of Joubert syndrome and as distinct disease entities by B. R. Versiani1, M. L. Machado1, L. A. F. Laureano1, J. Squire2; others. In addition, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia occurs together 1School of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto - University of São Paulo, with juvenile nephronophthisis. We report a large consanguineous Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. Austrian family with three children, two sibs and their cousin, being Currently, the GTG-banding technique is the most commonly used variably affected by cerebellar, ocular, and renal malformations. We diagnostic method in clinical cytogenetics. This analysis of markers present a comparison of the clinical findings with known cerebello- can be inadequate because of poor chromosome morphology, size of oculo-renal syndromes, and the exclusion of both the Joubert markers and/or an insufficient yield of analyzable metaphases. The syndrome and juvenile nephronophthisis loci, JBTS1 and NPH1, usefulness of the FISH remains limited by the number of spectrally respectively, as the site of the mutant gene. distinguishable fluorochromes or fluorochrome combinations. Spectral karyotyping (SKY) has been developed to unambiguously P0276. Computer assisted diagnosis of chromosomal display and identify all chromosomes at one time using a spectral aberrations using a Bayesian and a counting approach signature that generates 24 unique colors. Three cases of with the help of the database SYNDROC constitutional supernumerary chromosomal markers and different U. Tautenhahn1, J. Kunze2, J. Pelz1; clinical manifestations are described in this report. Case 1: a male 1Reformstudiengang Medizin, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, (9 months of age) with microcephaly, up-slanting palpebral fissures, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Charité Campus Virchow, malformed ears, cryptorchidism, and “schawl” scrotum. Case 2: a Berlin, Germany. 6-year-old female with facial asymmetry, strabismus, prominent nasal The possibility to diagnose chromosomal aberrations using a bridge, micrognathia, and cubitus valgus. Case 3: a 14-year-old male computerized database was tested using 101 patients with an with seizures, triangular face, strabismus, prominent ears, thoracic established chromosomal aberration using the database SYNDROC. asymmetry, scoliosis, cubitus valgus, macro-orchidism, and wide gap This system provides the user with two different algorithms for the between first and second toes. SKY reveals the origin of the three calculation of a diagnosis: markers (Cases 1, 2, 3) as der(2), der(9), and der(15), respectively. - a descriptive algorithm which proposes a diagnosis counting a set of The identification of the chromosomal origin of the markers by phenotypic markers all having the same weight. SKY provides better information for the physician, and genetic - a Bayesian-algorithm which, evaluating calculates probabilities for counselor, for more appropriate management of patients with specific competing diagnoses by analyzing phenotypic anomalies. aneusomies. Three levels of precision were used assessing the diagnoses: Supported by: FAEPA, CAPES, FAPESP, CNPq, CCS, NCIC suggestion of the correct (1) chromosome number, (2) chromosome arm, (3) aberration type and rough location. P0274. CDG syndome type 1 : Ovarian histopathologic The combination of both algorithms yielded 51 consensus diagnoses anomalies in a woman with hypergonadotrophic for the level of the correct chromosome, 24 for the chromosome arm, hypogonadism and 15 for the aberration type. Additional diagnoses solely with the P. Sarda1, F. Dalla Vale2, B. Hashemi1, J. Puechberty1, C. Coubes1, P. descriptive algorithm were yielded for 43, 52 and 47 cases and using Blanchet1; the Bayesian-algorithm for 1, 4 and 1 diagnoses respectively. Since 1Genetics Department - Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, with the Bayesian-algorithm, when evaluating an uncertain diagnosis France, 2Pediatric Endocrinology Department - Arnaud de Villeneuve using a combination of symptoms, one does so by calculating the Hospital, Montpellier, France. probability of the claim in the light of given information. This seems Carbohydrate Deficient Glycoprotein (CDG) syndrome type 1 is a to be a much more promising for a correct diagnosis than the pure genetic disorder with multisystemic manifestations. Few affected counting of numbers of matches. The Bayesian coefficients were in adults have been reported and most females show absent or delayed the range between 0.57 and 0.05; the 0.5 margin as a trustworthy pubertal development due to ovarian failure but no histopathological one announced by the authors of SYNDROC was reached by only examination in adult patients has been reported to date. one of the correctly recognized cases. The prior probabilities for the We present the case of a 22-year-old woman, with CDG syndrome calculations of the Bayesian-formula do not seem to use serviceable type 1. At age of 17 she had no sign of pubertal development. No weights. ovaries were present on ultrasound examination and endocrine testing revealed hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism. P0277. Another observation with VATER and a deficiency Pelvic laparoscopy showed bilateral streak-like ovaries with of complex IV respiratory chain disorder. dysmorphic fallopian tubes and a normal uterus. Biopsy specimen of C. Thauvin-Robinet1, L. Faivre2, P. Journeau3, F. Huet4, P. Rustin5, A. ovaries revealed ovarian like stroma with no follicle. Rötig5, A. Munnich5, V. Cormier-Daire5; Less than 10 adult women with CDG syndrome have been reported. 1Centre de Génétique, Dijon, France, 2centre de génétique, Dijon, Only one woman had normal puberty. All the others present with France, 3Service de Traumatologie et Orthopédie, Hôpital Nécker- hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism. In half of the cases no ovary Enfants, Paris, France, 4Service de Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d’Enfants, is detectable by ultrasound examination, in the other half of cases Dijon, France, 5Département de Génétique, Hôpital Nécker-Enfants, ultrasound revealed presence of ovaries but without signs of follicular Paris, France. activity. The VATER association of vertebral anomalies (V), anal atresia Abnormal protein glycosylation has complex and heterogeneous (A), esophageal atresia and/or tracheo-esophageal fistula (TE), effects which result in ovarian failure. Details of pathogenesis remain radial and renal anomalies (R) is a common congenital disorder to be determined. of unknown origin with probably heterogeneous causes. Here, we report on a girl presenting with pre- and postnatal growth retardation, P0275. An autosomal recessive cerebello-oculo-renal esophageal atresia, vertebral and costal anomalies and a unilateral syndrome unlinked to both the JBTS1 and NPH1 loci radial defect, consistent with the diagnosis of VATER association. B. Utermann1, A. R. Janecke1, T. Müller2, H. Duba1, R. Scheithauer3, In the first months of life, she presented with failure to thrive, severe G. Utermann1; episodes of hypoglycemia, and liver cytolysis which prompted us to 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, University of perform a metabolic screening. Hyperlactatemia was observed and a Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Paediatrics; University complex IV respiratory chain deficiency was found on a liver biopsy. Hospital Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Institute of Legal Medicine, The respiratory chain deficiency was not observed in skin fibroblasts. University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. No mtDNA point mutation or deletion was identified. The girl is now A delineation of several syndroms featuring cerebellar vermis 6 years old and has a normal mental development but persistent hypoplasia, and ocular, renal, or hepatic involvement has proven feeding difficulties and moderate hyperlactatemia (2.6mM). To our difficult. Cerebellar vermis hypoplasia occurs as an isolated trait, knowledge, this is the second report of VATER association with a or together with hypotonia, developmental delay, and abnormal mitochondrial disorder. In a previous report (Damian et al., 1996), breathing or abnormal eye movements in Joubert syndrome, and a VACTERL association was observed in a girl who presented, in is further observed associated with other ocular, renal, or hepatic addition, the mitochondrial NP3243 point mutation. The observation 132 Posters - Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 133 of VATER association in combination with a mitochondrial disorder 7 1/2 year old girl is described. This type of cytogenetically visible may be coincidental but could suggest also that the presence of microdeletion was not reported so far. The patient was born as the multiple malformations and antenatal manifestations does not rule out second child to healthy unrelated parents following an uneventful the diagnosis of respiratory chain deficiency. pregnancy. Her phenotypic anomalies are relatively mild including a moderate growth and mental retardation and discrete dysmorphic P0278. Nager syndrome: About a Tunisian case facial features can be seen as well. Initial cytogenetic results obtained L. Benjemaa, F. Maazoul, R. Mrad, M. Chaabouni, M. Ksontini, H. by standard G-banding were confirmed by high resolution RBG/GBG Chaabouni; banding and characterized in more detail by analysis of the patient Service des Maladies Congénitales et Héréditaires, EPS Charles and her parents using more than 8 informative microsatellite markers Nicolle, Tunis, Tunisia. including D22S536, D22S1167, D22S273, D22S278 and D22S1156. Nager acrofacial dysostosis was recognized as a specific entity The patient does not show cafe-au-lait spots or neurofibromas at her by Nager and de Reynier syndrome(1948). It’s a rare desorder, skin however since the gene for neurofibromatosis 2 coding for the approximately 40 documented cases. The inheritance is autosomal merlin/Schwannomin tumor suppressor protein maps to 22q12.2, dominant, most cases have been sporadic. Zori(1993) suggested that which is by cytogenetic resolution within the deleted segment, further the gene may reside on chromosome 9. molecular studies are required to provide the patient with the optimal We reported a young boy offspring of young and non consanguineous disease prevention and medical management. parents, he presented a mandibulofacial dysostosis and a skeletal anomalies, evoking Nager’s syndrome.The investigates genetics is P0282. Mutations in EDA, EDAR, XEDAR and NEMO negative. We begin in this work a comparative study with the data of genes reveal a new signal transduction pathway the literature and we discuss the differential diagnosis. participating in differentiation of skin appendages. S. A. Wisniewski, B. Marszalek, K. Kobielak, A. Kobielak, W. H. P0279. Long follow up in a patient with a Toriello-Carey Trzeciak; syndrome. USOMS Poznan, Poznan, Poland. S. Sabine, A. Moncla, N. Philip; Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (EDA) is caused by the defect in the Département de Génétique Médicale, Marseille, France. differentiation of skin appendages during embryonic development, In 1988, Toriello and Carey described a rare congenital disorder resulting from improper interactions between ectoderm and characterized by telecanthus, short palpebral fissures, a small nose, mesenchyme at a molecular level. Initiation of the differentiation abnormal ears, Robin sequence cardiac defect, corpus callosum process requires protein products of EDA, XEDAR and NEMO agenesis, hypotonia, postnatal growth retardation and developmental genes localised on the X chromosome and EDAR gene localised delay. Originally an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance on chromosome 2. These genes encode a ligand (ectodysplasin A), was suspected. Since that times a total of fourteen patients have receptors (EDAR and XEDAR) belonging to TNF/TNFR families, as been reported. The predominance of affected male and the milder well as a protein (NEMO), participating in signal transducting pathway phenotype in female patients suggested an X linked or sex influenced involving NFκB. Patients harbouring mutations of these genes exhibit gene. We report the follow up of an additional male patient with a an identical phenotype: oligodontia or anodontia, sparse hair and Toriello-Carey syndrome born from unconsanguineous parents from hypertermia, caused by the lack of sweat glands. birth to the age of 7 years. The structure of EDAR and XEDAR genes was investigated in 20 patients with clinical symptoms of anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia P0280. Ocular Findings In Fabry Disease : A Survey Of 25 and their 80 relatives. In these patients no mutations in EDA, and Hemizygous Male Patients NEMO genes were found. Appropriate fragments of genomic DNA C. Orssaud, D. P. Germain; were amplified by PCR and were subjected to multiple temperature, Hopital Europeen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France. single stranded conformation polymorphism analysis (MTSSCP) Background: Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked inborn error of followed by direct sequencing using automated sequencer. In one glycosphingolipid metabolism due to deficient activity of lysosomal α- patient, sequence analysis revealed a novel T1109C transition galactosidase A. Progressive glycosphingolipid storage is responsible resulting in (Val370Ala) substitution in the death domain of EDAR. for renal failure and ischemic complications, involving brain and In the other patient, sequence analysis demonstrated deletion heart. Much interest is currently paid to emerging α-galactosidase A of G (del252G) in exon 2 of XEDAR gene resulting in premature replacement therapy. termination of translation and truncated form of the receptor devoid of Methods: We carried out a complete baseline ophthalmologic transmembrane and intracellular domains. The correlation between examination of 25 hemizygotes affected with FD, prior to enzyme the phenotype and the localisation of the molecular defect was replacement therapy. investigated. Results: The mean age at time of examination was 36 ± 13 years. No patient had any functional complain. The measured refractive P0283. Diagnosis of malformation syndromes using values were unremarkable. However, the incidence of myopia artificial neural networks was high (46.00 %). Thirty-nine eyes (78.00 %) reached a far best G. Graetschel, J. Pelz; corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/20. Seven eyes had a BCVA of Reformstudiengang Medizin, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany. 20/25 and none of them had an acuity lower than 20/33. All the eyes Computer programs which can be used as an aid to diagnose had normal BCVA in near vision. The mean value of the Schirmer 2 multiple congenital malformation syndromes have been used for test was normal in 18 patients. Seven patients (28.00 %) presented many years. These programs are based either on algorithms, which a reduction of the lacrimal secretion. Vascular abnormalities of define a diagnosis by a set of phenotypic components all having the bulbar conjunctiva were found in 34 eyes (68.00 %). Cornea the same weight or on algorithms based on a concept of Bayesian verticillata was observed in 23 eyes (46.00%). A corneal haze was statistics. A new approach for this field are artificial neuronal networks the most frequent corneal abnormality, observed in 45 eyes (90.00 (ANNs). A commercially available shell was applied, suitable for %). Lens anterior capsule deposits were observed in 4 patients building up feedforeward ANNs trained by using backpropagation and the Fabry posterior cataract in 9 patients. Retinal vascular of errors. The data of 234 patients representing individual examples tortuosities were observed in 12 patients (48 %). The optic discs were of 21 different malformation syndromes were used. The numbers unremarkable. An enlargement of the blind spot was noted in 35.00 of symptoms/combinations for the description of cases were limited % of the eyes at visual field examination. to 28, 55 and 78 in different series of tests. After the export of the patients data to the shell the data of about 2/3 of the patients were P0281. Constitutional Microdeletion del(22)(q12.1q12.3) used for the training of the ANN. The remaining 1/3 of patients data- including the NF2 gene region. sets were used to test the diagnostic capacities of the different ANNs. P. M. Kroisel, C. Windpassinger, H. Zierler, K. Wagner, E. Petek; The most efficient yielded a diagnosis in more than 95 % of all tests. Institute of Medical Biology & Human Genetics, University of Graz, Correct diagnoses without any concurrent differential diagnoses were Graz, Austria. generated in 26 %; adding all tests producing the correct diagnosis A de novo deletion of the long arm of chromosome 22 distal to the among other diagnoses amounted to 74 %. The application of ANNs DiGeorge/Catch22 critical region as verified by FISH analysis in a in the diagnostic process of malformation syndromes is efficient - one Posters - Cystic Fibrosis, Familial Mediterranean Fever 134 135 shortcoming is, that different sets of training data produce models P 4. Cystic fibrosis and Familial Mediterranean Fever with different generalization accuracies. The significance of an ANN is to a great extent influenced by chance and the experience of the P0286. Maternal UPD7 In The Case Of Cystic Fibrosis developer. E. Obersztyn, Z. Helias-Rodzewicz, A. Sobczynska-Tomaszewska, E. Bocian, T. Mazurczak; P0284. Can OMIM be used as a decision support system National Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. in the diagnotic process of malformation syndromes? Uniparental Disomy (UPD) is the inheritance of two homologous F. von Luebken1, J. Kunze2, J. Pelz1; chromosomes only from one parent in a euploid offspring. Loss 1Reformstudiengang Medizin, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, of heterozygosity in the uniparental isodisomy may be a cause of Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Charité Campus Virchow, clinical expression of autosomally recessive disorders, when only one Berlin, Germany. of the parents is the carrier of gene mutation. In approximately 7-10% The increasing number of malformation syndromes causes difficulties patients with Silver-Russell syndrome maternal UPD7 is observed. for the diagnostic process of the clinician. OMIM (Online Mendelian Clinical, cytogenetic and molecular studies carried out in the case Inheritance in Man) was tested as a decision support system for the of a 2 years old girl affected with cystic fibrosis (CF) as a result differential diagnostic process of patients with malformations. The of maternal isodisomy of chromosome 7 are presented. Clinical data of 119 patients with different clinically confirmed syndromes diagnosis of CF was confirmed by mutation analysis in the CFTR were used to search differential diagnoses in OMIM feeding the signs gene which revealed that patient is the homozygote of delF508 of the respective patient in all possible combinations. Four different mutation. Severe intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation (body search strategies were tested (1) utilization of all signs of the patient, weight -4SD, body length -6SD), relative macrocephaly, clinodactyly (2) usage of those signs, that a clinical expert considered to be of 5th finger, feeding difficulties, hypoglycaemic episodes in the important in diagnosis, (3) input of head-neck-signs (4) feeding all neonatal period and dysmorphic features suggested Silver-Russell but (3). The combinations of signs for the searches in OMIM were syndrome. Psychomotor development was within the normal range. created using the ‘AND’ and the ‘OR’-junction. Karyotype in the lymphocytes was normal - 46,XX. Analysis of With the AND-junction the number of differential diagnoses polymorphic microsatellites markers at loci: D7S507, D7S2422, decreased with the number of signs used in combination, while the D7S460, D7S1517 and GTNOS showed maternal UPD7. Analysis of OR-junction resulted in more than 200 differential diagnoses for delF508 mutation revealed that only mother was the heterozygote of every syndrome and search strategy on the average. All four search this mutation. strategies yielded more than 50% positive results, interestingly even Results of our studies explain the cause of severe somatic retardation strategy (4) was very effective. The number of differential diagnoses in the patient.The diagnosis was the basis for verified genetic decreased with the number of signs read in in combinations applying counselling concerning recurrence risk of cystic fibrosis in that family. the AND-junction. The application of OMIM is sometimes tedious, but it is an acceptable P0287. The case of cystic fibrosis in 46,XY phenotypic and useful tool in all four strategies although it has not been newborn girl with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome developed as a decision support system in the realm of malformation E. A. Grigori, P. M. Stratulat, E. P. Tabac, L. Sinitsina; syndromes. Institute of Childhood and Motherhood Health Care, Chisinau, REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA. P0285. Stuve –Wiedemann syndrome in long-term In presented study we are describing a phenotype of newborn girl survivors: a neuro-myo-skeletal disorder with prominent consulted concerning congenital abnormalities. Her mother was 20 neurovegetative features years old, father was 25 years old, apparently healthy. The parental M. Di Rocco1, G. Stella2, C. Bruno3, L. Doria Lamba4, M. Bado3, A. consanguinity wasn’t discovered. Child was born from fifth pregnancy, Superti-Furga5; complicated with toxemia, at 38 week of gestation, birth weight 1Second Unit of Pediatrics, Istituto G Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 2Second was equal to 2700g, head circumference of 33 cm. The first four Unit of Orthopaedics, Istituto G Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 3Unit of pregnancies terminated with spontaneous abortion. There were the Neuromuscular Disorders, Istituto G Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 4Unit of following phenotypic abnormalities: broad nasal bridge with broad Pediatric Neurology, Istituto G Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 5Department of nose and anteverted nostrils epicanthal folds, low set ears, increased Pediatrics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. nasolabial distance, broad maxillary alveolar ridges, micrognatia, cleft In 1971 Stuve and Wiedemann described a syndrome characterized palate, short neck with pterygium colli, postaxial polydactyly of hands by bowing of long bones, camptodactyly, respiratory distress, and feet, hypoplastic of thumbs, proximal cutaneous syndactyly hypertermic episodes and death in the first year of life (Z Kinderheilkd of toes II-III, congenital heart defect, external genitals feminine. 11:184-92,1971). Clinical features of long-survivor patients with SWS The karyotype of child was 46,XY. The karyotypes of both parents are not studied in great detail, owing to the rarity of individuals. were normal. The child died at the age of 15 days. It was found We follow two patients with SWS aged 12 and 3 years. The first the following malformations at autopsy: microghiry, heart trilocalar had congenital bowing of the long bones, respiratory distress, with common ductus arteriosus, fibrosis interstitial of pancreas with swallowing difficulties and unexplained fevers in the first year of dilatation cystic of sinuses, cystic dysplastic changes of both kidneys, life. After, he developed intolerance to low temperature, paradoxical bronchitis and broncholith with mucus obstruction. Thus we suggest sweeting, hypolacrimation and lack of corneal reflex leading to that above mentioned case is presented by association of Smith- keratitis and corneal leukomas, recurrent ulcerations of the tongue, Lemli-Opitz syndrome in phenotypic female a 46,XY karyotype and chronic gingivitis and dental decay. Cognitive level is normal. He cystic fibrosis caused by different recessive genes. has no clinical signs of myopathy, but muscle examination showed an increased number of lipid droplets and reduced respiratory P0288. Prenatal Diagnosis in Families with Cystic chain activities. No mtDNA mutations were detected. After the first Fibrosis in Republic of Moldova years of life he also showed severe progressive scoliosis. The S. D. Ghimbovschi1, T. E. Ivaschenco2, T. K. Kascheeva2, S. A. second patient had respiratory distress, hypertermia, bowing of Groppa1, V. S. Baranov2; legs and camptodactyly at the birth. In the second year of age he 1Institute of Childhood and Motherhood Health Care, Chishinau, developed intolerance to low temperature, paradoxical sweeting, REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA, 2Scientific Institute of Midwifery and tongue ulcerations with loss of tongue fragments, poor dentition, Gynecology, S-Petersburg, Russian Federation. chronic gingivitis, corneal anesthesia leading to keratitis and corneal Introduction: Taken into consideration that there are 72% of mutant leukomas. Cognitive level, electromyography and motor nerve chromosomes with non-identified mutations in moldavian patients conduction are normal. with Cystic Fibrosis (CF), we performed prenatal diagnosis (PD) Clinical history of our patients expands the clinical phenotype of this using both molecular-genetic and biochemical methods. Using PCR- intriguing disorder and may help in pinpointing candidate genes. RFLP analysis and investigation of the level of the some enzymes in liquor amnii (aminopeptidaze, γ-glutamiltranspeptidaze and alkaline fosfotaze) have been applied PD in 12 CF-families. Results: In all 5 cases of PD in first trimester of gestation we used only molecular-genetic methods. In 2 cases we based only on the 134 Posters - Cystic Fibrosis, Familial Mediterranean Fever 135 availability of the DF508; in 1 case - on the availability of DF508 in 137/151 (91%) lymphoblasts and a 6% rate of allele drop-out and R347P; in 2 cases - on the availability of DF508 and allelic (ADO) was observed. During clinical application, 94% of blastomeres distribution in CS7/Hin6.I and Km19/PstI systems (in both allele gave PCR signals and a complete haplotype could be assigned to 2 was linked with unknown mutations). In all of these cases were 84% of them. With the degree of polymorphism of the markers (48 established healthy fetuses. In 4 (from 7) cases of PD in the second and 39%) and their co-amplification with the F508 locus, our test trimester of gestation we used both the molecular-genetic (availability should be suitable for nearly 80% of the couples requesting PGD for of DF508) and biochemical methods. Due to absence of information CF. This fluorescent multiplex PCR indirect diagnosis provides also about “guilty” mutations in 3 CF-families we carried out the PD in the a safer test since it allows confirmation of the diagnosis, detection second trimester of gestation based only on the data of the enzyme’s of contamination and could give an indication on the ploidy of the level in liquor amnii. As a result of our PD investigations we confirmed embryos tested. cystic fibrosis in 4 fetuses. Conclusion: Using both molecular-genetic and biochemical P0291. Non-visualization of the fetal gallbladder: a approaches of investigation allows performing of PD in total number predictive sign of cystic fibrosis? of pregnancies with major risc in CF in situation when there are D. Demarsy1, M. C. Malinge1, A. Guichet1, C. Lépinard1, D. Bonneau2; not sufficiently information about molecular-genetic structure of 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Angers, France, 2Centre mutations. Hospitalier Universitaire, Angers, France. The non-visualization of the gallbladder without additional P0289. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis for cystic malformations has been described in fetuses with trisomy 21, biliary fibrosis in populations with molecular heterogeneity, atresia and gallbladder agenesia. On another hand, a number of based on multiplex sequence variation detection fetuses with an isolated absence of the gallbladder have a normal throughout the CFTR gene outcome. It is well known, however, that cystic fibrosis must be C. Vrettou1, M. Tzetis1, J. R. Traeger-Synodinos1, G. Palmer2, E. suspected when the absence of the gallbladder is associated with Kanavakis1; hyperechogenic bowel. We report here 5 cases where the isolated 1University of Athens, Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 2Center for non-visualization of the gallbladder led us to diagnose cystic fibrosis Reproductive Medicine, Alpha Lab, Athens, Greece. by DNA analysis at 20-24 weeks of gestations. Four fetuses were Cystic fibrosis (CF) is targeted as one of the priority genetic diseases homozygous ΔF508/ΔF508 and 1 was coumpound heterozygote for prevention programmes. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis ΔF508/G551D. All pregnancies were terminated and the gallbladder (PGD) represents an alternative approach to prenatal diagnosis, was found to be present but hypoplastic on pathological examination especially for couples with an unsuccessful reproductive history in all 5 fetuses. Several hypothese may be proposed to explain this and/or undergoing assisted reproduction for male infertility who finding. 1) a cystic duct obstruction from inspissated bile or mucus. have the additional risk of transmitting CF. The clinical application Pathological examinations of the biliary tract were however normal requires optimization of single cell genotyping protocols to minimize in all fetuses.2) a contracted gallbladder. 3) an hyperechogenic PCR failure, allelic drop out (ADO) and contamination. In addition bowel might have been associated earlier in pregancy and might the protocol should allow detection of the wide spectrum of potential have disappeared when ultrasound examinations were performed. CF-affected genotypes, especially relevant for Southern European In agreement with this hypothesis, one of the fetuses reported populations. To this end we developed a flexible multiplex PCR her was found to have an absent gallbladder associated with protocol allowing analysis of sequence variations in any combination hyperechogenic bowel at 14 weeks of gestation whereas the anomaly amongst 7 CFTR gene exons (4, 10, 11, 13 in two parts, 14b, 17b of the gallbladder was isolated at 15 weeks of gestation. We suggest and 21) by nested-PCR and DGGE analysis, along with the intragenic therefore to performe chromosomal and DNA analyses on amniotic dinucleotide microsatellite IVS8CA. The experiments were carried fluid to exclude trisomy 21 and cystic fibrosis respectiviely when the out on 390 single lymphocytes from 3 compound heterozygous gallbladder is not visualized at 22 weeks of gestation. CF patients, one heterozygote and one non-CF individual. PCR efficiency between exons varied from 90% to 100%, and ADO from P0292. Non-invasive Prenatal Detection Of A Paternal 0% to 3.8%. IVS8CA was co-amplified with PCR efficiency of 92.4% Inherited Cystic Fibrosis Mutation In Maternal Plasma and 10.8% ADO (evaluated by sizing the fluorescent PCR product). C. González-González, M. García-Hoyos, M. J. Trujillo, M. No contamination was observed in any set of experiments. The Rodríguez de Alba, J. Gallego, I. Lorda-Sánchez, C. Ayuso, C. present method overcomes the need of separate assays for each Ramos; CF mutation, and additionally allows analysis of linked polymorphic Department of Genetics. Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. sequence variations (when informative), useful for minimizing The discovery of the presence of circulating fetal DNA in maternal misdiagnosis and/or indirect diagnosis. This method proved robust plasma and serum opens up new strategies to perform non- and flexible for diagnosing diverse CF genotype combinations in invasive procedures to obtain a reliable diagnosis without any risk single cells. for the fetus. In this way, it has been used for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of fetal gender, Rh factor, and paternally inherited disorders P0290. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) of cystic like myotonic dystrophy. fibrosis by multiplex PCR combining deltaF508 mutation The big potential of the detection of fetal DNA from maternal plasma by PCR lies in the possibility to avoid any risk for the fetus in the and intragenic microsatellites of the CFTR gene. invasive procedure and its feasibility for a clinical application. C. Moutou1, N. Gardes1, S. Viville1,2; Because of the maternal DNA contamination this kind of analysis is 1Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg SIHCUS-CMCO, Schiltigheim, limited to those sequences of paternal origin and thus we attempted France, 2Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, to detect only the paternal mutation. Illkirch, France. In our study we have used the PCR method to demonstrate a non- One major limitation of pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) invasive prenatal analysis, in maternal plasma, of an autosomal- practice comes from the need to develop single cell PCR protocols. recessive disorder like Cystic Fibrosis in which both parents have For Cystic fibrosis (CF), for which almost 1000 mutations have different mutations, having successfully detected a paternally been identified, the development of a mutation-based PGD protocol inherited CF mutation in heterozygosis. is impracticable. An way to overcome this problem is to set up The interference of the maternal DNA during the PCR amplification an indirect diagnosis using polymorphic markers allowing the represents the main disadvantage. At this point it is essential to find identification of the pathogenic haplotype instead of the mutation. new strategies in order to obtain a non-invasive diagnosis with results We present a new PGD protocol for CF, based on a multiplex as precise as the ones obtained by invasive procedures. fluorescent PCR co-amplifying the deltaF508 mutation and two CFTR intragenic polymorphic microsatellites (IVS8CA and IVS17bCA). Such an approach is justified since in 91% of the cases at least one P0293. Microscopic fetal pathological examination can partner of the couple carries the deltaF508 mutation. The use of lead to unexpected diagnosis of cystic fibrosis intragenic markers reduces the risk of misdiagnosis due to meiotic P. Y. J. Marcorelles1, M. P. Audrezet2, J. J. Chabaud3, P. Parent4, M. recombination. A PCR signal was obtained in 97% of the single Le Bris5, M. De Braekeeler5, C. Ferec2, N. Lagarde1; lymphoblasts (151/155) tested. A complete haplotyping was achieved 1Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, CHU, Brest, France, 2Laboratoire Posters - Cystic Fibrosis, Familial Mediterranean Fever 136 137 de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Brest, France, 3Clinique Pasteur, We retrospectively registered all the patients born in Brittany since Brest, France, 4Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Brest, France, 1960, by crosschecking different data sources. We contacted 5Service de Cytogénétique CHU, Brest, France. councils to obtain patients’ residence place. We are reporting a case of a 19 weeks gestational age fetus A total of 520 patients were registered. We assessed CF incidence terminated for myelomeningocele discovered on early ultrasound according to administrative and ecclesiastic divisions and its evolution examination . Parents were non related with no story of familial over decades. Incidence was 1/2630, with a west/east gradient genetic disease. On microscopic examination of fetal pancreas, which was confirmed over time (Finistère: 1/2071 vs. Ille-et-Vilaine: slight cystic dilatations of small pancreatic ducts were consistent with 1/3286). This high frequency may result from founder effects and cystic fibrosis as these dilatations are known as the earliest histologic genetic drift. Currently, incidence is decreasing mainly because of change described in the pancreas. Molecular analysis of the CFTR prenatal diagnosis. Moreover, we determined the mutations spectrum gene by DHPLC on the genomic DNA of the parents revealed the and their spatial distribution. We obtained an excellent detection rate presence of the mutations deltaF508 and E60X, thus confirming this (99.7%). Western Brittany presented a specific spectrum (1078delT, diagnosis. G551D, W846X, 4005+1G>A), whereas the eastern part show a Normal pancreatic development is caracterised by the increase of spectrum more similar to the French one. acinar number during pregnancy. In case of cystic fibrosis, acini This study relates the regional specificities of the CFTR gene and become scarce with extensive diffuse fibrosis and excretory ducts highlights the disparities that existed in Brittany. This results from may be distented with eosinophilic plugs in their lumina. Others different isolation degrees and population movements. It is the first additional findings can be meconium ileus, or meconial peritonitis and time that a so detailed study is performed in a large population. This on microscopic view widespread obstruction of exocrine glands ducts. better knowledge of CF epidemiology allows to improve diagnostic However none of these morphological findings can be found in every strategies and to refine genetic counselling. fetal or perinatal case but becomes usual in older children. To conclude, this case report points out the need of thorough fetal P0296. Notification of Cystic Fibrosis as primary cause of examination which can discover others abnormalities than the death in Rio de Janeiro State, Brazil, from 1979 to 1998 expected ones and allows a better pre-natal genetic counselling. C. L. A. Paiva1, L. Janotti2, C. Naurath3, S. R. Middleton4, R. M. Lugarinho5, S. R. dos Santos4; P0294. Screening for CFTR Gene Mutations and 1Genetics and Molecular Biology Unit, Universidade do Rio de Polymorphisms in Patients with Chronic Pancreatitis Janeiro(UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Universidade do Rio de A. Nikolic1, J. Kusic1, D. Radojkovic1, S. Lukic2, T. Milosavljevic2, A. Janeiro (UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3Universidade do rio de Savic1; Janeiro (UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil, 4Universidade do Rio 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, de Janeiro (RJ), Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil, 5Universidade do Rio de Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 2Clinical Center of Serbia, Department of Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil. Gastroenterology, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is an autossomal recessive disease mapped Chronic pancreatitis is an inflammatory disorder in which progressive to 7q31-q32. Lung disease accounts for approximately 95% of its and irreversible structural changes of the pancreas result in a morbidity and mortality, with an incidence of 1 in 2,500 Caucasians. permanent impairment of both exocrine and endocrine function. The aim of this work was to investigate the notification of CF as Both environmental and genetic factors are known to induce chronic primary cause of death in Rio de Janeiro State (RJ) for 20 years. Our pancreatitis. Recent reports have revealed genetic basis of chronic data were extracted from the Brazilian Data-SUS CD-rom entitled pancreatitis showing that mutations in Cationic Trypsinogen, CFTR “Sistema de informacão sobre mortalidade/1979-1998”. Our results and SPINK1 genes are associated with this disorder. show that 27 infants, younger than 1 year, died from CF in RJ from This study was undertaken to investigate the association of mutations 1979 to 1988, and 13 infants died from CF from 1989 to 1998. The and polymorphisms in CFTR gene with chronic pancreatitis in same sorts of results were observed throughout Brazil (252 cases Yugoslav patients. Thirty-nine patients (alcohol-related pancreatitis from 1979 to 1988 and 178 cases from 1989 to 1998). For Brazil, in 29 and idiopathic pancreatitis in 10) were examined using the Qui-square test indicates that these differences are significant combination of PCR and subsequent direct (HA, PSM) and indirect (p<0.01), as well as for Rio de Janeiro State (p<0.05). For the (SSCP, DGGE) mutation detection methods. age group 15 to 24 years the numbers of death notifications have F508del mutation was found in two patients (5.1%). 5T allele at Tn increased. These results indicate that there was an improvement in polymorphic site was not found in any of the analyzed patients, while the quality of life of CF patients. Eighty people out of 93 died from frequencies of 7T and 9T allele were 85.9% and 14.1%, respectively. CF in Rio de Janeiro City and 13 deaths occurred in five smaller Eighteen patients (46.1%) had 2694T→G polymorphism in exon 14a, cities, although their permanent addresses were distributed among while three (7.7%) had 4002A→G polymorphism in exon 20. One 12 different cities out of 31. It is worth mentioning that notification of patient showed also, in combination with 2694T→G polymorphism, CF as primary cause of death occurred in cities, but one, where there the change in exon 6a, but this change should be defined through was at least one Faculty of Medicine. This may account for a better sequencing. acknowledgement of CF and for a more accurate death notification. Obtained frequency of 2694T→G polymorphism in Yugoslav patients with chronic pancreatitis (25.6%) closely resembles its frequency in P0297. Molecular-genetic analysis of polymorphic healthy Yugoslav population (29%). Still, obtained frequency of CFTR variants of GSTM1, CYP1A1 genes and CFTR gene mutations is slightly increased in these patients which indicates mutations in patients with chronic pulmonary diseases possible association of mutations in CFTR gene with chronic from Bashkortostan pancreatitis, but further investigations on larger cohort of patients are D. Yanbaeva, G. Korytina, O. Macarova, E. Khusnutdinova, T. required in order to confirm these findings. Viktorova; Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. P0295. Molecular epidemiology of cystic fibrosis in Chronic pulmonary diseases are one of the major widespread causes Brittany, France: a retrospective study from 1960 of illness. The search for pulmonary disease susceptibility genes is V. Scotet1, D. Gillet2, I. Duguépéroux2, M. P. Audrézet1, G. Bellis3, B. a complex problem, connecting with the influence of environmental Garnier3, M. De Braekeleer1,2,3, C. Férec1; factors in the pathogenesis of these disorders. Nevertheless, a 1INSERM EMI 01-15, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Brest, large number of epidemiological studies suggest that genetic factors France, 2Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Brest, France, 3Ined, Paris, play a role. One possibility to account for a susceptibility to the France. effects of environmental pollutants may be genetic variations in the Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common severe autosomal recessive xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes such as glutathione-S-transferase disease that affects children in Caucasian populations. Characterized M1 (GSTM1) and cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1). In addition, by pulmonary and digestive disorders, CF is caused by mutations heterozygosity for predominant delF508 mutation of CFTR gene is in the CFTR gene. Near 1000 mutations have been identified associated with pulmonary disease such as chronic bronchitis and worldwide. The aim of this study was to define the spatial and asthma. temporal distribution of CF and of its mutations in Brittany (western In order to determine the possible role of detoxifying enzymes gene France) where the disease is frequent. mutations and mutation delF508 of CFTR gene in the pathogenesis 136 Posters - Cystic Fibrosis, Familial Mediterranean Fever 137 of pulmonary diseases we have studied 45 patients (22 with strip; in all these cases, the wild-type probe remained positive. For bronchopneumonia, 12 with chronic bronchitis, 7 with asthma and the rare mutations, no cross-reactivity with the mutant probes was per 2 with bronchiectasis and bronchoobstructive syndrome) and observed. We could conclude that in all these samples, the INNO- compared the results with 68 subjects from control group. The LiPA probe reactivities allowed correct clinical interpretation. GSTM1 0/0 genotype was found in 37% of affected individuals and in 49% in control subjects. There were no significant differences P0300. Prevalence Of Cftr Mutations In Newborns (p>0,05). For CYP1A1 locus the Val allele was detected in 7% of With Increased Irt Detected Through A Pilot Neonatal affected individuals and only in 3% in control, but the differences Screening For Cystic Fibrosis In The Piemonte Region are not significant (p>0,05). CYP1A1 Ile/Val genotype increased G. Restagno1, L. Sbaiz1, A. Gomez1, E. Cocco1, S. Bosso1, A. approximately twofold in affected individuals (15%). We have not Sedita2, E. Bignamini3, L. Anfossi3, L. Leone4; found an individual with delF508 mutation of CFTR gene. In future 1Molecular Genetics Service, Azienda Ospedaliera O.I.R.M.-S.Anna, studies of multiple gene polymorphisms we should include other Torino, Italy, 2Molecular Genetics Service, Azienda Ospedaliera candidate genes and will take more affected patients. O.I.R.M.-S.Anna, Torino, Italy, 3Cystic Fibrosis Center, A.O. O.I.R.M.- S.Anna, Torino, Italy, 4Department of Clinical Pathology, Azienda P0298. Possibilities and barriers in the implementation Ospedaliera O.I.R.M.-S.Anna, Torino, Italy. of a preconceptional screening programme for cystic Neonatal screening strategy. A two-step protocol combining the fibrosis carriers: a focus group study assay for immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) with the analysis of 30 F. Poppelaars1, G. van der Wal1, J. Braspenning2, M. Cornel1, L. mutations in the CFTR gene using the OLA-PCR-SCS. Neonates Henneman1, M. Langendam1, L. ten Kate1; with two mutations are referred directly for clinical assessment and 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2University confirmatory sweat test; infants with one mutation are recalled for of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. sweat test at age 4-5 weeks. A genetic counselling benefit is offered Background. Since the identification of the cystic fibrosis (CF) gene to parents when trypsinogen/DNA screening is performed. This it has become possible to perform CF carrier screening. Despite the strategy results in early and accurate diagnosis of cystic fibrosis but positive results of pilot studies in various countries, carrier screening an excess of heterozygotes among neonates with hypertrypsinaemia is not yet standard practice. The question arises as to whether this has been reported. might be due to barriers in implementation. Prevalence of heterozygosity in hypertrypsinaemic newborns. Objective. The objective was to explore possibilities and barriers We have assessed the heterozygosity frequency among 50.956 in the implementation of a nation-wide preconceptional CF carrier children born from July 2000 to December 2001 and screened for CF. screening programme. 996 (1.9%, i.e. 1/51) of those tested had an IRT level greater than Methods. Sessions with two focus groups of CF patients and CF the decisional threshold and were analysed for mutations. 19 were relatives, one focus group of people from the target population CF with a positive sweat test and 80 were carriers. Incidence of CF (couples planning to have children), and two focus groups of care- was 1/2682, leading to a carrier frequency of 1/26 while the estimated providers (general practitioners, and health care workers in the frequency of heterozygtes in children with hypertrypsinaemia was Municipal Health Services). 1/9, three times greater than the general population. The number Results. In general, there is a positive attitude among CF patients of different mutations in carriers is greater than in CF children (13 and their relatives, the target population, and care-providers towards versus 10) and than in a cohort of 1574 newborns from our region, preconceptional CF carrier screening. The most important barriers in not selected by IRT, analysed in a previous pilot screening (10 implementation are the problem of reaching the target population, the different mutations). The identification of an excess of heterozygotes heavy workload of GPs, the limited knowledge about CF in general, in hypertrypsinaemic newborns remains an important matter that can and the absence of a preconceptional consultation setting. be managed only with effective counseling strategies in the context of Conclusion. Different intervention strategies will be necessary to newborn screening. overcome the various barriers in the organisation and execution of the screening. The positive attitude towards preconceptional P0301. Pyrosequencing™ assess the most common CF carrier screening, in combination with the willingness of the Cystic fibrosis mutations care-providers to participate in providing (a part of) the screening A. Schiller, J. Dunker, U. Larsson, M. Storgärds, A. Alderborn; programme, will make it easier to overcome the barriers. Pyrosequencing AB, Uppsala, Sweden. Cystic fibrosis is a lethal recessive genetic disorder in Northern P0299. Evaluation of the probe specificity used in INNO- European populations affecting 1 live birth in 1600-2500. In contrast LiPA CFTR: No false positives or cross-reactions with to many other recessive disorders, the carriers of CF mutations (1 in benign variants or rare mutations. 25 Caucasians) have no biochemical or physiological alterations by C. Van Loon, P. Hendrix, G. Verpooten; which they could readily be identified. As a consequence the search Innogenetics, Ghent, Belgium. for genetic markers became a matter of decisive importance. Thirteen INNO-LiPA CFTR12 and INNO-LiPA CFTR17 + Tn respectively years after the discovery of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane identify 12 and 17 CF-related mutations and their wild-type conductance regulator (CFTR) gene and the characterization of over sequences, as well as the CBAVD-related polymorphism Tn. The 990 mutations, CF is now to become the first disease targeted for technology used is a simple reverse hybridisation of amplified product population-wide genetic screening. on a nitro-cellulose strip carrying specific oligonucleotide probes Pyrosequencing AB (Sweden) offers a PSQ™ 96 System well suited as parallel lines. The amplified product is the result of an optimised to meet the demand for research and routine testing of mutations multiplex amplification. Hybridisation and stringent wash occur at the in the CFTR gene, providing simple, rapid, cost efficient and same temperature and can be performed either manually or using extremely accurate detection, of all relevant mutations, including Auto-LiPA. Both assays were successfully validated in a European internal controls for each analyzed position. Pyrosequencing™ multicenter study. is a DNA sequencing technology based on real-time detection of Individuals, homozygous for a mutant or a wild-type allele, will pyrophosphate released upon nucleotide incorporation. Highly only hybridise with the corresponding probe, whereas individuals reliable CF assays have been designed and developed for all CFTR heterozygous for a particular mutation will hybridise with both the mutations with a population frequency of ≥ 0.1% including point mutant and wild type probe for this mutation. We undertook to test mutations as well as insertions and deletions. The assays are greatly the INNO-LiPA CFTR assay specificity for samples containing benign condensed including multiplex design of both PCR and sequencing variants or rare CF-related mutations, of which the sequences are, reactions. The assays have also been optimized to even include less covered by the INNO-LiPA CFTR mutant and wild type probes. The common mutations in the same analysis simply by extending the benign sequence variants were introduced by mutagenesis and number of nucleotide dispensations in each pyrosequencing reaction. controlled by sequence analysis. In addition, three clinical samples In addition to these two approaches, the same assays have been with proven presence of F508C and linked with the S1251N mutation used for population-based determination of carrier frequencies using were included. For the rare mutations, clinical samples were allele quantification. available. None of the benign variant sequences tested showed any false-positive reaction with the corresponding mutant probe on the Posters - Cystic Fibrosis, Familial Mediterranean Fever 138 139 P0302. An automated high throughput screening system Antonarakis1; for detection of 33 clinical mutations and 7 SNPs in the 1Medical Genetics, University Hospital and School of Medicine, cystic fibrosis gene Geneva, Switzerland, 2Otorhinolaryngology Service, University E. H. Schreiber1, R. Tam1, I. McLaughlin2, S. J. Scharf2; Hospital, Valencia, Spain, 3Universitätskinderklinik, Basel, 1Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA, 2Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Switzerland, 4Human Genetics, University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium, 5Royal Free and University College Medical School, University CA. College, London, United Kingdom. Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is an inherited disorder that affects children Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) is an autosomal-recessive and young adults. Causative for respiratory disease and pancreatic disorder with an incidence of 1/20’000, characterized by dysmotility dysfunction are mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane of cilia/flagella. In addition to upper respiratory tract infections, conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. We have previously offered an bronchiectasis and male subfertility, 50% of cases show situs assay (for research use only) that detects 31 mutations in the CFTR inversus (Kartagener syndrome, KS). Our linkage analysis (Blouin gene. This single-tube assay is based on multiplex PCR amplification et al. EurJHumGenet 8:109-118) indicated extensive locus and subsequent detection of the alleles by oligonucleotide ligation heterogeneity, in concordance with the variety of ultrastructural assay (OLA). To meet both the list of essential mutations in the defects of cilia/flagella. We identified potential loci on chromosomes recently issued ACMG guidelines for population screening of CF 3p, 5p, 8q, 11p, 15q, 16p, 17q and 19q, colocalizing with genes carriers, and the need for high throughput screening, we revised the for dyneins, the major proteins of dynein arms defective in 50% design of the PCR/OLA-based Cystic Fibrosis assay by including all of patients and therefore strong candidates for PCD. Our most required mutations and enabled detection on the Applied Biosystems suggestive/nearly significant linkage interval on chr.16p near marker 3100 Genetic Analyzer ®. D16S748 (NPL score =2.96 on families with dynein arm deficiency) The new assay detects the following 33 mutant and normal alleles: contains the gene for axonemal dynein heavy chain DNAH3. We S549R, S549N, R553X, G551D, V520F, del I507, delF508, 3876delA, report here characterization of the DNAH3 gene and mutation 1717-1 G→A, G542X, R560T, 3120+1G→T,R347P,R347H,I148T, search by sequencing all exons in patients with PCD. Genomic W1282X,R334W,1078delT,3849+10 kbC→T, R1162X,N1303K,36 and transcriptional organization were determined by RT-PCR and 59delC,3905insT,A455E, R117H,394delTT,2184delA,2789+5G→ searches of genomic sequences and ESTs. The gene spans 200 Kbp A, 1898+1G→A,621+1G→T,711+1G→T,G85E. Further, the assay and is composed of 62 exons coding for a 4410 residues protein, detects these polymorphisms recommended for reflex testing: highly homologous to paralogues and orthologues. Mutation search F508C,I506V,I507V and polyT in intron 8. in 7 patients with PCD showing allele segregation compatible with The instrument enables automated DNA sequencing and fragment linkage to DNAH3 revealed 9 exonic variants. Screening of the analysis applications using an array of 16 capillaries. Up to 192 translated variants in more than 100 control population chromosomes samples can be processed on two 96-well plates within 8 hours of same ethnic origin suggests that amino-acid substitutions P1197L of unattended operation.The data are analyzed with Genotyper® and A3529D observed in patients with KS and ciliary ultrastructural software in an automated fashion for final review by the investigator. deficiency on either inner dynein arm/stroke or both dynein arms The assay works with purified genomic DNA and blood samples might be pathogenic mutations. (Guthrie cards). We have tested a reference panel of 25 CF samples from Coriell laboratories and found that all samples were genotyped correctly. P0305. Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: Mutation analysis in Dynein light chain genes mapping to chromosomes 1 P0303. Psychological impact of the introduction of a pilot (Hp28) and 22 (DNAL4) for newborn screening of Cystic Fibrosis C. Gehrig, C. Albrecht, G. Duriaux Saïl, C. Rossier, N. Scamuffa, C. T. Pàmpols1, A. Maya1, M. Puliol1, F. Borja1, T. Casals2, J. Bellón3, R. DeLozier-Blanchet, S. E. Antonarakis, J. L. Blouin; Prats4; Medical Genetics, University Hospitals and School of Medicine, 1Institut de Bioquímica Clínica.CDB.Corporació Sanitària Clínic, Geneva, Switzerland. Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Recerca Oncoloógica, Barcelona, Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) is an autosomal recessive disorder Spain, 3Consellería de Sanitat i Seguretat Social.Govern Balear, affecting the ultrastucture of respiratory tract cilia and spermatozoa Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 4Departament de Sanitat i Seguretat flagella, causing dysmotility to immobility and male sterility. When Social.Generalitat de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain. respiratory infections and bronchiectasis are associated with situs The Institut de Bioquimica Clinica currently analyses 74,000 newborn/ inversus (half of cases), the disease is referred to as Kartagener year for PKU , CH and since September 1999 CF as a pilot . The CF Syndrome. PCD is genetically heterogeneous, with only a few protocol is based in a three-tier system: a) inmunoreactive trypsine mutations having been described to date. Our linkage analysis in test at 2-5 days of life ,b) in testing positives a retest at 20-40 days, 31 families (Blouin et al. 2000, EurJHumGenet 8:109-118) failed to c) in retesting positives a DNA test for 31 mutations , sweat test and reveal a single major locus, but suggested linkage to several regions clinical examination . containing candidate genes for PCD. These candidates include The 171,693 newborns screened for CF have generated 2,500 dynein genes, the major elements of the dynein arms, such as the consultations revealing anxiety or adverse emotional reactions : novel human light chain genes Hp28 (chromosome1p35) and DNAL4 -The request of the sample for the retest . In spite of the text of the (22q12-13). For Hp28, there is suggestive evidence for linkage in the letter has been carefully reviewed. Number of recalls 1,957 (1.14 % ). appropriate genomic interval on chr.1p (NPL=1.37). We screened -The communication of a positive retest . N= 480 (0.28 %) . At this 54 unrelated patients for mutations in these two genes with SSCA; point baby still can be heterozygous or normal , in fact only a 6.6 % electrophoretic variants were sequenced. No obvious pathogenic of them will be CF. Parents began to be aware of the severity of the mutations were revealed, but nucleotide variations were observed disease as well as of the limitations of treatment . Benefits of genetic at both loci. In Hp28 (previously screened in 7 patients: Pennarun counselling are hardly perceived at this time. et al., 2000, EurJHumGenet 9:P1584), two nucleotide changes - The finding of the mutation in only one allele. It still raises two were detected: A65V in exon 2 was later confirmed as a frequent possibilities a CF genetic compound or an heterozygous . Results of polymorphism in a control population (CEPH), whereas the second sweat test and medical exams are very important . But the screening variant was located in an intron (IVS3-10). In DNAL4, variants were of the whole gene takes a long time and the anxiety persist. observed in intron1 (IVS1+31) and in intron2 (IVS2+20). These - The access of the parents to Internet is specially traumatic. studies suggest that neither Hp28 nor DNAL4 are frequently mutated In conclusion all this psychosocial components will be considered in in PCD. the final pilot evaluation. Study supported by the Swiss National Funds and the Carvajal Foundation. P0304. DNAH3: Characterization ofthe sequence Authors CG and CA contributed equally. and mutation search in patients with Primary Ciliary P0306. Genotype-phenotype correlations in a group of Dyskinesia J. L. Blouin1, C. Gehrig1, M. Armengot2, M. Rutishauser3, M. Yugoslavian adult cystic fibrosis patients Jorissen4, D. Jeganathan5, L. Bartoloni1, C. Rossier1, G. Duriaux- D. Radivojevic1, M. Djurisic2, P. Minic2, M. Guc-Scekic2, T. Lalic2; Sail1, N. Scamuffa1, H. Mitchison5, C. D. DeLozier-Blanchet1, S. E. 1Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 138 Posters - Cystic Fibrosis, Familial Mediterranean Fever 139 2Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic”, Sequencing analysis of the exons of this gene from MI-discordant Belgrade, Yugoslavia. sibpairs revealed 3 non-coding sequence variants. We have Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common serious genetic disorder performed preliminary studies one of these variants (648+46T/G) and among Caucasian populations, mostly diagnosed in childhood. Since an intragenic, complex microsatellite marker in MI and non-MI CF the number of adult CF patients is significant, usually two groups patients and families, respectively. No significant allelic association of patients are defined: first, with late diagnosis (at the age of 16 or could be detected with these two markers but studies will continue older) and second, patients diagnosed before their 16th birthday with the remaining ones. (early diagnosis). In a group of 164 Yugoslavian (YU) CF patients whose DNA samples were analyzed for the presence of CFTR P0309. Rare Mutations and Polymorphisms of the Cystic mutations, 9,76% (16/164) were adults. Three of 19 CFTR mutations Fibrosis Gene in Patients with Alcoholic and Early-Onset identified in YU CF patients were found in adult patients: dF508, Idiopathic Chronic Pancreatitis R334W and A120T. Complete genotypes were determined in 43,75% B. Steiner1, K. Truninger2,3, H. E. Blum3, B. Müllhaupt2, B. Seifert4, S. (7/16) of adult CF patients, while 9 of them (56,25%) had at least one Gallati1; unidentified CF allele. Genotype dF508/dF508 was found in 31,25% 1Human Molecular Genetics, Bern, Switzerland, 2Department of (5/16) of adult patients, another 5 of them (31,25%) had dF508/ Internal Medicine, Zürich, Switzerland, 3Department of Medicine II, non-dF508 genotype, and the group of 6 adults (37,50%) had non- Freiburg, Germany, 4Dept. of Biostatistics, Zürich, Switzerland. dF508/non-dF508 genotype. Patients were compared considering The pathogenesis of chronic pancreatitis (CP) is poorly understood. their clinical data (sex, age at diagnosis, age, lung function tests, Genetic studies identified mutations in the cationic trypsinogen sweat test, pancreatic status) and determined genotypes.In this work, gene, the serine protease inhibitor, Kazal type 1 gene, and the cystic authors will discuss possible connection between genetic features fibrosis (CFTR) gene in patients with CP of different etiologies. The and manifestations and prognosis of the disease in analyzed group of aim of the present study was to perform a comprehensive DNA YU adult CF patients. testing of the CFTR gene in patients with early-onset ICP (ICP) and alcoholic CP (ACP). Furthermore, single nucleotide polymorphisms P0307. Molecular diagnosis of Cystic Fibrosis in Belarus (SNP‘s) induced alterations of motif scores of the serine/arginine-rich N. Mosse, K. Mosse, G. Tsukerman; (SR) proteins SF2/ASF, SRp40, SRp55, and SC35 were analyzed Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus. using score matrices. CF causing mutations were found in 4/14 ACP Several years ago the prevalence of delta-F508 mutation has been patients (29%; 6.5 times the expected frequency, p < 0.05) and in 5/ studied in 2,598 newborns chromosomes from Belarus population. 13 ICP patients (39%; 8.7 times the expected frequency, p < 0.05). 2 The frequency of delta-F508 mutation heterozygote carriers was (14%) ACP and 4 (31%) ICP patients were compound heterozygous. 0.014 or 1:72. As this mutation accounted for 62% of CF alleles in our The frequency of SNP’s was increased in patients with ACP and ICP. patients, so CF incidence had to be 1:8000. Then a whole population The SNP nt2694T/G in exon 14a reduces a SRp40 score motif and pilot screening of 146 701 newborns, based on initial estimation of generates a new SRp55 high score motif. The SNP nt4521 in exon 24 IRT at cut-off 70 ng/ml followed by direct CF gene analysis of positive eliminates a SC35 motif. The intronic SNP nt3041-92G/A eliminates samples, confirmed the expected frequency, which is much less a SRp55 and a SC35 motif and SNP nt3601-65C/A eliminates a then 1:2500. Examination of 232 CF chromosomes from Belarus SRp55 motif but increases a SC35 motif score. Mutations and SNP’s patients for the presence of the mutations, originally identified in of the CFTR gene are associated with ACP and ICP. The most European population, has shown that delta-F508 mutation covered frequently identified SNP‘s clearly change the motif scores of different 61,2% of CF chromosomes, N1303K - 2.5%, G542X - 1.3%, W1282X SR proteins, supporting the idea that the combination of mutations - 0.9%, R334W - 0.4%, R347P - 0.4%, S549N - 0.4%, R553X and SNP’s may be important in the pathogenesis of CP by affecting - 0.4%. Mutations G551D, R560T, 621+1GT, 520F, DI507, 1717- splicing efficiency. 1GA, R117H, A455E, 3849+10kb were not found. Recently a large genomic deletion, spanning introns 1-3 of CFTR gene, was identified P0310. Routine analysis of the CFTR IVS(8)T and termed CFTRdel2,3(21kb). Our data show that this mutation, polymorphism discloses two pathogenic mutations frequently observed in Central and Eastern Europe, is particularly C. Kraus1, L. Naehrlich2, S. Mattes3, A. Reis1; common in Belarus - 6% of all CF chromosomes. Thus the total 1Institute of Human Genetics of the Friedrich-Alexander University, detection rate of the found mutations is 73,7%. The first trimester Erlangen, Germany, 2Pediatric Hospital of the Friedrich-Alexander prenatal diagnosis has been performed in 34 CF-families by means of University, Erlangen, Germany, 3Pediatric Hospital Thueringen-Clinic, direct mutation analysis and combined analysis using the intragenic Saalfeld, Germany. polymorphism IVS6a-GATT in the CFTR gene. Eight affected fetuses Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal recessive and 15 carriers were detected. disorder in the Caucasian population, caused by hundreds of mutations in the cystic fibrosis conductance transmembrane regulator P0308. Analysis of candidate genes in the region of the (CFTR) gene. Routinely, we use an Oligonucleotide ligation assay cystic fibrosis modifier 1 (CFM1) locus. (Applied Biosystems) to screen for 31 mutations in the CFTR gene, D. Markiewicz1, X. Yuan1, M. Corey1, R. Rozmahel2, P. Durie1, J. including 24 of the most common. Additionally, CFTRdele2,3(21kb), Zielenski1, L. Tsui1, &. The CF Modifier Collaborative Group3; which occurs with a frequency of 1% in our population is analyzed 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of by multiplex PCR. With regard to CBAVD the polymorphism IVS(8)T Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3., European and North American CF were examined by PCR/restriction anaylsis and subsequent PAGE. Centers, ON, Canada. Generally, the poly-T tract in intron 8 exists in three variants, 5T, 7T, Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disease, most and 9T. The 7T and 9T variants generate a predominantly normal common among Caucasians. It is caused by mutations in the cystic transcript, whereas the 5T allele reduces the level of functional fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. There CFTR and is associated with an inherited form of infertility in males is considerable genotype-phenotype association but clinical variation (CBAVD). The existence of further allelic variants (3T, 6T and 8T) observed in CF is also determined by additional, secondary genetic was shortly mentioned in an abstract last year. From our CF patients modifiers and environment factors. We previously demonstrated two out of 125 exhibited an abnormal migration pattern in the PAGE the presence of a CF modifier locus (CFM1), contributing to of IVS(8)T. In one patient PAGE results suggested in addition to a the predisposition of meconium ileus (MI). Association studies 9T allele a 6T allele. Sequencing, however, disclosed the 6T allele (transmission disequilibrium tests, TDT) using MI and non-MI CF as a 7T allele carrying a splice site deletion (IVS-1delG). In the families with at least one affected child led to refinement of the region other patient PAGE displayed a 7T and 9T allele with an abnormal on human chromosome 19, region q13.2. Of 18 local markers tested, heteroduplex formation. In this case a IVS8-2A→C transversion the strongest association with MI was detected for microsatellite in was discovered in cis with the 7T allele. We therefor conclude that intron one of the KCNN4 gene. While detailed analysis of KCNN4 is any atypical T variant has to be carefully analyzed for the underlying in progress, we have extended our analysis of genes in its immediate mechanism. proximity. A gene (NM019108) immediately distal to KCNN4 has been analyzed as candidate for CFM1. This predicted gene consists of 14 exons, spanning 23 kb. It is partially confirmed by EST data. Posters - Cytogenetics 140 141 P0311. Prevalance of MEFV gene mutations in FMF account for the majority of FMF chromosomes. Differences in the phenotype II patients with renal amyloidosis clinical expression have been partly attributed to MEFV allelic B. Balci1, E. Yilmaz1, S. Gucer2, N. Besbas3, K. Tinaztepe2, A. heterogeneity. The M694V/M694V genotype is associated with a Bakkaloglu3; severe form of disease. Otherwise, a role for additional genetic 1Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Medical Biology, and/or environmental modifiers has been proposed. Of these, male Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Fac. of Medicine, Dept. of gender was found to influence disease penetrance and susceptibility Pediatric Pathology, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, Fac. of to renal amyloidosis. The aim of this study was to further investigate Medicine, Dept. of Pediatric Rheumatology and Nephrology, Ankara, the contribution of sex to the phenotypic profile, in FMF. We thus Turkey. performed a sex-phenotype correlation analysis on a large cohort Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an inherited inflammatory consisting of 124 FMF patients who were all homozygous for the disease that is principally recognized in Jewish, Armenian, Turkish M694V mutation, thus precluding the weight of allelic heterogeneity. and Middle Eastern Arab populations. The disease is characterised Although a preponderance of male patients was documented (73: by recurrent febrile episodes of fever and serosal inflammation 51; 1.4), the overall male:female ratio was significantly higher among manifested by sterile peritonitis, pleuritis and synovitis. Amyloidosis of patients with amyloidosis (32:15; 2,1) than among patients without the AA type is the most severe manifestation of the disease. amyloidosis (41:36; 1.1). The calculated FMF severity scores were Individuals with two MEFV mutations may be divided into three equally high among male and female patients (9.5±3.0 and 9.7±2.8, clinical categories; in the group of phenotype I FMF patients; the respectively). Male gender acts as an MEFV-independent factor amyloid development appears after the beginning of symptoms like, increasing susceptibility to renal amyloidosis (OR = 2.37; 95% CI = fever, abdominal pain and inflammatory attacks. In some cases, renal 1.06-5.26). amyloidosis may develop before other manifestations of FMF. In this group of patients which are named as phenotype II, the disease is P0314. Familial Mediterranean fever - Results of MEFV asymptomatic until the development of renal amyloidosis. The last gene analysis and detection of two novel mutations category, phenotype III, includes clinically unaffected gene carriers. J. Trübenbach1, J. Decker1, B. Zabel2, G. Wildhardt1; The aim of the present study is to confirm the presence of MEFV 1Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany, 2University Children´s Hospital, mutations in phenotype II patients. 25 paraffin blocks from patients Mainz, Germany. with renal amyloidosis and who were deceased which are thought Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive to be phenotype II were analyzed for MEFV gene mutations. The disorder (MIM 249100) characterized by recurrent episodes of distribution of the four most common mutations among phenotype II fever and serosal inflammation with peritonitis, arthritis, erythema. patients was; 38 % for M694V, 8 % for M680I, 4 % for V726A and 4 Amyloidosis causing renal failure is the most severe complication % for E148Q. The distribution of the four common mutations among of the disease which primarily affects populations of Mediterranean FMF phenotype I patients (M694V 51.55 %, M680I 9 %, V726A 2,88 extraction. % and E148Q 3,55 %) was not significantly different from that found In 1997, a gene for FMF (MEFV) was identified. The MEFV gene in phenotype II patients. product (pyrin/marenostrin) consists of 781 amino acids encoded by 10 exons. The specific protein function remains unknown but the P0312. The differential contribution of MEFV mutant expression in polynuclear leukocytes suggests an essential role in alleles to the clinical profile of familial Mediterranean inflammation processes. fever Several FMF studies helped to identify MEFV mutation hot spots. R. Gershoni-Baruch1, R. Brik1, M. Shinawi1, A. Livneh2; Based on these data, a stepwise procedure was applied for FMF 1Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2Sheba Medical Center, Tel- routine diagnostics. Stage 1 consisted in sequencing of exon 10 where most MEFV mutations are found. Stage 2 meant was analysis Aviv, Israel. of exons 2, 3 and 5, the location of several additional FMF-associated Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive mutations. In Stage 3 the remaining exons were sequenced. disorder characterized by recurring attacks of fever and serositis. Five Our diagnostic strategy applied to 94 cases resulted in the sequence alterations (M694V, V726A, M680I, M694I and E148Q), identification of one MEFV-mutation in at least 50 cases. In 31 in the MEFV gene, account for the majority of FMF chromosomes. patients the genetic cause of the disease could be verified. In The wide clinical variability of the disease has been related to MEFV addition, two novel mutations associated with FMF were found. The allelic heterogeneity. M694V homozygotes have a severe form of the mutation E148V (in exon 2) affected one patient, the mutation I591T disease. Mutations E148Q and V726A have reduced penetrance. The (in exon 9) was detected in two unrelated patients. clinical features, associated with the M680I and the complex V726A- Our three-level FMF diagnostic study proved to be efficient without E148Q allele, are not well defined. This study further characterizes missing the identification of novel mutations. The availability of the phenotypic profile associated with the major MEFV mutations. We the molecular test has major clinical implications considering the investigated 220 FMF patients, in whom both FMF alleles have been prognostic value of some MEFV-mutations and the variability of the identified, and found that different genotypes are characterized by a disease phenotype. specific allelic related clinical profile and penetrance. Homozygotes for the M694V mutation and the complex V726A-E148Q allele are the most severely affected and often endure renal amyloidosis. P 5. Cytogenetics Homozygotes for the M680I and V726A alleles and compound heterozygotes for either the M694V or the V726A-E148Q alleles in P0315. Molecular Cytogenetic Study of Cases With Short combination with either the E148Q, the V726A or the M680I alleles Stature are significantly less severely affected. The morbididity associated N. A. Meguid1, A. Mahmoud1, A. Khalil1, M. Amer2, A. Dardir1, H. with the complex V726A-E148Q allele by far outweighs that Atteya1; associated with the V726A allele, bearing evidence to the fact that 1National Research Centre, Human Genetics Department, Cairo, the E148Q mutation is not a benign polymorphism. These findings Egypt, 2Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. increase our understanding of the role of allelic variability in disease Among 150 cases with short stature and delayed puberty referred expression. to the outpatient clinic of Human Genetics Department, National Research Centre, during two years period, we selected 25 Egyptian P0313. Male gender increases susceptibility to girls with phenotype far more severely affected than expected in amyloidosis in FMF patients homozygous for the M694V- Turner syndrome. Initially, the karyotype in some cases was thought to be 45,X with MEFV mutation. a chromosome marker. However, re-examination with FISH probes R. Gershoni-Baruch1, R. Brik1, M. Shinawi1, A. Livneh2; showed 14 subjects with 45,X/46,X r(X) karyotype. Seven subjects 1Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2Sheba Medical Center, Tel- with 46,XisoX(q) karyotype; 2 subjects with 45,X karyotype; and 2 Aviv, Israel. subjects with 46,XX karyotype. Tiny ring X was present in 5 cases, Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive and inactivation was proved by molecular cytogenetic techniques. disorder characterized by recurrent attacks of fever and serositis The clinical picture of cases with ring (X) chromosome includes and predisposition to renal amyloidosis. Five sequence alterations mental retardation in 8 patients (the non-verbal I.Q. tends to be lower (M694V, V726A, M680I, M694I and E148Q), in the MEFV gene, 140 Posters - Cytogenetics 141 than the verbal I.Q.) and learning disability in 3 cases. Dysmorphic P0319. Blepharophimosis Is The Most Constant Clinical features are found in 3 cases and limb anomalies in 5 cases. Feature In 14qter Microdeletion Syndrome Our results showed that the severe phenotype was present in the O. Rittinger1, G. Kronberger1, C. Fauth2; cases with tiny ring (X) chromosomes suggesting mutation in the X 1Landeskliniken Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 2Institut für chromosome inactivation pathway and that the inability of these rings Humangenetik, TU Muenchen, Muenchen, Germany. to inactivate was responsible for the severe phenotypes. We confirm Mental retardation is a distressing disorder affecting approximately the advent of in situ hybridization with chromosome specific DNA 3% of the population. Among these, cytogenetic anomalies explain probes in identifying small structurally abnormal chromosomes. about 30% of patients with more severe mental retardation. Using conventional methods, detection of subtle structural aberrations is P0316. Pure partial trisomy 4q caused by a tandem direct clearly limited to 6-10Mb. According to Flint et al.(Nat Genet,1995) duplication dup(4)(q27qter) a substantial percentage of mental retardation is caused by H. Elghezal1, H. Sennana Sendi1, M. Griba1, S. Ibala Romdhan1, K. subtelomeric abnormalities. A couple of methods is now available Monastiri2, A. Saad1; to establish diagnosis of submicoscopic deletions or more complex 1Service de Cytogénétique. CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, rearrangements. We observed a young lady in which the dysmorphic 2Service de Pediatrie. Hopital Fatouma Bourguiba, Monastir, Tunisia. phenotype in spite of a normal karyotype remained highly suggestive We report a 3 year old boy with a de novo direct tandem duplication for a chromosomal aberration: the most impressive feature was dup(4)(q27qter) confirmed by FISH using whole chromosome the orbital region with blepharophimosis, epicanthal folds, puffy 4 painting probe. Our patient showed a particular dysmorphic eyelids, a long shaped face with a pointed chin and small ears. The phenotype, an epilepsy, a sensorioneural deafness and a moderate hands were small with tapering fingers, body length was at the 90th mental retardation. Magnetic resonance imagine of the brain showed percentile range, no microcephaly was observed. Hypertrichosis a dilated cerebral ventricles. No other visceral malformation was was seen only in the first few years. Mental disability was in the mild detected. range, with surprisingly good speech development. Finally, diagnosis Few cases of pure partial trisomy 4q was described. According to was done at the age of 12 years using a commercial multitelomere this new case and previously published data, we support that the FISH-kit (Cytocell). It revealed a subtelomeric de novo deletion on renal malformation obseved in meny cases of 4q trisomy is related chromosome 14q. This result in the patient and the normal parental to a region proximal to 4q27, neurosensorial deafness is related to karyotype were confirmed by a new strategy recently described by 4q31q33 region and suggest that trisomy of the 4q33q35 region is Fauth et al. (Hum Genet,2001). Considering the results of other associated with minor clinical effect. groups we suggest blepharophimosis to be the most constant and impressive clinical feature of this rare condition and we recommend P0317. Effect of hydroxyurea and catalase on therefore to rule out 14qter deletion in all patients with equivocal chromosomal damage and G2 arrest in Fanconi Anemia blepharophimosis syndromes. lymphoblasts from groups FA-A, FA-B, FA-C, FA-D1 and P0320. FISH assessment of sperm aneuploidy FA-E. frequencies in ICSI patients with severe oligoasthenotetr A. Carnevale, B. Molina, R. Ortiz, L. Gomez, L. Legorreta, M. L. Velazco, S. Frías; aozoospermia (OAT) Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, DF, Mexico. N. Ditzel1, L. Jelinkova1, B. Gläser2, E. Strehler1, N. Reeka1, G. Fanconi Anemia(FA) is heterogeneous, and 8 complementation Speit2, K. Sterzik1; groups have been discovered: FA-A,B,C,D1,D2,E,F,G. We showed 1Christian-Lauritzen-Institut, Ulm, Germany, 2University of Ulm, that in lymphoblasts FA-A and B damaged with mitomycin C(MMC), Department of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany. Hydroxyurea(HU), added in G2, produces potentiation with a striking The aim of this study was to examine chromosomes in sperm increase of chromosomal aberrations(CA). Here, we investigated by fluorescence-in-situ-hybridisation (FISH) with considerable whether this potentiation is due to dNTP pool depletion or free differences in disomy frequency for the chromosomes 13, 16 and 21. radicals (FR) produced by HU. Normal lymphoblastoid cell cultures On date 4 patients with oligoasthenotetraozoospermia were involved and from FA-A,B,C,D1 and E were grown. Half cultures were treated in our study. FISH procedure was made by standard protocol, using with 10un/ml MMC for 24 hours; during G2 phase all cultures were probes for chromosome 13 and 21 (locus-specific probes) and a treated with HU 2mM, and half were treated with Catalase 0.6 mg/ml probe for chromosome 16 (centromeric satellite probe). For each which eliminates FR. Cells were processed to analyze: a) CA in 50 patient 2000 sperms were analysed. cells per treatment per cell line; b) Proportion of cells in G2/M by flow In the patients, the incidence of chromosome 13 and 16 disomy cytometry. Cultures were done in triplicate, data were compared by ranged from 0.08% to 0.21%, and from 0.05% to 0.13% respectively. varianza and Tukey or Tamhane test and Z of proportions. Increased In the case of chromosome 21 we observed substantially higher CA were found in all cell lines, but MMC-HU potentiation was rate of disomy in one of our 4 patients. In three patients, the 21 observed only in FA-A (300%) and FA-B (100%). Catalase added disomy ranged from 0.1% to 0.29%, while in the fourth patient, the 21 to FA-A and B diminished CA frequency to 5-10%; however, CA aneuploidy reached 4.1%. frequency never returned to that MMC-induced. These data suggest Our results support the hypothesis of positive correlation between that MMC-HU potentiation in FA-A and B is through alteration of OAT and higher disomy rates. However, this correlation is not linear dNTP pool. The proportion of G2 cells increased in MMC-treated and absolute, among patients with severe OAT we can observe also cultures and decreased with HU in all FA cell lines, indicating that the high proportion of men with normal range of disomy. Only one of our restriction point of G2 is normal, and HU reduces the proportion of G2 patients had a substantially higher rate of 21 disomy than men with cells, possibly because cells fail to arrive to G2. All data suggest an normal sperm quality. The other three patients had normal disomy abnormal postreplicative repair in FA-A and B. rates of chromosomes 13, 16 and 21 even suffering from OAT. According to our results and also results from literature, we P0318. FISH at complicated cytogenetic cases recommend a more intensive prenatal control of pregnancies, M. Nemeckova; originating from the ICSI method. The study will be continued and we GENNET CZ s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic. will include more data in the poster. Three cases of complicated chromosomal rearrangements elucidated by FISH are presented: P0321. Molecular cytogenetic analysis of a constitutional -Familial isodicentric supernumerary chromosome 15 and familial de novo interstitial deletion of chromosome 12 inverted chromosome 18 at families with reproductive failure. (del(12)(p12.3p12.1)) in a boy with developmental delay -Pseudodicentric chromosome 18 at fetus with Edwards syndrome. and minor anomalies Role of FISH as the adjunct of classical pre- and postnatal B. Gläser1, E. Rossier1, G. Barbi1, L. Delle Chiaie2, C. Blank3, W. cytogenetics in routine practice is discussed. Vogel1, H. Kehrer-Sawatzki1; 1University of Ulm, Department of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2University of Ulm, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Ulm, Germany, 3University of Ulm, Department of Pediatrics, Ulm, Germany. We describe the case of a 6-month-old boy with psychomotor Posters - Cytogenetics 142 143 retardation, craniofacial dysmorphism, cleft lip and palate, as iris coloboma, cleft palate, micrognathia), heart defect , right renal well as hearing and visual impairment. Analysis of G-banded agenesis and functional neurological abnormalities . metaphase chromosomes from the propositus revealed the presence Chromosomal analysis by G-banding at 450 - 550 bands resolution of an interstitial deletion of the short arm of chromosome 12 indicated a normal 46,XX karyotype. Because clinical signs were very (del(12)(p12.3p12.1)). To define the deletion extent on the molecular suggestive of WHS, FISH studies were performed using two DNA cytogenetic level, we hybridized BAC clones mapped to band 12p11, probes for chromosome 4p16, one BAC 19G2 and one from Vysis 12p12 and 12p13, respectively, to metaphase chromosomes of Inc. The patient demonstrated a typical 4p16 deletion spanning both the proband. Our FISH results demonstrate that the deletion on probes. chromosome 12 spans the region flanked by BACs RP11-174G6 To our knowledge, this may represent the first case of a FISH (12p12.3) and RP11-325D10 (12p12.1). As deduced from the map diagnosis established in North-Eastern Romania. The diagnosis was position of these BAC clones in the Ensembl contigs, the deletion possible by collaboration with the Molecular Cytogenetic Unit at the encompasses about 12.5 Mb. According to the Ensembl database, Dresden University. On the basis of the reproductive history of the the deletion is flanked by markers D12S1832 and G62375. parents, it makes sense to expect a cytogenetically cryptic balanced Up to now seven patients with de novo interstitial deletions chromosomal rearrangement in this family. Parental FISH testing is involving bands 12p12 have been described in the literature. Some presently in working. of this patients had a number of clinical symptoms in common with our patient, like psychomotor retardation, microcephaly and P0324. Ring autosomes database of National Registry dysmorphic facial features. Diverse cardiovascular anomalies and of Chromosomal Abnormalities: the study of mitotic eye abnormalities were also observed in several cases, but all these instability of constitutional ring chromosomes features are equally found associated with other chromosomal A. D. Polityko, N. Rumyantseva, T. Egorova, I. Pisarik, O. Khurs; aberrations. It is currently unknown, if among rare structural Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus. chromosome aberrations like these interstitial deletions within Twelve patients with ring chromosomes 4, 13, 15, 18, 21 and 22 in 12p breakpoint cluster regions can also be found as is the case constitutional karyotype were registered in Belarus National Registry in the more frequent category of microdeletions responsible for of Chromosomal Abnormalities among the individuals who were microdeletion syndroms like for example DiGeorge and Prader Willi cytogenetically studied in Republic Genetic Center during 1983- syndrome. 2001 years. In theory, phenotype abnormalities of ring chromosome carriers are associated with loss of chromosomal material. However, P0322. Tandem duplication of the NF1 gene detected by in part of cases telomere pairing without deletion of important high-resolution FISH in 17q11.2 region genetic material takes place in ring formation, and the mitotic ring P. Riva, C. Gervasini, A. Bentivegna, M. Venturin, L. Corrado, L. instability can cause the phenotypic anomalies, independently what Larizza; chromosome is involved. The phenotype of such a “general ring Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical Faculty - University of syndrome” consists of growth failure without malformations, few or no Milan, Milan, Italy. minor anomalies, mild-moderate mental retardation. The gene responsible for Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), which has We studied the mitotic behavior of various size ring chromosomes in been mapped to 17q11.2, has one of the highest observed mutation non-mosaic karyotypes rates. We have previously shown by means of high resolution FISH - to examine the supposition that the size of ring influences on it that a number of the loci flanking the NF1 gene are duplicated, in line stability and with the previous identification of NF1 REPs by other groups. We - to evaluate the correlation between ring size and instability of here report on a direct tandem duplication of the NF1 gene identified somatic cells. in 17q11.2 by means of high-resolution FISH. FISH on stretched Cytogenetic analysis showed dicentric rings of twice the size, smaller chromosomes using locus-specific probes revealed the duplication rings, three- and tetracentric rings, double size and single size rings of most NF1 gene from the promoter to 3’UTR, but with at least the simultaneously, two single size rings, poliploid (three-, tetra- and lack of exon 22. Fiber FISH using PACs/BACs specific for the NF1 pentaploid) metaphases, metaphases with 45 chromosomes without gene, including the 5’UTR and 3’UTR and flanking regions, visualized ring and other abnormalities. Mitotic instability of ring chromosomes the direct tandem duplication of NF1 and showed the similar, but not in vitro as well as the lability of rings in vivo may lead to high cellular identical genomic organization of the duplicon copies. A duplicated death rate and interfere with normal development. Our data further NF1 gene was also found at orthologous chromosomes loci in support the suggestion that larger ring configurations are more chimpanzee and gorilla, suggesting that the duplication occurred unstable than smaller ring chromosomes. More essential contribution before the divergence of great apes. We hypothesize that the NF1 of larger rings instability to formation of «general ring syndrome» is intrachromosomal duplication may contribute to the high whole discussed. gene mutation rate by gene conversion, an unlikely mechanism in the case of NF1 pseudogenes containing only limited portions of P0325. Alternative mechanisms in the pathogenesis of the NF1 gene. The functional activity of the NF1 copy remains to true hermaphroditism be investigated. Detection of the NF1 duplicon by high-resolution S. H. Kofman-Alfaro1,2, G. Queipo3, R. Peña4, K. Nieto5, L. M. FISH may pave the way to filling up the gaps in the human genomic Dorantes4, L. Eraña4, A. L. Jimenez3, D. Soderlund6, E. Lieberman7, sequence of the pericentromeric 17q11.2 region. A. Radillo3, J. C. Zenteno3; 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico, 2Universidad P0323. A case of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome diagnosed Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico, 3Hospital General by FISH de Mexico, Mexico, Mexico, 4HIM”Federico Gómez”, Mexico, Mexico, E. Braha1, O. Bartsch2, M. Volosciuc1, C. Gavrilovici1, M. Covic1; 5Omnilab, Mexico, Mexico, 6UIM Biologia del desarrollo CMN-SXXI, 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy ‘Gr. T. Popa’, Iasi, Romania, Mexico, Mexico, 7Departamento de Investigacion en Genetica 2Institute for Clinical Genetics, Technical University, Dresden, Germany. Humana, Mexico, Mexico. The Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is caused by partial deletion True hermaphroditism (TH) shows genetic heterogeneity and of chromosome 4p. In a subset of cases the deletion may be so small several genetic abnormalities have been associated with the dual that it may escape detection by standard chromosome analysis. gonadal development: point mutations in the SRY gene in 46, XY The syndrome is characterized by severe growth and psychomotor patients, trisomy for chromosome 22 and hidden mosaicism for a retardation, microcephaly, ‘Greek helmet’ facies and closure defects . Y chromosome or Y sequences in 46, XX patients. We performed We report on a 4-month-old girl whose clinical signs strongly cytogenetic and molecular analyses of Y sequences in DNA from suggested WHS. She is the product of the third pregnancy of blood leukocytes and gonadal tissue in 12 Mexican TH. The young healthy non-consanguineous parents. The parents had karyotypes did not revealed chromosome abnormalities. Nine cases had a miscarriage at 4.5 months gestation and a child who had showed a 46, XX karyotype and eight of them were SRY negative died one month old.with cleft lip and palate and other congenital in leukocytic and gonadal DNA. In case 1, also a 46, XX TH, PCR malformations. and FISH analysis performed in an ovotestis homogenate and Clinical findings at the age of four months included severe postnatal ovarian region revealed the presence of SRY, indicating a gonadal growth retardation, microcephaly, dysmorphic facies (hypertelorism, mosaicism. Other Y sequences (PABY, ZFY, Ycen, Yqh) tested in 142 Posters - Cytogenetics 143 all 46, XX TH including patient 1, were negative in both tissues. In- Here we report on the girl with trisomy 6p due to unbalanced t(X;6) patient 4, PCR revealed the presence of Ycen and Yqh and absence and unusual mosaicism involving abnormalities of chromosomes 6 of Yp sequences in leukocytic, ovotestis and fibroblastic DNA. FISH and 10 in the mother. Our patient is 6-year-old girl with moderate analysis confirmed the presence of a Y mosaicism and each Y mental retardation, short stature, failure to thrive and mild facial positive cell showed two X centromeres, demonstrating a second dysmorphism. The chromosome analysis of the proband showed cell line with 47, XX del (Y) (p?). In 3 patients with a second cell line a 46,X,der(X)t(X;6)(q22; p11) karyotype. The derived X was with a Y chromosome (patients 10-12), all Y sequences tested were late replicating in all investigated cells with variable spreading amplified. Sequence analyses in the 4 SRY positive cases (patients of X chromosome inactivation onto translocated 6p. The normal 1, 10-12) was normal, excluding SRY mutations. We confirm that the karyotype was observed in the father, while the mother presented presence of hidden Y mosaicism must be discarded in the molecular 46,XX/ 46,XX, der(10)t(6;10)(p11;p11). The mother is a mosaic with study of TH. unbalanced t(6;10) in 4,7% of cells. To the best of our knowledge, this unusual mosaicism has not been reported yet. We suggest P0326. Mosaic case of Patau Syndrome with karyotype that chromosome constitution in the mother is due to postzygotic 46,XXt(13;13)/45,XXt(13;15)/46,XX recombination involving chromosome 6 and 10 at S/G2 phase of L. Kartashova, N. Nikitina, E. Nikolaeva, V. Sorokina, O. Bushueva, the cell cycle. In order to understand the mechanism of formation of L. Ponomareva; der(X) in the proband we performed DNA polymorphism analysis. The Medico-Genetic Center, Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation. molecular analysis revealed that chromosomes X and 6 involved in The index patient – a 8,5-year-old girl - was the second child in the the rearrangement are of paternal origin. This work was supported by family (the first child was a healthy boy). She was born when her grant from Ministry of Science and Technology Republic of Croatia ( mother was 21 years old at 36 weeks of gestation.Her weight was project no. TP-01/072-01). 3250g, length – 57cm. Her early milestones of development were retarded.The girl sat at 10 months, walked without any aid by 18 P0329. Cytogenetic, FISH and molecular analysis of the months and said her first words at the age of 2,5 years. stable dicentric X chromosome At the age of 8,5 years her height was 138 cm, weight – 25 kg, I. Petkovic1, I. Barisic1, R. Bago2, I. Sansovic1; cranial circumference – 52,5cm. 1University Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Ruder Dysmorphic features included: hypotelorism, enophtalmos, progenia, Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. pro-minent sharpended nose, deformed ears. Speech and mental We present the results of cytogenetic and molecular study in a 5- development were retarded. Her behavior was characterized by years old girl with mild dismorphism, grow retardation and structural inappropriate smiles. rearrangement of X chromosome. Both parents presented normal The proband’s karyotype was: 46,XX t(13;13)/45,XX t(13;15)/46,XX. karyotype. Chromosome analysis revealed one normal and one Her mother had a normal 46,XX karyotype. Her father’s karyotype aberrant X chromosome. The rearranged X is a large submetacentric was unknown. with one primary constriction and two blocks of C-staining. It is composed entirely of the X chromosome material. Two mosaic P0327. A natural equivalent to human satellite DNA-based cell lines were detected by interphase FISH with X chromosome artificial chromosome persists over 140 years, in a three- specific centromeric probe. Three signals were observed in 84.5% and one signal in 15.5% of interphase cells. Replication analysis generation family showed the normal X always early replicating while the dicentric G. Hadlaczky1,2, G. Bujdosó3,4, É. Koltai5, G. Schwanitz6, E. Csonka7; was late replicating in all investigated cells. Molecular analysis 1Biological Research Center, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, using polymorphic DNA markers revealed that the dicentric is of Szeged, Hungary, 2Chromos Molecular Systems Inc.,, Burnaby, BC, paternal origin. Based on this study the karyotype of the patient is Canada, 3Semmelweis Medical School, Department of Forensic 45,X/46,X,psu idic(X)(q22.3). We suggest that dicentric is the results Medicine,, Budapest, Hungary, 4Research Unit sponsored by the of postzygotic isolocal break in both chromatids of the paternal Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary, 5Semmelweis X chromosome, subsequent rejoining of broken ends, followed Medical School, Department of Forensic Medicine, Budapest, by inactivation of one centromere. These results point out to the Hungary, 6Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, importance of combined cytogenetic, FISH and molecular study in Germany, 7Institute of Genetics,Biological Research Center, order to elucidate the mechanisms of formation of chromosomal Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary. abnormalities. This work was supported by grant from Ministry of Human artificial chromosomes represent an attractive tool for gene Science and Technology Republic of Croatia ( project no. TP-01/072- therapy. Recently, we demonstrated that human satellite DNA- 01). based artificial chromosomes (hSATACs) could be generated via amplification-dependent de novo chromosome formation induced by integration of exogenous DNA sequences into the centromeric/ P0330. Terminal deletion 4q in a patient with complex rDNA regions of human acrocentric chromosomes. Human SATACs chromosomal rearrangement and characteristic have been successfully constructed in different cell types from phenotype exogenous DNA, and “neutral” endogenous sequences of the short M. Czako, E. Morava, B. Cser, J. Karteszi, G. Kosztolanyi; arm of chromosome #15. These artificially generated accessory Dep. Med. Genetics and Child Development, Pécs, Hungary. chromosomes carry predictable DNA sequences and they contain We report on a 2 year old patient, who was born at term with low defined genetic information. We suggested that hSATACs composed birth weight, brachycephaly, low set ears, full periorbital region, of rDNA and non-coding satellite DNA sequences that lack curved eyebrows, strabism, depressed nasal bridge, upturned nose, transcription units for undesired and unknown genes can be regarded high arched palate and micrognathia. He had overlapping fingers as as genetically “neutral” and hence are prototypes of safe or low risk observed in trisomy 18, but no cardiac anomalies. He had severe artificial chromosome vectors. postnatal growth retardation and profoundly delayed psychomotor Here, we report the existence and characterization of a natural development. Routine cytogenetic analysis suggested a balanced equivalent to human satellite DNA-based artificial chromosomes. This translocation between chromosomes 6;14 and a possible deletion small stable accessory chromosome derived from the centromeric/ of the short arm of chromosome 4. FISH studies were performed short arm region of human chr #15 is carried by healthy members showing a complex rearrangement between chromosomes 4, 6 of a family, and remained apparently unchanged at least in three and 14. Distal segment of chromosome 6 (breakpoint q16) was generations. The stable persistence of this natural accessory translocated to the long arm of chromosome 4 (breakpoint q26). chromosome supports the assumption that hSATACs derived from A part of the long arm of chromosome 4, distal to the breakpoint, the centromeric/short arm region of chr #15 may be suitable long- was translocated to the short arm of chromosome 14. Studies for term gene expression platforms without detrimental consequences. the Wolf-Hirschhorn locus detected two signals 46,XY,t(4;6),t(4;1 4),4qter-. Since no signal was detected by FISH with 4q terminal P0328. Paternal origin of der(X)t(X;6) in a girl with trisomy 6p specific probe on the derivative 14, we assume a fourth break at the I. Petkovic1, I. Barisic1, R. Bago2, S. Hecimovic2; distal part of the long arm of chromosome 4 leading to a terminal 1University Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Ruder deletion, and suggest that the long arm segment of chromosome Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. 4 was translocated by the terminal broken end. Thus, this complex Posters - Cytogenetics 144 145 rearrangement resulted in a 4q terminal deletion. The phenotypical P0333. A case with double minute chromosome carrying features were comparable to that of the previously described patients chromosome’s 8 centromere amplicons. with &#2116;q- syndrome’. Our observation contributes to the S. Kokkinou, S. Diamantopoulou, E. Meidanis; phenotypic spectrum of the rare &#2116;q- syndrome’. Sismanoglio General Hospital, Marousi, Greece. Double minute chromosomes (dms) are extensively associated P0331. Monozygotic twins with a trisomy 11p due to an with cancer cells. There are few reports of their presence in the unbalanced translocation. peripheral cells of normal individuals. We report the existence of a D. Marcus-Soekarman1, G. Hamers1, S. Velzeboer2, J. Nijhuis3, C. dm chromosome in the peripheral blood lymphocytes of a 31 years de Die-Smulders1, C. Schrander-Stumpel1, J. Engelen1; old young lady, without any type of malignancy or any history of prior 1Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Maastricht, exposure to mutagenic agents. The patient had a leukopenia due to Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital, an anemia of vitamin B12 deficiency. The bone marrow aspiration and Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Department of Obstetrics, University tephrine biopsy was not diagnostic for an MDS (FAB classification). Hospital, Maastricht, Netherlands. She is followed cytogenetically for a period of five years. Peripheral A pregnancy, complicated by a twin transfusion syndrome (TTS), blood samples were cultured accordingly to standard techniques. resulted in the birth of female twins by cesarean section in the 30th Chromosome preparations were stained with GTG banding gestational week. Since both twins showed dysmorphic features, in technique. The karyotype was 47,XX (dm included in 50 analyzed one more pronounced than the other, karyotyping of blood samples metaphases). The dm was studied in detail with FISH. We used a was done in both. This showed a 46, XX, der(15)/46, XX karyotype in specific for 8q24 region (LSI-VYSIS), that contains c-myc oncogene, both. a specific for MLL gene at 11q23 (LSI-VYSIS), and a centromeric Fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) with a panel of probes for chromosome 8 (cep8-VYSIS). The visible dm was a centromere identified the additional material on the short arm of chromosome 15 of chromosome 8 in 100% of the metaphase spreads and in 500 as to be derived from the short arm of chromosome 11. counted interphase nuclei as well. To the best of our knowledge this Since at that time, the twins showed discrepant phenotypes which is the first case in which on a dm c-myc oncogene or MLLgene is not we felt could not be explained by the TTS alone, FISH with an 11p- amplified and it contains centromer’s 8 amplicons. We believe that: probe was performed on a buccal smear and a urine sample of both (1) the patient has an unusual type of MDS, (2) the amplified genes twins. This showed three signals in part of the cells with the most on that extra centromere of chromosome 8 propably give a favorable dysmorphic twin having a larger proportion of abnormal cells, both in advantage to her mild and stable clinical course. buccal and bladder cells. Meanwhile, DNA-investigations on blood samples of the children and P0334. A solution for bloody amnios ? their parents had confirmed that the twins were monozygotic. D. Blake, P. Perrin; Clinical data and results of the chromosomal investigations will be MCL, Medizinische Laboratorien, Düdingen, Switzerland. presented in detail. The children show features of a phenotype as The presence of blood in amniotic fluids is classically associated described by Slavonitek et al (1). Mosaicism for unbalanced structural with a reduced number of colonies and an increased culture time. In chromosomal abnormalities in live-born infants is a rare observation a prospective 1 year study, 42 bloody amniotic fluids were treated and its origin in these twins will be discussed. with a commercially available selective lysing solution (Vitalyse™, 1. Slavonitek, A., Gaunt, L., Donnai, D. Paternally inherited BioErgonomics, Inc.). All samples were run in parallel: half of the duplications of 11p15.5 and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. independent culture vessels were treated with Vitalyse™ prior to J.Med.Genet. 1997;34:819-826 culturing, half were cultured using standard operating procedure. For both techniques, we compared the number of colonies per cover P0332. Prognostic impact of cytogenetics in patients with slip and number of days in culture. One case failed with both sets B-CLL of cultures. In the remaining cases, the data collected, although not L. Sindelarova1, K. Michalova1,2, Z. Zemanova1, J. Brezinova2, S. statistically significant, indicate an increase (53%) in the average Kurkova2, E. Cmunt3; number of colonies produced (9.9 vs. 6.5) and a decrease (6%) 1Center of Oncocytogenetics, General Faculty Hospital and 1st in number of days in culture (9.7 vs. 10.4) after treatment with Medical Faculty of Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, Vitalyse™. Additionally, no difference in metaphase quality was 2Institute of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech observed. These data argue in favor of the safety and benefits of Republic, 31st Medical Department, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Vitalyse™ solution. Further prospective studies to support these Medical Faculty of Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. findings are currently underway. B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL), the most common adult leukemia in Western countries is characterized by clonal P0335. Cytogenetic and FISH analyses of masked and chromosomal abnormalities detected in almost 50% of studied complex Philadelphia chromosome translocations in patients. The most frequent are deletions 13q14, trisomy 12, chronic myeloid leukemia. deletions 17p13 and deletions 11q22-q23. F. Morel1, A. Herry1, M. J. Le Bris1, N. Guéganic1, M. F. Scoazec1, P. During the last four years we performed dual color I-FISH on bone Morice2, J. F. Abgrall3, P. Bourquard2, C. Berthou4, M. De Braekeleer1; marrow and/or blood smears of 178 patients (114 males, 64 females, 1Service de Cytogénétique, Cytologie et Biologie de la Reproduction, mean age 64,1 years) with B-CLL. UBO & CHU, Brest, France, 2Service d’Hématologie, CH Yves Le Trisomy 12 was found in 34 of them (19%), deletion 13q14 was Foll, St-Brieuc, France, 3Service d’Hématologie biologique, CHU, analysed in 162 patients and proved in 85 of them (52.5%). Deletion Brest, France, 4Service d’Hématologie clinique, CHU, Brest, France. 17p13 was found in 32 (19.6%) patients out of 163 examined. By Bone marrow samples from 112 patients with chronic myeloid probe LSI MLL for 11q23 region we studied 56 patients. Although this leukemia (CML) were investigated using cytogenetic methods. gene is not included in pathogenesis of B-CLL, deletion was proved Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with whole chromosome in 10 (17.8%) of them. All DNA probes were from VYSISTM and cut- paints and Vysis BCR-ABL ES probe was used to confirm and/or off level 2.5% was established on controls (standard deviation not complete the findings. Eight variant Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) exceed 0.5%). Recent studies revealed that deletions of chromosome translocations were identified. Three-way Ph translocations were bands 11q22-q23 including the ATM gene locus are one of the most found in seven patients. Chromosome 4 was involved in two cases common chromosomal aberrations in B-CLL. We will retrospectively and chromosomes 3, 11, 14, 17, and 16 in one case each; in the evaluate the incidence of the deletion in our patients with ATM/FDX latter patient, a ring chromosome of the translocated 9 was found probe. (r(9)t(9;16;22)). The eighth patient had a five-way Ph translocation Correlations of the molecular-cytogenetic findings with the t(2;9;16;22;22); it involved the fusion of the 3’ADN sequence of the immunophenotype, clinical course will be presented and prognostic ABL oncogene with the 5’DNA sequence of the BCR gene on the impact will be discussed. Ph chromosome and the insertion of the 5’end of ABL in the other This work was supported by grant IGA MZ CR NC 6470-3/2001 and chromosome 22. The BCR/ABL fusion gene was detected on the CEZ J 13/98 111100004 Ph chromosome in all 8 cases but 2 also presented a deletion of the 5’ ABL region on the derivative chromosome 9. A masked Ph chromosome was identified among the 112 patients; it involved the 144 Posters - Cytogenetics 145 insertion of ABL into BCR on an apparently normal chromosome 22, This work was supported by grants IGA MZCR NC/6675-3 and GACR resulting in a fusion ABL-BCR gene. In conclusion, FISH analyses 301 01 0200. allowed, not only a more accurate characterization of these complex translocations with subtle abnormalities and the identification of P0338. Importance of genetic investigation in couples cryptic rearrangements, but also the recognition of the deletion of the involved in “in vitro fertilisation”(IVF) 5’ ABL region, which is now regarded by some workers to be of bad P. Capkova1, K. Adamova1, A. Santava2, R. Vrtel1, J. Kolarova2, I. prognosis. Oborna3, A. Sobek4, J. Santavy2; 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Foetal Medicine, University P0336. MLL rearrangements in balanced and unbalanced Hospital of Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 11q aberrations in patients with hematological 2Faculty of Medicine, Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech malignancies Republic, 3Clinic of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital J. Brezinova1, Z. Zemanova2, S. Kurkova1, L. Sindelarova2, J. of Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 4Fertimed, Sajdova1, K. Michalova1,2; Private Centre of Assisted Reproduction, Olomouc, Czech Republic. 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech PROBLEM: The aim of study was to evaluate the contribution of Republic, 2Center of Oncocytogenetics, General Faculty Hospital and chromosomal abnormalities and gene mutations (AZF and CFTR) in 1st Medical Faculty of Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. cases of decreased fertility. Structural rearrangements involving chromosome band 11q23 have RESULTS: The frequency of chromosomal aberrations in examined been observed in various hematological malignancies and the great group was 6,5 % (29/444). We detected 7 (1,5 %) cases of balanced majority of chromosomal changes involve the MLL gene. More than chromosomal rearrangements, 2 (0,45 %) cases of cytogenetic 50 different chromosome bands have been found to be implicated deletion of Y chromosome, 1 (0,23 %) case of inversion, 1 (0,23 in these rearrangements, and identification of MLL together with its %) case of marker chromosome, 13 (3,0 %) cases of gonosomal localization can be easily done by FISH with specific DNA probes. mosaicism and 5 (1,13 %) of gonosomal aneuploidies. The We investigated rearrangements of MLL gene in 14 patients with prevalence of AZF deletion at azoospermic men in this group was different hematological malignancies (9 myeloid, 5 lymphoid), 3,91 % (5/128) and CFTR gene mutation was 4,79 % (7/146). whose bone marrow cells contained in three cases balanced and in In a small group of pregnant patients after IVF included in our study eleven cases unbalanced 11q aberrations including translocations, the frequency of chromosomal abnormalities was 18,6 %. deletions and insertions. FISH with dual colour locus specific probe CONCLUSION: High number of infertile couples is affected by for MLL gene (VYSIS) proved in those with balanced aberrations the chromosomal aberrations. It is suggested that chromosomal analyses rearrangement of MLL gene in one case, in two cases MLL gene was should be performed before IVF treatment. Incidence of AZF a CFTR translocated on the partner chromosome without rearrangement. In gene mutations was also frequent in studied group and for that the cohort of patients with unbalanced 11q translocations the deletion reason the screening of both AZF deletion and CFTR gene mutation of MLL gene was proved in three cases, rearrangement of MLL gene is recommended in azoospermic men. in three cases, in another three cases MLL gene was translocated on the partner chromosome without any change detectable by P0339. Prenatally diagnosed chromosome abnormalities FISH and in two cases MLL gene remained on band 11q23. Whole and ultrasound markers: A report of 537 cases chromosome painting probes (CAMBIO) and multicolour FISH H. Hichri, H. Sennana Sendi, H. El Ghezal, M. Gribaa, S. Ibala (mFISH - MetaSystems) were used for identification of chromosomes Romdhana, A. Saâd; involved in translocations. Laboratoire de Cytogénétique et de Biologie de la Réproduction, Correlation of clinical characteristics, outcome and survival of patients CHU Farhat Hachad, Sousse, Tunisia. according to diagnoses and various types of 11q rearrangements will Fetuses with chromosomal abnormalities are usually characterized by be discussed. specific, minor or major, multiple anomalies accepted as sonographic This work was supported by grants IGA MZCR NC/6675-3 and GACR markers of chromosomopathies. 301-01-0200. Fetal karyotyping was performed for 537 patients because of fetal abnormalities on ultrasonography. The fetal karyotype was abnormal P0337. Clinical implications of del(20q) in patients with in 8.94% of cases (48/537). There were: autosomal aneuploidy in hematologic myeloid disorders 26 cases (4.84%), structural rearrangements in 9 cases(1.67%), S. Kurkova1, J. Brezinova1, Z. Zemanova2, L. Sindelarova2, J. sex aneuploidy in 8 cases (1.49%), triploidy in 3 cases (0.56%) and Cermak1, M. Siskova2, R. Neuwirtova2, K. Michalova1,2; marker chromosomes in 2 cases(0.37%).Unbalanced structural 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech anomalies were frequently associated with intrauterine growth Republic, 2Center of Oncocytogenetics, General Faculty Hospital and retardation (4.13%). Within the group of single sonographic anomaly, 1st Medical Faculty of Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. the most frequent chromosomal disorders were trisomies 21 and Deletion of the long arm of chromosome 20 represents the 18 (3.17%). Among fetuses with multiple sonographic anomalies, most common chromosomal abnormality associated with the Turner’s syndrome was detected in 3.06%, trisomy 21 or trisomy myeloproliferative syndrome (MPS). This aberration can be also 18 in 2.04%. Chromosomal abnormalities were detected in found in bone marrow cells of the patients with other myeloid malformations affecting: malignancies including myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and -nervous system : 5.67% acute myeloid leukemia. Deleted part of 20q is rather small and its -gastrointestinal system : 7.14% extent and breakpoints on the long arms of chromosome 20 can be -renal system :10.4% identified by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with specific -chest : 13.72% DNA probes. -neck : 16.67% We report findings in bone marrow cells of 34 patients (19 males, -abdomen : 30.77% 15 females, mean age 65 years, range 21-89 years) with malignant -skeleton : 8.19% myeloid diseases with deletion 20q determined by classical -hydrops : 8.33% cytogenetic techniques. All cases were studied by FISH using locus Minor fetal anomalies also serve as ultrasound markers of fetal specific probes for band 20q12 (LSI D20S108, VYSIS). According to aneuploidy, the most specific is nucal translucency. It was associated the results of both cytogenetic analyses this cohort of patients was with chromosomal anomalies in 13.3% of cases. divided into two groups: in the first one the patients with deletion 20q as a single aberration (20 patients) were presented, in the second P0340. DNA analysis of Y - chromosomal sequences from group were the cases with deletion 20q and other chromosomal different tissues in Turner syndrome patients. changes (14 patients). We correlated hematologic findings with R. Vodicka1, R. Vrtel1, J. Zapletalova2, A. Santava1, K. Adamova1; the results of cytogenetic examinations and time of survival in both 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Foetal Medicine, University groups of the patients. The prognostic value of deletion del(20q) Hospital of Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, in our cohort in comparison to those published in literature will be 2Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital of Palacky University, presented. Deletion del(20q) as a single aberration is a sign of better Olomouc, Czech Republic. prognosis for the patients with MPS and/or MDS. IntroductionPosters - Cytogenetics 146 147 Incidence of Turner syndrome (TS) is about 1: 2500 of liveborn by their centromeric region (Nietzel et al., 2001, Hum Genet, 108, girls in the Czech Republic. Chromosome Y sequences having the 199-204). The technique, called cenM-FISH has been extended by physiological function in males can promote the development of the introduction of an additional probe specific for the short arm of all gonadoblastoma in undifferentiated gonads of TS patients. The risk of human acrocentric chromosomes called midi54 (described in Mrasek tumourgenesis is about 30%. et al., 2001, Cytogenet Cell Genet, 93, 242-248). This acro/cenM- Methods FISH probe set revealed in the present case, that the both SMC were Samples of 124 Czech TS patients were examined by polymerase identical derivatives of chromosomes 15 with two specific signals chain reaction (PCR) and quantitative fluorescent PCR (QF PCR) in for the centromere 15 specific and the midi54 probe. Additional 4 loci. Y - positive cases were furthermore tested using fluorescent in FISH experiments using the high resolution multicolor banding situ hybridisation (FISH). (MCB) technique and probes specific for the Prader-Willi/Angelman Results syndrome region (SNRPN and D15S10), respectively, characterized Tests of peripheral blood by: the derivative chromosomes as dicentric iso-chromosomes PCR in loci DYZ3 4,8%, AMGY 3,2%, SRY 3,9%, PABY 4% and i(15)(pter→q13::q13→pter). To the best of our knowledge, this is QF PCR in loci DYZ3 13,7%, AMGY 5,6%. the first case with partial hexasomy 15pter→15q13. Studies to Detection of Y sequences from paraffin - embedded gonadoblastoma clarify the origin of the derivatives (UPD-analysis) are in progress. In tissue in DYZ3 and TSPY loci from 2 samples. One sample was summary, acro/cenM-FISH is a very useful approach for the one step positive in both loci. identification of all human chromosomes by their centromeres and FISH with Y centromeric probe was performed on following sections: acrocentric p-arms. Supported by Herbert Quandt Stiftung der VARTA two samples from gonadoblastoma tissues and one sample from AG, Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung (99.105.1) and EU (ICA2-CT-2000- undifferentiated gonad. One sample was a mosaic 1 in 20. The others 10012 and QLRT-1999-31590). showed only sporadic positive signal. Conclusion P0343. Cytogenetic studies in lymphocyte cultures from The majority of hidden mosaicism is not detectable by conventional 3 members of a family affected with Werner’s Syndrome cytogenetic methods. The classical PCR combined with the detection B. Porto1, O. Pereira2, I. Malheiro1; of products on agarose gel (ethidium bromide stained) was quite 1Lab. Citogenética, Instituto Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Porto, unsuitable for mosaic determination. QF PCR is the most sensitive Portugal, 2Serviço de Dermatologia, Hospital Geral de Stº António, and the most precise method for the assessment of Y chromosome Porto, Portugal. mosaicism in patients with Turner syndrome. It enables the most Werner’s Syndrome (WS), a rare autosomal disorder arising as a effective selection of persons under the risk of gonadoblastoma consequence of mutations in a gene coding for a protein member development. of Rec Q family of DNA helicases (WRN), is characterized by premature aging exhibiting chromosome instability and predisposition P0341. Distal trisomy 14q and aorto-pulmonary window : to cancer. In cell lines derived from WS patients both stable and a case report unstable chromosome aberrations had already been detected, and Y. Perrin1, M. C. Addor1, N. Sekarski2, D. F. Schorderet1; recently it has been shown that WS cells have a slower rate of repair 1Division of Medical Genetics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Department of associated with DNA damage induced in S-phase. In the present pediatrics, Lausanne, Switzerland. work we performed PHA-stimulated lymphocyte cultures, with and We report on a newborn female with partial trisomy 14q. She was without induction with diepoxybutane (DEB), from two brothers with born at term after an uneventful pregnancy as the first child of an WS, another healthy sister and 6 healthy controls. The purpose unrelated couple. Her birth weigth was 2830g, length 47cm, head was to analyse the frequency and pattern of chromosome instability circumference 30cm. At birth she was noted to have an unusual face, in patients from the same family. Our results showed a higher a 3/6 systolic murmur and was admitted to the pediatric department. frequency of random chromosome aberrations in all members of She had a large anterior fontanel, hypertelorism, broad nasal the family, compared with controls; however, no consistent pattern bridge, high arched palate, micrognathism, low set ears, short neck, of chromosome-specific aneuploidies and structural aberrations overriding fingers, rocker-bottom feet. She also presented hypotonia, was detected among the 3 members of the family, supporting the opisthotonos, left side earing impairment, corneal epitheliopathy hypothesis that chromosome instability is related with the disease due to her lagophthalmia. An echocardiogram performed on the 3rd but the selection of the chromosome aberrations involved is not day of life showed a large aorto-pulmonary window with significant genetically determined. This study also revealed that the repair left to right shunt which required surgical closure at one month. At associated with DNA damage induced by DEB is not significantly two months, signs of virilisation were noticed. Endocrinologic and affected in the 3 members of the family. radiologic investigation concluded to side effects of medication. Cytogenetic analysis was done. Initial investigation demonstrated P0344. Supernumerary marker 22 chromosome: Clinical, additional material on chromosome 3. Fluorescent in situ cytogenetic and molecular analysis of five patients. hybridization showed that this material originated from chromosome I. Lopez Pajares1, A. Delicado1, P. Lapunzina1, M. Mori1, M. de 14. Her caryotype was: 46,XX,der(3)t(p25;q24). Studies of her Torres1, A. Sanz2; parents’ chromosomes revealed a reciprocal paternal balanced 1Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital de la translocation between chromosomes 3 and 14. His caryotype was: Princesa, Madrid, Spain. 46,XY,t(3;14)(p25;q24). Extra structurally abnormal microchromosomes are a heterogeneous We compare her clinical features with the 8 other trisomy 14q24→ group of chromosomes also known as markers or small qter published. supernumerary chromosomes . In most cases, the extra chromosome is derivated from an acrocentric chromosome.Thus, patients have P0342. Characterization of two small supernumerary duplications, or in some cases triplications of the chromosomal marker chromosomes (SMC) by acro/cenM-FISH - first segments included in the extra. case with partial hexasomy 15pter→15q13 Patients, material and methods : We have studied five patients with A. Heller1, B. Albrecht2, A. Nietzel1, H. Starke1, F. von Eggeling1, U. an extra marker 22 chromosome. All patients were evaluated with Claussen1, T. Liehr1; GTL, CBG, NOR-Ag banding, fluorescence in situ hybridation (FISH) 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany, using several probes and microsatellite anlaysis with four different 2Institute of Human Genetics, Essen, Germany. markers. Cytogenetic analysis performed in a three year old girl resulted Results: Four patients had typical clinical signs and symptoms in a karyotype 48,XX,+2mar[25/25]. She presented the following associated to the Cat eye syndrome (CES), showed peculiar face, clinical features: severe mental retardation, microcephaly, postaxial abnormal ears, anal stenosis/atresia and some degree of mental hexadactyly plus a pachygyry. Such small SMCs often are uneasy retardation, ranging from mild to moderate. Iris coloboma, a clinical to characterize in standard cytogenetic or molecular cytogenetic finding usually observed in CES, have not been found in none of our approaches. Recently, we developed a probe set, using all patients.One of them had a complex congenital heart defect and died human centromeric probes labeled in different colors, allowing the at age of three months.Cytogenetic studies showed that one child simultaneous characterization and identification of all chromosomes had mosaicism for the marker chromosome, and the remaining four 146 Posters - Cytogenetics 147 children had 47 chromosomes in all evaluated metaphases. Parents chromosome anbormalities has been well documented. Much less is were all cytogenetically normal. known concerning the role of parental chromosome abnormalities in There was heterogeneity on the FISH and microsatellite results recurrent in-vitro fertilization (IVF) implantation failures. demonstrating that the duplicated segment varied in size in each The aim of this study was to evaluate the contribution of chromosome patient. abnormalities as potential cause of IVF implantation failures. Comments: Our results in five patients with extra satellited 22 Two hundred and forty four consecutive patients (122 couples) who marker chromosome showed that the phenotype in these patients is had at least 3 attempts of embryos transferred without achieving characteristic of CES and that iris coloboma may be not present in a clinical pregnancy, were evaluated for chromosome abnormalities. percentage of patients. Five hundred and twenty six consecutive patients (263 couples) who had experienced 3 or more miscarriges, and 2032 consecutive P0345. Chromosome 9p- deletion syndrome: 3 “de novo” antenatal chromosome diagnoses referred because of advanced cases maternal age or maternal anxiety (unbalanced karyotypes associated N. Oliva Teles, M. Reis Lima, L. Ramos, G. Lima, F. P. Oliveira, J. with mental retardation were excluded), served as control groups. Aguiar, M. Pinto; Chromosome abnormalities were detected in 5/244 patients with Instituto de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal. IVF failures (4.1% of the couples), in 10/526 patients with recurrent The 9p- deletion syndrome was characterized for the first time in miscarriges (3.8% of the couples), and in 5/2032 (0.25%) antenatal 1973. The main clinical features of this syndrome are dysmorphic diagnoses. facial features (trigonocephaly, midface hypoplasia, upward-slanting The chromosome abnormalities detected in the IVF failures group palpebral fissures and a long philtrum) and mental retardation. included 2 reciprocal translocations, one case of 46,XYY, one case of The authors present the clinical description and the cytogenetic 46,X,del(X)(p22), and one case of 46,XY(96%)/45,X(4%) mosaicism. findings in three patients, aged 1, 4 and 43 years, with “de novo” The prevalence of chromosome abnormalities among the IVF deletions in the short arm of chromosome 9 (in 2 cases, 9p22 and patients was significantly higher than in the antenatal group 9p23 in the other). Apart from the mental retardation, the reasons for (p<0.001), and it was similar to the prevalence of chromosome referral were, respectively, Pierre-Robin syndrome with low weight abnormalities detected in the recurrent miscarriges group. and height, severe facial dysmorphic features and apparent Down The results of the study suggest that chromosome analysis should syndrome. be considered as part of the routine investigation of patients with It is important to note that, although the symptoms are typical and recurrent IVF implantation failures. diagnosis may be suspected at birth, most paediatricians are not aware of this syndrome; therefore, no provisional diagnosis or P0348. Unusual inverted duplication of chromosome 15 detailed clinical description are given to the cytogenetics laboratory with terminal deletion. in the majority of cases. The clinical details, together with high R. Genesio1,2, A. Borghese1, D. De Brasi3, P. Di Micco3, P. Di resolution banding patterns (especially if the breakpoint region is Costanzo3, A. Conti1, D. Paladini4, A. Loffredo4, P. Martinelli4, L. very close to the 9p telomere) are the best combination to avoid the Nitsch1; underestimation of this syndrome. 1Cytogenetics and Prenatal Diagnosis - University of Naples, Naples, Italy, 2BioGeM, Naples, Italy, 3Dpt.of Pediatrics - University of Naples, P0346. A new probe set for the characterization of Naples, Italy, 4Dpt. Obstetrics and Gynecology - University of Naples, centromere-near rearrangements Naples, Italy. H. Starke1, A. Weise2, A. Nietzel2, A. Heller2, U. Claussen2, T. Liehr2; We report here the case of a female premature newborn with multiple 1(1) Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany, severe congenital defects. Ultrasonographic examination at 26 2Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. weeks of gestation evidenced growth retardation, cardiac and kidney A variety of FISH approaches have been developed in the last abnormalities, arthrogryposis and foot deformity. These anomalies decade, covering the entire human genome in multiple ways. were all confirmed at birth. Moreover, facial dysmorphism, left-hand Nonetheless, there is still a chromosomal region which is not well deformity, dislocation of the hip and hypoplastic corpus callosum investigated with the presently available probe sets: the pericentric were found. Cytogenetic investigation performed by high resolution region. This region is of special interest when small supernumerary G banding on amniocytes, fetal blood and skin fibroblasts indicated marker chromosomes (sSMC) shall be characterized. Neither a possible duplication of 15q. FISH analysis was performed with a whole nor partial chromosome painting (wcp and pcp) probes are painting probe for chromosome 15, with a telomeric probe and with informative if centromere-near euchromatic material is present on specific 15q probes, to identify and delimit the duplicated region. a sSMC. This question can be answered best when hybridizing An inverted duplication of the q14-26.2 region was assessed. The centromere-near probes like BACs. At present we are working on deletion of q26.3 was also demonstrated. The resulting karyotype 24 probe sets, each for one human chromosome, which consists of was: 46, XX, inv dup del(15)(pter→q26.2::q26.2→q14). The parents’ a centromere specific satellite probe, one centromere-near BAC in karyotypes were normal. The phenotypic alterations of the proband q and p (excluding the acrocentric chromosomes) and arm-specific are only in part superimposable to those described in the literature for pcp probes. These probes are used after characterizing the sSMC analogous cases. This could be due to the extent of the duplication by cenM-FISH (Nietzel etal., 2001, HumGenet, 108, 199-204). and/or to the monosomy of a portion of q26. Chromosomal Up to now two cases with cat eye syndrome (CES) chromosomes aberrations involving the human chromosome 15 (most often the q11- [inv dup(22)(q11.2)] and three sSMC derived from #2, #16 and 13 region) have been frequently reported in the literature. It has been #22, respectively, have been characterized by centromere-near suggested that duplicons with opposite orientation may predispose to BAC probes. As expected, centromere-near euchromatic material inverted duplications and that distal deletion and a single copy region was present in the CES-chromosomes. For the derivative #2 q- between the duplicated regions are then present. We are currently arm specific centromere-near material could be detected, while investigating the hypothesis that the rearrangement described here the derivatives #16 and #22 consisted only of centromere and might be related to the recently discovered duplicons in the 15q26 heterochromatin. Additionally, a clinical case with a normal karyotype region. apart from the very small pericentric inversion could be detected using the chromosome 2 specific peri-centromere probe set. In P0349. Asynchronous replication of bi-allelically summary, we present a probe set useful to characterize any kind expressed loci: A new phenomenon in turner syndrome of centromere-near rearrangement. Supported by EU (QLRT-1999- O. Reish1, R. Gal1, L. Gaber2, C. Sher1, Z. Bistritzer1, A. Amiel2; 31590) 1Assaf Harofeh, Zerifin, Israel, 2Meir Medical Center, Kefar Saba, Israel. P0347. Role of chromosome abnormalities in recurrent In-Vitro Fertilization implantation failure Purpose: Transcriptional activity of genes is related to their I. Yehudai1, H. Bar-El1, Z. Borochowitz1, R. Diukman2, H. Dar1,3; replication timing; alleles showing the common biallelic mode of 1Bnai-Zion Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2Carmel Medical Center, expression replicate synchronously, whereas those with a monoallelic Haifa, Israel, 3Technion - Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel. mode of expression replicate asynchronously. Here we determined The association between recurrent miscarriges and parental the level of synchronization in replication timing of alleles in subjects Posters - Cytogenetics 148 149 with Turner syndrome. Methods: We used FISH for 3 loci not P0352. Pure partial trisomy for long arm of chromosome 9 linked to X chromosome, in lymphocytes derived from 12 controls, R. Airinei1, I. Dimofte2, A. Popa2, D. P. Balaban3, L. C. Enache4, V. 3 individuals with Turner and 4 with mosaic Turner syndrome. Broasca Madar5; Results: In cells derived from controls, each pair of alleles replicated 1Faculty of Medicine, Constanta, Romania, 2Medical Genetics synchronously; yet these same alleles replicated asynchronously in Department, Faculty of Medicine, Constanta, Romania, 3Biochemistry cells monosomic for X chromosome derived from Turner and mosaic Department, Faculty of Medicine, Constanta, Romania, 4Cell and Turner patients. When the level of 45,X0 was low in the mosaic Molecular Biology Deparment, UMF “Gr.T.Popa”, Iasi, Romania, samples, the replication pattern of the 46,XX cells was normal. 5Management and Public Health Department, Faculty of Medicine, However, in samples with a high level of mosaicism, a significantly Constanta, Romania. increased asynchronous replication was detected in the 46,XX A case of a 4-year-old boy with trisomy of the long arm of the cells. Conclusion: An altered temporal replication control in Turner chromosome 9 is described (46,XY, der(9), t(9;9) (q32:q12)). syndrome may suggest an epigenetic mechanism involved in this The trisomy is probably the result of a translocation of the long arm condition affecting the aneuploid and euploid cells. of the chromosome from one homologue to the other in a prenatal gonad. P0350. Cytogenetic analysis of 179 infertile Iranian The clinical features of the child which severe developmental women. retardation, bird-like facies, tapered fingers, and flexion contracture of F. Mortezapour1, L. Seyed Mortaz1, F. Razazian1, B. Hashemi1, H. the legs are similar to those of the few cases described of trisomy of Sayar1, S. Joghehdost1,2, M. Houshmand1,2; the whole chromosome. 1Blood transfusion organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and P0353. Paracentric inversion of chromosome 1 - Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. inv(1)(p31.2p35.2) - in a large family from northern Turner syndrome in adult is typically presented by primary Finland amenorreha,infantile genitlia and failure of secondary sexual J. Leisti, E. Kinnunen-Siira, K. Haapala, R. Herva, H. Kokkonen; development. Gonadal dysgenesis resulting in primary infertility Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland. is one of the most common features of turner syndrome. We describe a large family in which a paracentric chromosomal Nevertheless, menstruation and pregnancy have been recorded in inversion was first detected in the early 80´s in a 1-year-old boy with a few 45,X subjects. But whether on not the fertility is associated severe mental retardation, infantile spasms and multiple congenital with a 46,XX cell line the germ cells is not known. We have anomalies. He had inherited the inversion in an unbalanced form investigated 218 female patients which were referred to our lab for from the mother, who was carrier of inv(1)(p31.2p35.2) and who had primary amenorrhea or secondary amenorrhea or for R/O Turner had several spontaneous abortions. Subsequently this inversion has syndrome, 35 cases showed an abnormal cytogenetic analysis. been independantly ascertained in six individuals of whom four were The most common chromosol abnormality was 45,X(18/35). The studied for developmental delay and dysmorphic features. In them no other karyotypes consist of: pseu/idic(X)(q22); del(15)(q11);ad light microscopic differences could be seen at prometaphase level, d(X)(q28);r(X);iso(X)(q10);4 cases of mosaicism (45,X/46,XX/ when compared with the inversions of their healthy parents. This 47,XXX);46X,iso(X)(q10)/45X;45X/46x;del(X)(q22.2); 2 cases of prompted us to search for the origins of the carriers of the inversion; inv(9)(p11,q13). The latter cases will present a normal variant in with the help of church records a founder couple born in 1760 and human. 1763 could be detected, whose descendants all the inv(1) carriers are. - The cytogenetic, clinical and genealogical data of the family P0351. A New Case of Mosaic Supernumerary Ring will be presented and the role of the inversion in the family and the Chromosome 8 Syndrome population will be discussed. S. Yilmaz1, A. Deviren2, D. Kuru3, Y. Tarkan-Argüden1, B. Karaman4, A. Yüksel3, S. Hacihanefioglu1; P0354. Diagnosis of low rate mosaic trisomy 21 by FISH 1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Div.of Biomedical in a girl with inherited balanced translocation 6;15 Sciences, Dept.of Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, M. Kocova; Genetics and Teratology Research Center (GETAM), Istanbul, Turkey, Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav 3Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Div. of Biomedical Republic of Macedonia. Sciences, Dept.of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul FISH can help in the diagnosis of mosaic chromosomal University, Child Health Institute, Medical Genetics Division, Istanbul, abnormalities. Here we present a girl diagnosed with low rate Turkey. mosaicism for trisomy 21 utilizing this method. We described a de novo mos r(8) by conventional cytogenetic and Case report: A 12-year girl presented due to schooling problems. FISH tecniques. The patient was referred because of neuromotor She was a student in the 6th grade of elementary school, very good growth retardation and dysmorphic facial findings. He was a 15 in literature and writing, however she had poor grades in math and year-old male, with a height of 157 cm (10th centile), and weight logical sciences. She had several pneumonias and additional lobe of 37.5 kg (<3rd centile), head circumference 55 cm (75th centile). in right lung has been diagnosed. Otherwise, she grew normally, His born weight was 1750 gr (<3rd centile), and length was 50 cm and the puberty occurred at an age of 11 years. Physically she (50th centile). He had long and expressionless face with a prominent had some of the features of Down syndrome, e.g. flat nasal bridge, maxilla, everted lips, streched lingual frenulum which had been cut epicantus, low set years, brachicephalia. However, she had a very afterwards. He had big low-set ears, epicanthus, prominent root of well developed speech, with significant eloquence, and no suspicion nose, plagiocephaly, pterigium coli, camptodactyly, deep plantar of Down syndrome occurred previously. creasis, overlapping of toes, hammer big toes and cryptorchidism. Karyotype detected balanced translocation 6p; 7q, inherited from her He had elongated thin trunk with narrow shoulders. There were cafe- father. No other chromosomal abnormality was found by karyotyping. au-lait on dorsal region and. Radiographic findings showed a mild FISH was performed on the chromosome spreads from blood kyphoscoliosis on dorsal vertebras, spina bifida on L4-L5. Magnetic lymphocytes. Out of several thousands of cells, trisomy 21 appeared rezonans Imaging (MRI) study revealed hypolasia of splenium region in three. of corpus callosum and cavum septum pellicidum abnormalities. His Low rate mosaicism in our patient confirms that the proportion of IQ level was 67, he had poor speech and language development, trisomic cells influences some of the features of Down syndrome poor awareness of necessary life skills, and had autistic-like including the speech development. FISH can help to detect small behaviours with shyness and stubbornnness. We performed number of trisomic cells in cases with unusual presentations of the cytogenetic analysis on peripheral blood cultures by GTL banding and syndrome. found 47,XY,+r[29]/46,XY[33]. We applied FISH and obtained signals on the ring chromosome with 8 painting and 8 alpha satellite probes. P0355. Partial monosomy 22q11 associated with Oncor (Gaithersburg) digoxigenin-labelled Coatosome probes and velo-cardio-cutaneus syndrome due to a de novo Vysis were used for FISH analysis. The resulting karyotype after translocation (15; 22) (p11; q11) FISH analysis was mos 47,XY,+r. ish r(8)(wcp8+;D8Z1+). E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Kocova, M. Krstevska-Konstantinova, G. Ubovic, V. Anastasovska;148 Posters - Cytogenetics 149 University Children Hospital, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of less than 20 million/ml are classified as oligospermic. We of Macedonia. have investigated 417 azoospermic patients in our center and a Reciprocal translocations are said to be a common finding in the constitutional chromosomal aberration were diagnosed in 110/ cytogenetic laboratories. In most of the cases there isn’t a loss of 417(26.4%). Whereas the 47,XXY chromosome complement was material when a breakage between two chromosomes occurs. A the commonest (71/110),the following abnormal karyotypes were balanced career doesn’t have any pathological signs. Sometimes also found:46,XX; del(Y)(q11);48,XXYY; inv(Y)(pqq.2,q11.2); t(2,12); during these breaks a certain amount of genetic material has been t(12,22); t(13q,14q); 45,X/46,XY; 47,XXY/46,XY and 6 patients had lost, or the break occurs in a specific region for some syndrome. inv(9)(p11q13) but the pattern have been observed as a normal Then the career expresses more or less dysmorphic signs, mental variant in human. We have found 4 patients with complex structural retardation, or organic lesions. and aneuploidy abnormalities (46,X,idic(Y)(q11.31)/45,X; 47,XXY/ A 2 year old boy approached to the clinic because of motor delay 48XXY+mar/48XXXY; 47,XXY, inv(9)(p11q13); 46,X,del(Y)(q11.21)/ and dysmorphic features. It was a second child of young and 45,X). Pooled data from the literature showed that the frequency of unrelated parents. The pregnancy was normal; the baby was a full- chromosomal abnormalities is higher in azoospermic than in infertile. term neonate, with birth weight and length under 3rd percentile. The We have observed 26.4% chromosomal abnormality in azoospermia boy had mild brachycephaly, flat facies, hypertelorizm, up-slanted and 20% in infertile men, that is compatible with the data from palpebral fissures, squared nasal root, big ears, micrognatia, and literature. swallowing difficulties due to velopharyngeal incompetence. Also the boy presented heart defect, crypyorchidism, inguinal hernia, P0358. Chromosome deletions in 13q: a review of 11 new slender hands with clinodactily of fifth finger. Neurological findings cases revealed hypotonia, motor and mental delay. Chromosomal finding C. Candeias, M. Mota Freitas, N. Oliva Teles, M. L. Fonseca Silva, represents translocation between chromosomes 15 and 22, 46, XY, M. C. Ribeiro, G. Lima, F. P. Oliveira, F. Pinto, M. Pinto; t (15; 22) (p11; q11) with a breakpoint in a VCFS site. Analysis of the Instituto de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal. mother’s chromosomes showed huge satellites on chromosomes 15 Partial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 13, del(13q), are and 22, which may be the cause of the breakage and translocation of uncommon chromosome abnormalities in which a portion of the long chromosomes in the child. When reciprocal translocation occurs in a arm is missing. The range and severity of the symptoms may vary specific region, it produces deletions of specific genes that lead to a greatly, depending upon the size and location of the absent segment. certain phenotype of a well known syndrome. The authors present 11 cases of “de novo” 13q deletions: del (13)(q31) - 1case; del (13)(q32) - 4 cases; del (13)(q22.3) - 1 case; P0356. Pseudohermaphroditism, etiopathogenesis and r(13) - 4 cases; mosaic r(13) - 1 case. All these patients were referred classification for cytogenetic studies due to multiple congenital abnormalities, F. Razazian1, S. Soleimani1, F. Nassiri1, B. Hashemi1, H. Sayar1, S. ranging from mild to severe. Joghehdost1,2, M. Houshmand1,2; A correlation phenotype/karyotype will be established and compared 1Blood transfusion organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of with the reported literature. Iran, 2National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P0359. Identification of supernumerary marker Advance in experimental endocrinology, biochemistry, genetics, and chromosome 20 in 3 patients. molecular biology have all contributed to our understanding of the M. Pierluigi1, S. Cavani1, M. Malacarne1, F. Faravelli1, L. Dalpra’2, E. process of human sex differentiation in the last 5 year. Based on Sala2, N. Villa2, D. Gaveglio2, M. Silengo3, G. B. Ferrero3, E. Frate4, F. the recognition of the underlying anomaly in the process of sexual Dagna Bricarelli1; differentiation intersex disorders may be devided into abnormal 1Laboratorio di Genetica Umana, Ospedali Galliera, Genova, gonadal determination and abnormal genital differentiation [including Italy, 2Laboratorio di Citogenetica, Ospedale S. Gerardo, Monza, male and female pseudohermaphrodism(MPH & FPH)]. Abnormal Italy, 3Dipartimento di Pediatria, Univerità di Torino, Torino, Italy, gonadal determination is mainly dependent on sex chromosomal 4Ambulatorio di Genetica Medica, Azienda ULSS 9-TV, Italy. defects that can be detected by cytogenetic analysis or by the DNA Marker chromosomes (MCs) are supernumerary structurally probes for genes located on the Y chromosome. Individuals with abnormal chromosomes in which no part can be identified by ambiguous genitalia but two differentiated testis are called MPH. cytogenetic banding techniques (ISNC 1995). They are detected Females with ambiguous external genitalia but normal ovaries and with a frequency of 1:1,660-1:1,040 at amniocentesis, 1:5,555 in normal internal genitalia are called FPH. The XX males may be liveborn individuals and 1:330 in mentally retarded patients. MCs divided into 3 subgroups:1) 46,XX males with SRY gene, 2)46,XX are classified as de novo or familial, satellited or non-satellited and males without the SRY gene and 3)46,XX/46,XY mosaics. The mosaic or non-mosaic. In some families, MCs are transmitted through insidence of 1 in 20.000 to 30.000 males with a 46,XX karyotype several generations, apparently with no associated abnormalities, have been reported. We have investigated 586 infertile patients who whereas other MCs carriers may present serious clinical symptoms, was referred to our labfrom 1997 until 2002, we have found 39 cases such as mental retardation, dysmorphic features and malformations. (39/586)with sex reversal which was more common in the male group Several syndromes associated with MCs are known. Mosaic i(12p) as male pseudohermaphrodism(24/39). The main reason of referal causes the Pallister-Killian syndrome; an inv dup(22) is found in the in the MPH group was azoospermia & in the FPH group consists of “cat eye syndrome” and an i(18p) syndrome has also been described. primary amenorrhea. Cytogenetic analysis is the main method for MCs can now be identified by molecular cytogenetic methods but diagnosis of sex reversal as a cause of infertility, but for determining limited data currently do not permit consistent phenotype-genotype the etiology of this pattern we need molecular technology to study the correlation to be made. In addition, variation in the size and parental SRY gene. origin of the marker can influence the outcome. The occurence of a supernumerary marker chromosome 20 is rare P0357. Evaluation of 355 azoospermics Iranian patients and no common phenotype has been established. So far, there are by cytogeneic method. 11 cases reported with an extra marker (20) and their phenotype M. Rahnama1, S. Tootian1, M. Zamanian1, B. Hashemi1, H. Sayar1, S. varies from normal to abnormal. Joghehdost1,2, M. Houshmand1,2; We describe 3 further patients with MCs derived from chromosome 1Blood transfusion organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 20 and identified by FISH. These MCs have been sized with BACs Iran, 2National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and probes and clinical and cytogenetic findings are compared with Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. results of case reports published to date. spermatogenesis in human is a complex, dynamic process which This study was supported by Telethon Italia (grant E.0827) the duration takes 70 days. The onset of release of spermatozoa occurs at about 13.5 years of age and continuing through out life P0360. Scanning probe microscopy studies on human into the eighth and ninth decades. In quantitative terms the out put metaphase chromosomes of spermatozoa in an average adult man is 1500 to 2500 million M. Oberringer, B. Heinz, A. Englisch, H. Gao, U. Hartmann; sperm commonly present in a single ejaculate. Total absence of Institute of Experimental Physics, Saarbrücken, Germany. sperm from the semen is called azoospermia. Sperm concentration A better knowledge of biochemical and structural properties of Posters - Cytogenetics 150 151 human chromosomes is important for cytogenetic investigations was a balanced reciprocal translocation carrier. By high resolution and diagnostics. Since conventional fluorescence microscopy has banding technique a slightly higher rate (4.76 per cent) was detected. reached its limit due to the restricted optical resolution (0,2µm), we 1328 persons (664 couples) referred to our Genetics Center with are currently working on the indroduction of different scanning probe the hisorty of two or more consecutive spontaneous abortions for microscopy techniques in this field: Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) chromosome studies. We found major chromosome abnormalities in and Scanning Near-field Optical Microscopy (SNOM). 35 cases (5.27 per cent). The most common type of abnormalities The topography of GTG-banded human metaphase chromosomes was translocation, in 7 cases the mosaicism of sex chromosome was evaluated by AFM and compared to the standard banding abnormalities has been detected. In one case Yq inversion, one case pattern according to the international system for human cytogenetic 46,XY male pseudohermaphroditism, and another single case of nomenclature (ISCN 1995), which is based on the optical properties pericenteric inversion of chromosome No 1 were the final diagnoses. of the chromosomes. A better resolution of the chromosomal surface On mosaic cases the most common type, was the mosaic Turner in general and of the bands themselves was acchieved by applying syndrome (4 cases), followed by the mosaic Klinefelter syndrome AFM. with 2 cases. We found only 1 case with mosaic trisomy 13. Another approach to make the chromosomes more accessible to We were confronted with 68 cases that showed minor chromosome DNA-probes during fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and abnormalities (10.2 per cent). The most common anomaly was to improve the visualization of their structure consists of various pericentric inversion of chromosome No.9 (17 cases). biochemical treatments. We were using the protein cleaving enzyme trypsin and the polyanion heparin additionally to well established P0363. Is tumourigenesis triggered by chronic procedures like for example HCl-incubation to remove the DNA- inflammation? binding proteins, histones as well as non-histones. The structural M. Jennewein1, M. Oberringer2; effects of these treatments were visualized by AFM and the binding 1Department of Trauma-, Hand- and Reconstructive Surgery, structure of target- and probe-DNA after FISH was investigated by Homburg, Germany, 2Institute of Experimental Physics, Saarbrücken, SNOM. Germany. During the last years, investigators aimed at the identification of new P0361. The cytogenetic analysis in female patients with dignostic and prognostic features of tumourigenesis by correlating amenorrhea and sexualization troubles cytogenetic data with the histopathological stage of tumour. Several E. V. Gorduza, T. Angheloni, C. Bujoran, O. Stoica, M. Volosciuc, E. tumours (e.g. esophagus, colon, lung) were characterized to be Braha, M. Covic; preceeded by chronic inflammation. University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. In an effort to evaluate if there was a relationship between The aim of our study is to analyse the relationship between clinical chronic inflammation and tumour development we determined diagnosis and chromosome studies in female with amenorrhea tumour indicating parameters like polyploidization, centrosome or sexualization troubles. We divided the lot of 197 patients in 11 hyperamplification, multipolar mitoses and the state of p53 during groups, on clinical basis. In Turner syndrome cases we found: 45,X inflammation in humans and mice. (41) 45,X/46,XX (23) 46,XX (23) 46,XX/47,XXX (2) 45,X/46,X,r(X) In inflammatory tissue of human and rodent wounds we detected (1) 45,X/46,XY (1) 45,X/46,XX/46,XY (1) 46,XY (1). Karyotypes for an increased tetra- and polyploidization rate, accompanied by primary amenorrhea cases resulted in: 45,X/46,XX(5) 46,XX(25) centrosome hyperamplification in human wounds. Tetraploid 46,XX/47,XXX(1) 45,X/46,X,i(Xq)(1) 46,XX/47,XXX(1) 46,XY(5). In cells seem to be advantageous during times of unfavourable secondary amenorrhea cases we found: 46,XX (9) 45,X/47,XXX(1). circumstances, as they are during inflammation. Their number Karyotype founded in Morris syndrome (4) and delayed puberty (1) decreased at the end of the healing process during scar formation, phenotypes: 46,XY. In Rokytansky syndrome cases (13) we found coordinated by an intact p53. 46,XX karyotype. In short stature cases we found: 46,XX (1) 45,X/ In inflammatory tissue of the bronchus, we also detected tetra- and 47,XXX(1) 45,X/46,XX/47,XXX (1). The clinical cases with triplo X (2) aneuploid cells as well as centrosome hyperamplification, both was confirmed: 46,XX/47,XXX (1) 45,X/46,XX/47,XXX (1). In cases increasing with the grade of inflammation. Since tetraploidy is with Noonan syndrome we found: 46,XX (3), 45,X (1), 45,X/46,XX defined as an intermediate during tumourigenesis, a decrease of this (1). In ovarian dysgenesia cases we found: 45,X (2) 45,X/46,XX (2) population, which we could see after transient inflammation in the 46,XX (2) 47,XXX (1) 46,XY (1) 46,XX/47,XXY (1). In cases with human wound, is necessary to prevent a malignant development. clinical suspicion of female pseudohermaphroditism we found: 46,XX However chronic inflammation, as in the bronchus, promotes (10) 45,X/46,XX (1) 45,X/46,XY (1) 46,XY (1). In intersexuality cases aneuploidization and malignancy because the unfavourable we found: 46,XX (8) 46,XY (3) 49,XXXXY (2) 45,X (1) 45,X/46,XX conditions are persistent and expose the cells to prolonged stress. (1) 45,X/46,XY(1) 46,XX/46,XY (1). Our studies results confirm the We could also show, that an enhanced number of centrosomes plays concordance between clinical aspects and cytogenetics results in a critical role during the process of segregating the chromosomes Turner, Rokytansky and Morris syndromes, but difficulties in clinical into normal euploid (diploid) cells as well as into aneuploid ones. diagnosis exist in females with isolated amenorrhea or ovarian dysgenesia. Instead, in intersexuality and pseudohermaphroditisms P0364. Detection of cerbB-2 gene amplification in we found a discordance. In conclusion, improving of clinical bilharzial bladder cancer using fluorescence in situ examination and cytogenetic confirmation are needed in patients with hybridization sexualization troubles. H. W. Mostafa1, M. S. Aly1, H. M. Khaled2; 1Faculty of Science, Cairo University (Beni Suef branch), Cairo, P0362. Results of chromosome studies in 664 Iranian Egypt, 2National Cancer Institute, Cairo, Egypt. couples with the history of recurrent early pregnancy Gene amplification are common in many different tumor types and loss. may confer diagnostic, prognostic, or therapeutic information for Y. Shafeghati1,2, M. Karimi Nejad2, M. Zangeneh2, R. Karimi Nejad2, patient management. Amplification and overstatement of the cerbB- Q. Baba Mohammadi2, N. Almadani2, N. Almadani2, F. Afroozan2; 2 gene occurs in different types of cancer. Fluorescence in situ 1Univerity of Welfare Science and Rehabilitation, Tehran, Islamic hybridization (FISH) represents the newest methodological approach Republic of Iran, 2Karimi Nejad Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic for testing for this genetic alteration. Republic of Iran. In this study, FISH is used in a series of archival human bilharzial Approximately 15 to 20 per cent of recognized pregnancies end in a bladder cancer specimens to evaluate for the presence of cerbB-2 first-trimester spontaneous abortion.An estimated 0.4 to 0.5 per cent gene alterations in the most common malignant tumor in Egypt and of them have 3 or more consecutive spontaneous abortions. This some other countries. The study included 41 cases, 32 males and 9 group of women are categorized as having “ habitual abortion”. More females. Twenty-one cases had squamous cell carcinoma, 17 had than 50 percent of spontaneous first trimester abortion specimens transitional cell carcinoma, 2 had adenocarcinoma, and one case had that undergo karyotyping are found to have a chromosomal undifferentiated carcinoma. After performing radical cystectomy to abnormality, which is the major cause for spontaneous abortion. these patients, stage p3b was the commonest lesion being present Karyotype studies of couples with two or more spontaneous abortions in 22 cases, while p3a lesions occurred in 9 cases, p2 in 6, and p1 in revealed in 2.78 to 3.4 per cent of the cases that one of the couples one case. Pathologic tumor stage could not be assessed in 3 cases. 150 Posters - Cytogenetics 151 Pelvic nodal affection occurred in 12 out of 36 (33.3 %) in whom cases of psoriasis vulgaris in patients with the 18p- syndrome. pelvic nodes were examined. Psoriasis vulgaris is a chronic inflammatory skin disease that affects Our data demonstrate that 16 of 41 tumor samples (36.6%) show about 3% of the caucasian population. The psoriasis susceptibility evidence of true cerbB-2 gene amplification. Of the remaining loci have been suggested within many chromosomes (1p, 1q, 2p, samples, 21 (53.4%) show no gene amplification and 4 (10 %) fall 6p, 17q etc.). We describe the first case of psoriasis vulgaris in a into the borderline category with a ratio between one and two cerbB-2 male with 18p- syndrome. Examination at the age 27 years showed genes/cell relative to chromosome 17 centromeres. Our data indicate psoriatic red scaly patches on the skin of his head and forearms. a possible role of the cerbB-2 gene in the development of aggressive He was moderately mentally retarded and had dysmorphic features: behavior in bilharzial bladder tumors. short stature, downslanted palpebral fissures, exophthalmus, prognathism, kyphosis, brachydactyly, micropenis etc. Cytogenetic P0365. Micronucleus Frequencies in Buccal analyses using GTG banding revealed partial deletion 18p in all Mucosa,Urothelial Cells and Peripheral Blood cells studied. FISH showing two fluorescent signals with WCP18 DNA probe and one signal with 18p subtelomeric DNA probe on Lymphocytes of Smokers. metaphases confirmed the finding. Karyotype is 46,XY,del(18)(: S. Demirel, A. G. Zamani, G. H. Durakbasi, A. Acar; p11.23-qter). As psoriasis vulgaris has not been previously described Department of Medical Genetics,Meram Medical Faculty,Selcuk in patients with 18p- syndrome, one might argue that they have not University, Konya, Turkey. reached an age to be able to determine whether they are affected The micronucleus (MN) assay in human peripheral blood and with psoriasis or not. Follow-up examination of these patients will exfoliated cells has been widely used to detect genotoxic effects of be necessary. The coexistence of psoriasis vulgaris and 18p- in environmental mutagens, infectious agents and hereditary diseases. our patient is possibly an association, but it might also be a causal In the present study, we aimed to determine the genetic toxicity of connection and may be helpful in the localization of an additional cigarette smoking. MN assay was performed on buccal mucosa, susceptibility locus for psoriasis in the region of 18p. urothelial cells and periheral blood lymphocyte samples obtained from 15 healthy male smokers ( > 5 pack-years) and 15 male non- smoker controls who had not been exposed to any known genotoxic P0368. Case report of a de novo duplication 14q11.2- agent. It was found that, the mean value (+/- SD) of MN frequency in q21.2 oral mucosa cells from smokers and controls were 1,208 ± 0,220 % B. Oehl-Jaschkowitz1, M. G. Shamdeen2, S. Reichardt1, V. and 0,264±0,105 %, in urothelial exfoliative cells 1,292±0,280 % and Kalscheuer3, K. D. Zang1, T. Martin1; 0,120±0,088 %, in peripheral blood lymphocytes 1,534±0,234 % and 1Institute of Human Genetics, Homburg, Germany, 2Centre for 0,386±0,124 %, respectively. The mean MN frequencies in the buccal Paediatric and Juvenile Medicine, The Saarland University Hospital, mucosa, urothelial exfoliative cells, and peripheral blood lymphocytes Homburg, Germany, 3Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, were significantly higher in smokers than in those of controls ( p< Berlin, Germany. 0,0005). Our data suggest that chromosomal damage in these We present the case of a 10-month-old girl, second child of tissues were induced by cigarette smoking. nonconsanguineous healthy parents, with developmental delay, growth retardation (height and head circumference 3rd percentile), P0366. Chromosomal aberrations in Cis and Ta bilharzial several dysmorphic stigmata and severe West syndrome. Conventional chromosomal banding analysis led to the suspicion bladder cancer of one derivative chromosome 14. A whole chromosome paint M. S. Aly1, H. M. Khaled2, N. Mokhtar2; for chromosome 14 gave a homogeneous staining, excluding 1Faculty of Science, Cairo University (Beni Suef branch), Cairo, an interchromosomal rearrangement. CGH revealed a gain of Egypt, 2National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. chromosomal material of the region 14q11-21. FISH analysis with Carcinoma of the bladder is the most prevalent cancer in Egypt and region specific YACs confirmed the duplication. The duplication spans most African countries.At the National Cancer Institute, Cairo, it from 14q11.2 to 14q21.2. and accounts for approximately 16Mb. constitutes 30.3% of all cancers.The median age at diagnosis is 46 Chromosomal analysis of both parents showed normal karyotypes. years,with male preponderance of 5:1.It has several unique clinical, Even a minor 14q duplication of one parent was excluded by FISH. epidemiological, and histological characteristics suggesting that it is a There is no published case of proximal duplication 14q with exactly distinct entity from bladder cancer seen in Western countries.Genetic the same breakpoints. Thus, it is conceivable that not all clinical alterations in bilharzial related bladder cancer have been studied features of our patient are concordant to other patients with proximal infrequently, and specially in the advanced sittings i.e. T3 and T4 duplication 14q. Especially West syndrome has yet not been stages.The objective of this study was to extend establishing the described in this context. base line cytogentic profile of this type of malignancy to carcinoma Methodologically our case confirms that CGH is a useful tool in situ stages. For this purpose, FISH was applied to interphase in molecular cytogenetics particularly for the detection of small nuclei of frozen-stored samples with biotinylated repetitive DNA chromosomal rearrangements not concerning the subtelomeres for probes specific for all chromosomes to detect numerical chromosome which a specific diagnostic is available. changes in 25 patients presenting with carcinoma in situ of bladder. Twenty four cases had transitional cell carcinoma and one case had squamous cell carcinoma. Six out of 24 TCC cases had diploid P0369. The shape, length and banding pattern of human chromosome count with all the probes. Numerical chromosome interphase chromosomes aberrations were detected in 18 cases (75%).In 8 cases, a loss U. Claussen1, J. Lemke1, J. Claussen1, I. Chudoba2, T. Liehr1, P. of chromosome 9 was observed.In one case, an additional loss Muehlig3, K. Sperling4; of chromosome 17 was detected.One case demonstrated a loss 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany, of chromosome 17, whereas another two cases showed a gain of 2MetaSystems, Altlussheim, Germany, 3Institute of Molecular chromosome 7. Loss of chromosome Y was observed in 9 of the 22 Biotechnology, Jena, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Berlin, male cases studied (40.9%).The only case with SCC had normal Germany. diploid chromosome count with all the probes used. A theory of Interphase chromosomes analysed with currently available bilharzial bladder cancer pathogenesis is suggested. techniques do not present any recognizable structures such as bands, centromeres, telomeres, or specific shapes. Microirradiation P0367. Partial Deletion 18p in a Patient with Psoriasis experiments and molecular cytogenetic investigations with whole chromosome paints and region specific microdissection probes have Vulgaris confirmed a territorial organization of chromosomes in interphase R. Mikelsaar1, K. Muru1, K. Varb1, A. Kulla2, A. Süvari3; nuclei. Until now, however, their structure is not well understood. 1Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Using laser scanning microscopic examination and the high- Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pathology, Tartu University Clinics, resolution DNA-based multicolour banding (MCB) technique, we Tartu, Estonia, 3Viljandi Children Aid and Social Center, Viljandi, have generated a banding pattern and have determined the length Estonia. of human chromosome 5 in lymphocyte interphase nuclei, and in Deletion 18p (18p-) is characterized by variety of clinical features nuclei of HeLa cells arrested at different phases of the cell cycle. including mental retardation, facial abnormalities and skeletal The shape and MCB pattern of chromosome 5 in interphase nuclei anomalies. Skin abnormalities are rarely reported. There are no Posters - Cytogenetics 152 153 is similar to that of metaphase chromosome 5 at all stages of the cancer risk and must be considered as a potential genotoxic agent. cell cycle. The length of the chromosome axis is comparable to that In this study, genotoxic effects of different modes of magnetic fields of a metaphase chromosome at a 600-band resolution. Therefore, were investigated by using the micronucleus assay. For this, rat the concept of chromosome condensation during mitosis has to embryos were exposed to different modes(5,10,20,30mGA) of EMF be reassessed. Interphase chromosome banding can be used to for 48 hours in culture between 9.5 and 11.5 days of embryological identify chromosome aberrations and opens new fields in cytogenetic development in which early organogenesis takes place.After culturing analysis. the embryos,their blood samples were collected by removing the visceral yolk sac and the embryo in RPMI-1040 medium.The P0370. Breakpoints in 17p13 associated with Asperger sample was directly processed for micronucleus assay.Results from syndrome. control and experimental groups were compared statiscally.We T. Johannesson1, D. Tentler2, M. Johansson3, M. Råstam3, C. did not observe any significant difference between the control and Gillberg3, M. Nordling1, N. Dahl2, J. Wahlström1; experimental groups (p>0.05),at these low modes of EMF. Further 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, experiments will be carried out in order to examine the genotoxic Sweden, 2Dept. of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, effects of higher doses of EMF on rat embryonic growth and Uppsala, Sweden, 3Dept. of Child Adolescent Psychiatry, Gothenburg development. University, Gothenburg, Sweden. Asperger syndrome (AS) is a severe developmental disorder P0373. A complex sex chromosome abnormality characterized by major difficulties in social interaction with unusual associated with short stature and hypogonadism responses to the environment similar to those in a mild form of M. Volosciuc1, E. Braha1, C. Bujoreanu2, M. Covic2; autism. 0.3-0.6% of the population will meet the criteria of AS. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr.T.Popa” Iasi, Iasi, The clinical features includes paucity of empathy, difficulties to Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr.T.Popa”, Iasi, form friendships with social isolation as a consequence. The Romania. syndrome also includes pedantic and monotonic speech and highly Feminine hypogonadism is characterized by delay puberty, absent of circumscribed interests in topics such as the weather and railway the sexual characters and primary amenorrhea. In some cases these tables or maps. findings are due by gonadal dysgenesis which are based a numerical We have identified two non-related patients with AS both with or structural chromosome anomalies. apparently balanced reciprocal translocations with breakpoints We reported a 15 years 2 months old girl with proportionate short in 17p13. Cytogenetic analysis revealed de novo translocations stature, thin body, delay puberty (primary amenorrhea, B1, PH3). t(13;17)(q14;p13) and t(17;19)(p13;cen) respectively. Supplementary features were excessive pigmented nevi (on face and Mapping the translocation breakpoints of the chromosomes 17p thorax), narrow, hyperconvex nails and thumbs with radial angulation. was performed by FISH. Chromosome 17p13 specific clones were The pregnancy and delivery were uneventful and the proposita was hybridized to metaphase chromosomes of the two translocations. born at term with 2300g weight. She is the first child of young healthy The results demonstrated the two breakpoints to be located within a non-consanguineous couple. Both parents have healthy children from region of 300 kb. The region is spanning 14 known genes. others marriages. PCR- amplified fragments derived from or flanking 5 of the genes was Sex chromatin showed two Barr bodies. Other investigations used as FISH-probes to perform a closer definition of the breakpoints. performed are showing a mean intelligence (IQ= 106), high levels of FSH and LH and the presence of uterus with bilateral polycystic P0371. Using chromosomal microdissection for ovaries (echographic exam of pelvis). production of specific molecular probes. G-banded chromosomal analysis (with an average resolution of 450- M. Zawada1, A. Pienkowska2, C. Schelling3; 550 bands) revealed a 46,XX/47,XXX/45,X/46,X, +mar karyotype. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, The patient combine clinical features from different gonadal Poland, 2Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Swiss dysgenesis (Turner syndrome, triplo X). The karyotype could explain Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, Switzerland. miscellaneous features. The origin of marker presently being The microdissection of chromosomes is the technique for production arranged for and results, if any, will be shown at the meeting high specific molecular probes, which are necessary for diagnostic fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with structural and P0374. Investigation of chromosomal aberrations in numeral abnormal chromosomes, including marker chromosomes. hepatocellular carcinoma in Egypt by fluorescence in situ The specificity of these probes is connected to identification of hybridization chromosomal aberration in precise clinical case, which diagnosis H. El-Gebaly1, M. S. Aly1, H. M. Khaled2; by using commercial probes is very expensive and time-consuming. 1Faculty of Science, Cairo University (Beni Suef branch), Cairo, To this time we prepared microdissection of marker chromosomes Egypt, 2National Cancer Institute, Cairo, Egypt. from human and translocated chromosome X from dog. We prepared Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a very common and highly also probes from X and Y bovine chromosomes for diagnosis of malignant tumor, associated mainly with chronic viral hepatitis, aberration of these chromosomes. All FISH experiments showed the cirrhosis of any cause, aflatoxin exposure and ethanol consumption. hybridization signals and allowed for identification of studied cases. Cytogenetic analysis on HCC has been limited because of poor From our experience we know that microdissection of chromosomes hepatocyte growth in vitro. Conventional cytogenetic studies have is irreplaceable tool for obtain of probes more adequate for the demonstrated frequent abnormalities of specific chromosomes specific clinical case than commercial probes. in hepatocellular carcinoma. Molecular cytogenetic approaches This work was supported by grant from Committee for Science have applied only rarely in the characterization of hepatocellular Research No 6PO6D02821. carcinoma (HCC). The main aim in this study was to evaluate genetic aberrations of different chromosomes in HCC. P0372. Micronuclei Induction in Rat Embryonic Blood The study included 30 patients with hepatocellualr carcinoma who Cells Following Exposure to Different Modes of have been diagnosed and treated at National Cancer Institute, Cairo Electromagnetic Fields University during the period 1997-1998. The charts of the patients M. Aksoy1, H. Acar1, K. Karabulut2, A. Salbacak2, I. Uysal2, M. were reviewed to retrieve their clinico-pathologic data. They were Kaynak1; 20 males and 10 females with a M/F ration of 2. Their ages ranged 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Selcuk University, between 14 years and 80 years (median 55 years). Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Anatomy, Selcuk Interphase cytogenetics by fluorescence in situ hybridization University, Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey. with the use of a panel of centromere-associated DNA probes In modern society, human population have been exposed to different for chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 were performed modes of electromagnetic fields (EMFs). Many researchers have on paraffin-embedded HCC specimens. Numerical abnormalities been conducted on whether cancer risks may be associated with of chromosomes 1, 4, and 6 were found in 7, 15 and 12 cases, such exposures. It has known that low frequency EMFs don’t produce respectively. Trisomies of chromosomes 8 and 9 were found in 6, 9 enough energy to damage DNA. However, epidomiological studies cases respectively. Gain and/or loss of more than one chromosome suggest that EMFs have been associated with increased incidence of were detected in 27 of 30 cases. Gains and losses of DNA found in 152 Posters - Cytogenetics 153 this study probably involve oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes boy who inherited the same karyotype from his father. The second that play a role in the puzzle of hepatocarcinogenesis. one, a maternal translocation t(13;18) in a woman detected after eight years period of sterility and two spontaneous abortions. Another P0375. The effects of diagnostic ultrasound exposure on balanced translocation t(5;13) without familial data was found in the meiotic prophase in rats oocytes. a normospermic man whose wife had four repeated unsuccessful E. Lapina, O. Krasnikova, T. Kuznetzova, V. Baranov; pregnancies. When the pacient learnt about the diagnosis he did not Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, RAMS, St-Petersburg, want to cooperate any longer, so we could not contact other members Russian Federation. of his family. Our results point out the value of the cytogenetically Over the past 30 years ultrasound has become a widely used tool screening of the couples with reproductive failures as well as the in obstetrics diagnostic. The safety of obstetric ultrasonography was emotional and familial aspects of the genetic counselling. proved with standard teratologycal methods. Recently a number of biological effects have been observed following diagnostic ultrasound P0378. Molecular cytogenetic characterization of exposure in various experimental systems (Tarantal, Hendrickx, disseminated tumor cells in renal cell carcinomas 1989; Jensh et. al, 1995; Newnham et. al., 1993). Taken into account R. Gangnus; a widespread application of ultrasound in prenatal medicine and Institut für Humangenetik der TU München, Munich, Germany. obstetrics its effect on oogenesis in mammalian fetuses deserves Bone marrow is the most important secondary organ for the special attention. dissemination of epithelial cells in tumor patients. Several recent The subjects were 19 albino rats. The proportion of meiotic prophase studies demonstrated that the detection of such disseminated cells stages in the fetal ovaries on the 21st day of development were may represent an independent prognostic factor in several tumor studied after 30 minutes exposure to diagnostic ultrasound (intensity entities. However, in urologic tumors the role of disseminated <100mW/cm2, frequency 5MHz) of female rats on the 17th day of epithelial cells has up to date not been established. Furthermore, a pregnancy (group 1). The control pregnant rats were assigned to two detailed characterization of the genome of these rare events remains other groups: group 2 - the sham-irradiated group that was treated in an arduous task. The aims of our study include the development of the same way except for irradiation (n=5); group 3 - untreated group new molecular cytogenetic methods for a detailed characterization of (n=5). Most cells in all groups (56,44±8,33 - in group 1; 63,66±6,03 disseminated cells and their application on bone marrow of patients - in group 2; 69,68±10,8 - in group 3) demonstrated zygotene- with urologic tumors, such as renal cell carcinomas and bladder pachytene figures. No differences were found in distribution of cancer. meiotic prophase stages in the groups. Our data demonstrate that Our molecular cytogenetic strategy employs in a first step an diagnostic ultrasound exposure has not significant influence on the enrichment of disseminated cytokeratin-positive cells using developmental schedule of oocytes maturation. established protocols (e.g. magnetic beads). In a second step, disseminated cells are analyzed either by multicolor interphase- P0376. Analysis of meiotic prophase in normal and FISH and/or by single cell CGH. Multicolor interphase-FISH is done abnormal human female fetuses by using simultaneously at least seven different DNA-probes, each O. Krasnikova, E. Lapina, T. Kuznetzova; labeled in a different color. Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian RCC was chosen as a model tumor entity for two reasons: firstly, our Federation. knowledge about cytogenetic rearrangements in this tumor entity Mammalian oocytes at meiotic prophase stage demonstrate a is fairly advanced. Secondly, chromosomal rearrangements have a remarkable sensibility to different mutagenic factors (Kolomiez et. limited complexity . al., 1992), therefore the investigation of exogenous and endogenous First applications of this strategy demonstrating the feasibility for a factors effect on human germ cells dynamics is of specially high resolution characterization of the genome of rare cells will be importance. shown. This strategy should allow to gain new insights into genetic The 19 human female fetuses on 19-26 weeks of gestation were changes involved in tumor progression and in early dissemination. assigned to 4 groups respective to abortion reasons. The distribution The application of these methods is currently also extended to of meiotic prophase stages in the oocytes was studied on 76 bladder cancer. cytogenetic preparations. In fetuses on 19-20 weeks of gestation (n=12) meiotic figures were P0379. Karyological analysis of immature germ cells in represented by predominantly zygotene stage cells. In spontaneous sperm from men with impaired spermatogenesis. abortion the amount of diplotene-dictiotene cells was statistically I. Fedorova1,2, J. Loginova1, L. Petrova1, O. Chiryaeva1, T. lower (t=2,94 P>95%) compared to the control group (social reasons Kuznetzova1; abortion). 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian During the 23-26 weeks of gestation in malformations fetuses with Federation, 2St-Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian normal karyotype and (n=4) dictiotene stage predominate, while in Federation. aberrant karyotype group (n=3) the amount of cells on this stage was The diagnosis of male infertility is based on analysis of ejaculate and 10 times less. testis biopsy. Due to definite limitations of testis biopsy analysis of The decrease in amount of cells at the end of prophase 1 can be ejaculate is usually more preferable. Semenograme allows to obtain attributed to partial degeneration of oocytes during the preceding information about mature germ cells: concentration, motility and stages. morphological characteristic of spermatozoa. However, more detailed The differences in distribution of oocyte meiosis stages in the information about spermatogenesis might be obtained by analysis of embryos of the same age suggest the existence of different factors ejaculated immature germ cells using the method called Quantitative that influence on meiotic prophase in human oogenesis Karyological Analysis of Immature Spermatogenic Cells (QKAISC) (Kurilo,1993). This method permits to determine the relative portion P0377. Balanced chromosomal anomalies found in of germ cells at different stages and the stage of spermatogenesis persons with reproductive failures block. A. R. M. Stana1, A. G. Lungeanu2, D. Pelinescu-Onciul3; The samples of semen from 4 control subject and 25 patients with 1Filantropia Hospital, Titu Maiorescu University, Bucharest, Romania, impaired spermatogenesis were analysed using QKAISC technique. 2National Institute”Victor Babes”, Bucharest, Romania, 3Filantropia The partial block of spermatogenesis at the prepachytene stages was Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. detected in 2 patients with 47,XXY, but in patient with 46,XY/47,XXY Sometimes in the field of human reproduction we forget about the spermatogenesis block was detected after MI division. The partial necessity of cytogenetically examination of infertile couples. We arrest of spermatogenesis at the prepachytene, pachytene and found some cildless couples that have already been treating their diplotene stages was detected in 2 patients with 46,XY t(9;13) and infertility for years. In three of such couples we identified one partner 46,XY t(Y;5). In 8 46,XY patients with azoospermia the increased as a carrier of a constitutional chromosomal anomaly. From them two number of degenerated spermatogeneous cells and somatic cells cases were certified as familial rearrangements. First, a pericentric was detected. In 5 46,XY patients with oligoastenoteratospermia inversion of chromosome 5 in a normospermic man whose wife, and oligoastenospermia the partial block of spermatogenesis was after seven spontaneous abortions, finally gave birth to a healthy detected after MI division with increased number of degenerated Posters - Cytogenetics 154 155 spermatogenic cells. There were no difference between control Translocation carriers have been considered as reproductive failures, subjects and patients with normal and minor impairments of either due to spermatogenetic arrest or to unbalanced progeny. semen characteristics. These results demonstrate the significance During the meiosis, both translocated chromosomes and their of QKAISC technique in performing on complex examination of normal homologues can lead to unbalanced patterns of segregation ejaculate from patients with infertility. for these chromosomes. Analysis of live born offspring or fetuses Kurilo et al. Probl. Repr.(rus) 1995. v.3. p.33 does not provide accurate information about meiosis segregation products because of early missing of abnormal conception. However, P0380. Interstitial deletion in 10q11.2 : a nonpathogenic it has been postulated that there is an increased frequency of euchromatic deletion aneuploidies involving unrelated to the translocation, termed as M. Gregoire1, V. Bourdon1, F. Rousselet1, D. Guillet-May2, J. Hubert3, interchromosomal effect. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to present P. Jonveaux1; our primary findings for evaluation of interchromosomal effects of 1Laboratoire de Génétique-EA 3441, CHU, Nancy, France, 2Service different rearrangements, such as different balanced reciprocal d’Assistance Médicale à la Procréation Maternité Régionale, Nancy, and Robertsonian translocations and inversion, on occurrence France, 3Service d’Urologie, CHU, Nancy, France. of aneuploidies of sperm nuclei of carriers. Interphase sperm- Euchromatic autosomal imbalance detectable at the cytogenetic fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis was performed by level is usually associated with mental retardation and congenital using chromosome specific DNA probes that were not involving in abnormality. However, exceptional families have been reported those rearrangements in which cytogenetically visible deletions are segregating without detectable phenotypic effect. We report on a family in which a young P0383. High quality BAC FISH probes for the detection of man was referred for chromosomal analysis for infertility associated chromosome imbalances with azoospermia. A complex chromosomal rearrangement was D. Ehling1,2, A. Tauchen1, T. Schmitt-John1,2, J. Weidner2, J. Wirth1,2; observed, comprising a reciprocal translocation with a deletion : 1Developmental Biology and Molecular Pathology, University 46,XY,der(10) del(10) (q11.2q11.2) t(4 ;10)(p15.1 ;q11.1). Blood from of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany, 2Praenadia GmbH, Muenster, his brother and their mother was cultured and the same chromosomal Germany. abnormality was found in both. FISH study with specific whole Conventional fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a useful tool chromosome painting probes and comparative genomic hybridization for the detection of human chromosomal abnormalities in prenatal were performed both in the index case and his relatives, confirming and postnatal diagnostics. The quality of DNA probes contributes to the complex rearrangement. Reciprocal translocations may be the signal detection and is important for a confident interpretation of associated with male infertility, as an insurmontable obstacle to cell FISH results. We have developed high quality FISH probes suitable division in the spematocyte, resulting in azoospermia.(oogenesis for the identification of the major trisomies (21, 13, 18) as well as is apparently less vulnerable). To our knowledge, only one case of common structural rearrangements such as deletion of 22q11. Most this deletion have been reported in the literature, without phenotypic of our BAC clones were isolated by using the REPuter program consequences. Based on these data, deletion of band 10q11.2 which allows us to visualize distributions of exact and degenerate appears to have no phenotypic consequences. repeats with a minimal length of 20 bp. Regions with high gene content and relatively low repeat density were selected and primers P0381. Sex reversal secondary to Xp functional disomy were designed for the identification of BAC clones. Furthermore, including DAX1 gene by t(X;Y)(p21.2;p11.3) for improvement of the FISH signals we have assembled BAC D. Sanlaville1, F. Vialard1, J. Gekas2, L. Vue-Droit3, A. Corré4, B. contigs and used these as complex probe mixtures. The BAC clones Devauchelle2, A. Ardalan1, V. Malan1, T. Martin-Denavit1, P. Nizard1, F. were mapped to different regions of chromosome 21 including the Thépot2, J. Taillemite1, M. Portnoï1; centromeric region of 21q11, the Down syndrome critical regions at 1Hôpital Saint Antoine, Paris, France, 2Hôpital d’Amiens, Amiens, 21q22, and subtelomeric region of 21q22.3. Several DNA probes France, 3Hôpital de Saint Quentin, Saint Quentin, France, 4Hôpital were isolated in the region of 13q32, 18q21, 22q11 and subtelomeric Trousseau, Paris, France. region of 22q13. The probe set extremely facilitates the detection Translocations involving the short arms of the X and Y chromosomes of specific chromosome imbalances on uncultured amniotic fluid are extremely rare. They result from a recombinaison in the paternal cells and metaphase chromosomes and is greatly useful for the germline. The most frequent are reported in XX males and rarely in identification of partial trisomies, partial monosomies and interstitial XY females, resulting from SRY gene transfer, leading to complete deletions. sex reversal. Male-to-female sex reversal has been also observed in individuals with partial duplication of Xp and an intact SRY gene. P0384. Gonadal dysgenesis. Presentation of 3 cases and The dosage sensitive sex-reversal is due to duplication of the DAX1 report on the database of a Paediatric Endocrine Unit in gene in Xp21.2. We describe a 7 month-old phenotypic female child Hungary. with severe psychomotor retardation, growth retardation, dysmorphic M. Dobos1, G. Fekete1, J. Szabó1, R. Schellberg2, R. Raff2, G. features, cleft palate, cardiac and cerebral anomalies. The patient’s Schwanitz2, J. Solyom1; karyotype was 46,X,+ mar in all cells examined. The karyotype of 1Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Friedrich Wilhelms parents were normal. FISH techniques provided evidence that the University Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany. derivative chromosome was a der(Y) resulting from the transposition Gonadal dysgenesis encompasses a heterogeneous group of Xp material, including Xp21, onto the terminal short arm of an Y of different chromosomal, gonadal and genital abnormalities chromosome. No deletion of the Y chromosome was detected. The characterised by the presence of dysgenetic testes and/or streak child’s karyotype was: 46,X der (Y)t(X;Y)(p21.2;p11.3). Abnormal gonads, persistence of Müllerian duct structures and a variable clinical findings of our patient is due to funtional disomy for Xp21.2- degree of genital ambiguity or female phenotype. Clinical, pter segment, because the Xp translocated portion is active. Her pathological, hormonal and genetic aspects of 24 patients with complete sex reversal results from the presence of two active copies complete or partial gonadal dysgenesis have been studied. Three of DAX1 gene. The phenotype of our patient is similar to previous patients had complete (pure) gonadal dysgenesis (karyotype: 46,XY). reports of genetic males carrying a partial duplication of Xp. To our The karyotype of the 21 patients with a clinical diagnosis of partial knowledge, this is only the second report of a t(X;Y) resulting from gonadal dysgenesis (PGD) was 45,X/46,XY (n=10), 46,XY (n=6) or the transposition of Xp to the short arm of the Y chromosome. Genes others (n=5). The types of PGD, based on pathological findings of involved in human sex determination are discussed. the gonads, were mixed gonadal dysgenesis in 5 cases, dysgenetic male pseudohermaphroditism in 6 cases, bilateral gonadoblastoma P0382. Are There Interchromosomal Effects of in one case (no histological data are available in 9 cases). Genital Chromosomal Rearrangements on Occurrence of phenotype was predominantly male (n=8), ambiguous (n=9) or Aneuploidy in Sperm Nuclei of Carriers? predominantly female (n=4). H. Acar1, T. Yakut2, T. Çora1, Ü. Egeli2, M. Kaynak1, S. Yildirim1; We present 3 new cases with testicular intersexuality. The 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Selçuk University, cytogenetic investigations were carried out on both peripheral Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Biology and lymphocyte cultures and on buccal cells by GTG and FISH technics. Genetics, Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Bursa, Turkey. The karyotype analyses of two patients with partial gonadal 154 Posters - Cytogenetics 155 dysgenesis showed 45,X/46,XY mosaicism in different proportion Univesrity, Hamburg, Germany, 4National Institute”Victor Babes”, of tissues, while the third case proved to be 46, XY/47, XYY mosaic Bucharest, Romania. with genital ambiguity. The phenotype and genotype correlations and In this paper we report a familial translocation t(3;5)(q26;q21) found hormonal results are discussed. by chance in a 72 year old female at the moment of the diagnosis of ET. Because the patient had an excellent treatment outcome P0385. Segregation of Pierre Robin Sequence with a 2;17 and rapidly achieved hematological remission we supposed (q32;q24) Translocation that this constitutional translocation might not be involved in ET M. Rodríguez de Alba, E. Sánchez-Gutierrez, I. Lorda-Sánchez, C. pathogenesis, but rather in the reproduction. This is the reason González-González, C. Gacituaga, F. Infantes, C. Ayuso, C. Ramos; why we extended the cytogenetic investigations in the patient’s Department of Genetics. Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. offspring: her 52 year old only daughter and two grandchildren (a boy The Pierre Robin Sequence (PRS) consists in the association of aged 22 and a girl aged 18). All of them are phenotipically normal micrognathia, glossoptosis and cleft soft palate. PRS may present including hematological values. Using peripheral blood samples as an isolated (nonsyndromic) feature, generally on a sporadic for chromosomne slides and GTG-banding followed by FISH with basis, or may aggregate with additional findings that together define telomere probes and whole chromosome painting ( Appligene a syndrome, which in turn may itself be found to segregate in the Oncor CP5406G, CP5410R and Cytocell, PCM 356) we identified family. the same translocation t(3;5)(q26;q21)in proband, her daughter Although no genetic locus is known for nonsyndromic PRS, genetic and granddaughter, but not in the male offspring. The maternal factors are thought to play a role in this functional and morphological inheritance of such a large translocation in three generations without entity. The 2q32 region has been specifically associated with isolated striking reproductive failures is unexpected taking into account the cleft-palate. involvement of chromosomal rearrangements in meiotic segregation We present a father and a daughter carriers of a balanced of unbalanced gametes. In order to have a better and precise translocation between chromosomes 2 and 17 (2q32;q24) and with characterization of the breakpoints, extensive studies are needed. the phenotipic manifestations of the PRS. The paternal grandparents Molecular description of genomic region flanking the 3q and 5q were studied and neither of them presented the traslocation nor the breakpoints will help us to understand the relationship between this PRS. structural rearrangement and proband’s hematologic disorder (ET), HYPOTHESIS: The case presented here suggests the existence if any. of a genetic base not only for the cleft-palate feature but for the Acknowledgements: ANSTI Grant 5195/1999-2001, and VIASAN nonsyndromic PRS located on 2q32. The absence of other phenotipic project 089/2001-2004. manifestations rather ssuggests the idea that in this family there is not a microdeletion but a breakage point in the possible “candidate P0388. A Family With Reciprocal 4;7 Translocation gene”. Y. Tarkan-Argüden1, S. Yilmaz1, A. Deviren2, D. Kuru3, A. Yüksel3, S. Hacihanefioglu1; P0386. Identification of marker chromosomes using 1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Div.of Biomedical Sciences, Dept.of Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, microdissection and FISH Genetics and Teratology Research Center (GETAM), Istanbul, Turkey, J. J. M. Engelen1, A. C. Knegt2, J. C. M. Albrechts1, L. Spruyt1, C. T. 3Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Div.of Biomedical R. M. Schrander-Stumpel1, A. J. H. Hamers1; Sciences, Dept.of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey. 1Department of Genetics and Celbiology, University Maastricht, There are reports on balanced translocations of chromosomes 4 and Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University 7 with different chromosomes with various breakpoints in the parents of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. of abnormal offsprings with unbalanced karyotypes, but we found no Micro-FISH is a technique that comprises the physical dissection reports of t(4;7)(q31;p22) in our search of literature. of a GTG-banded chromosome (part), followed by a degenerate We present a family that have a balanced reciprocal translocation oligonucleotide primed-polymerase chain reaction (DOP-PCR) to between chromosomes 4 and 7. amplify the dissected chromosomal material, labelling of the PCR The proband who was 20 days old, was referred to our department product and subsequently reverse painting. In clinical cytogenetics because of clitoris hypertrophy. She had no other abnormalities. Her micro-FISH can be used to characterise marker chromosomes, Na+, K+, and 17 α OH progesteron levels were, 139 (N:135-145), 5.5 (de novo) unbalanced translocations and complex chromosome (N:3.5-5), and 16.8 (N:1.05-40.41), respectively. Her father was 37, rearrangements. and her mother was 35 year-old at the time of delivery. The marriage We present four cases with an unbalanced karyotype due to the was non-consanguineous. They had a healthy daughter who was presence of (DA/DAPI and NOR negative) marker chromosomes. 9 year-old. When the proband was reexamined after 6 months, her In a 8-year-old not mentally retarded boy, referred for cytogenetic genitalia was appeared to be normal. examination because of growth retardation, a mos 47,XY,+mar[75]/ Cytogenetic analysis on peripheral blood cultures of the proband 46,XY[25] karyotype was determined. Micro-FISH showed that by GTL banding revealed 46,XX,t(4;7)(q31;p22) chromosome the minute marker contained the centromere of chromosome 8. constitution. Then we performed cytogenetic analysis on the parents Chromosome analysis in a 26-year-old female showed an extra and the sister. Proband’s mother had 46,XX karyotype but we found marker chromosome in 50% of her lymphocytes. She was referred 46,XY, t(4;7)(q31;p22) in her father and 46,XX,t(4;7)(q31;p22) in because of mental retardation, dysmorphism and obesity. The marker her sister. Then two sisters of the father were studied and revealed chromosome contained chromosome region 14q10→14q12. The 46,XX, t(4;7)(q31;p22) karyotypes. third patient was referred for chromosome analysis at the age of 10 years because of growth retardation. She appeared to be carrier of 2 different marker chromosomes. At the age of 26 years chromosome P0389. Using of dual-color in situ hybridization for analysis was repeated. In 47% of the analysed cells both markers detection of numerical abnormalities in uncultured and were present, in 7% a small marker and in 29% a larger marker cultured leucocytes of radiochemical industrial workers chromosome was found. Micro-FISH disclosed that one marker V. A. Timoshevsky, S. A. Nazarenko; contained chromosome region 19q10→19q13.1, the other marker Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. contained chromosome region 20p10→20p11.2. The fourth marker As a rule the numerical chromosomal aberrations are not taken chromosome was present in 25% of amniotic fluid cells of a woman into account in the genotoxicity testing. However, it is possible that referred because of advanced maternal age. The contents of this many harmful substances can cause this type of chromosomal marker chromosome was region 19p10→19p13.1. alterations. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a powerful technique that allows numerical chromosome aberrations P0387. A familial translocation t(3;5) identified by chance (aneuploidy) to be detected in interphase cells. We used dual-color in a case of essential thrombocythemia (ET) FISH for detection of aneuploidy in peripheral blood leucocytes of A. A. Arghir1, N. M. Berbec2, A. Rodewald3, L. Serghei2, A. G. 15 men – radiochemical industrial workers, contacted with complex Lungeanu4; of radioactive and chemical substances. Analysis of hypo- and 1National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Carol Davila” University hyperploidy was carried out for three chromosomal pairs: 7/12, of Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 3Institute for Human Biology, 11/16 and X/Y using digoxigenin/biotin labeled probes. We found Posters - Cytogenetics 156 157 significantly increased frequencies of numerical chromosome of trisomy 7 could not be verified for this tissue. In the intraindividual abnormalities in uncultured leucocytes of the exposed workers comparison of cells from different tissues , however, while blood compared to the unexposed controls (10 individuals) for nullisomy lymphocytes and hair root cells showed similar low trisomy 7 rates Y-chromosomes only. However significant differences were found in (on the average 0.8%) in all cases, a variable but significant increase cultured lymphocytes for hypodiploidy of chromosomes 11, 12 and of mosaic trisomy 7 up to 11,5% was identified in mucosal cells hyperdiploidy of chromosomes X and 12. Moreover, a tendency to of several individuals. An age dependence of the observed tissue higher values was observed for hypodiploidy 16 and total frequency specific amplification of chromosome 7 has to be investigated. of numerical abnormalities in cultured lymphocytes. We conclude that agents of the radiochemical industry can induce aneuploidy in P0392. Very large pericentric inversion of chromosome 4 leucocytes and cause the premutagenic lesions, which are expressed giving rise to a rec(4)chromosome and Wolf-Hirschhorn during the cultivation of lymphocytes in vitro. It is possible, that some syndrome. chromosomes have larger liability to nondisjunction and loss. Our T. Ilus1, K. Õunap1, O. Bartsch2, H. Varendi3; data suggest that analysis of numerical aberrations must be carried 1Medical Genetics Center, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, out in addition to standard cytogenetics tests. 2Institute of clinical Genetics, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, Tartu University P0390. Inverted duplications associated with terminal Clinics, Tartu, Estonia. deletions : the phenotypic impact of this newly We report a case of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome in a 1.5-year-old boy recognizable rearrangement. born to phenotypically normal parents. Cytogenetic analysis revealed M. Zollino1, R. Lecce2, F. Tiziano2, G. Neri2; a deletion at 4p15.3 in the boy and a large pericentric inversion of 1Medical Genetics Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, chromosome 4 in the father. The family history was unremarkable. Catholic University, Rome, Italy. The boy had been born at term with low birth weight, 1700g. Distal inverted duplications associated with a terminal deletion Our examination at the age of 2 weeks showed marked growth represent a newly recognizable category of chromosome alterations. deficiency, microcephaly, hypertelorism, strabismus, epicanthal folds, Genotype-phenotype correlations are unclear. prominent glabella, cleft lip and palate, downturned “fishlike’ mouth, We observed a dup/del rearrangement in 6 patients presenting with micrognathia, dysplastic ears, left simian crease and hypospadias. MCA/MR syndrome. It involved chromosomes 4p (3 patients), 5p He also had a cardiac defect (pulmonary stenosis). One year old, he (one patient), 1q (one patient) and 19q (one patient). The duplication showed profound mental retardation and severe seizures that were was detected by conventional cytogenetics, the deletion by molecular difficult to treat. The low birth weight and the clinical signs represent probes only. typical Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome. Chromosome 4p. Both the duplication and the deletion did differ in Standard cytogenetic analysis from peripheral blood lymphocytes size in individual patients. The deletions, spanning 3.4, 10 and 12 Mb indicated a 4p deletion, karyotype 46,XY,del(4)(p15.3). The mother‘s on 4p16, respectively, encompassed the Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome karyotype was normal (46,XX), but the father demonstrated a large critical region” (WHSCR)in each occasion. Clinically, all patients inversion of chromosome 4, karyotype 46,XY,inv(4)(p15.3q35). We presented with a WHS phenotype. then confirmed in the proband, using FISH-analysis, submicroscopic Chromosome 5p. The 5p13.3-p15.1 region was duplicated, the distal 4q trisomy(q35-qter) in addition to the terminal 4p deleted 5p15.1-pter segment was demonstred by FISH to include the deletion(4pter-4p15.3). “cri du chat” syndrome critical region. The patient presented with a FISH karyotypes: “cri du chat” syndrome phenotype. father: fish inv(4)(p15.3q35)(D4S2930/D4S3186+mv::D4Z1+, Chromosomes 1q and 19q. A very distal duplication was observed D4S96+mv) in these cases, affecting the 1q42-q44 and 19q13.2-q13.4 regions, proband: fish der(4)(qter-q35::p15.3-qter)(D4S2930/D4S3186+mv:: respectively. Accordingly, a very small deletion, just including the D4S96-, D4Z1+, D4S2930/D4S3186+st)pat subtelomeric region, was detected. Clinical signs in both patients Distal 4q duplication is usually not associated with a distinct clinical were consistent with the respective partial trisomy syndrome phenotype, and therefore the predominance of the Wolf-Hirschhorn phenotype. phenotype was to be expected in this patient. Semicryptic or cryptic We observed that, whenever the deletion included critical regions large pericentric inversions represent an important cytogenetic with strong pleyotropic effects, such as the WHSCR and the “cri du mechanism that can give rise to terminal deletion/duplication chat” syndrome CR, clinical signs were consistent with a “deletion” syndromes. Prenatal diagnosis must be considered in these cases phenotype only. A partial trisomy syndrome phenotype was observed because of the possibility of recombinants, here, dup(4)(p15.3-pter) in cases with a small subtelomeric deletion. and del(4)(q35-qter). A proper assessment of the deletion is recommended in dup/del rearrangements. P0393. The collection of DNA probes for prenatal, postnatal and preimplantation diagnosis P0391. Mosaic Trisomy 7; An Age Related Or Tissue by FISH Specific Finding In Normal Human Tissues I. V. Soloviev1, Y. B. Yurov1, S. G. Vorsanova2, P. Patsalis3, P. Y. Mehraein, S. Bastian, C. Fromberg, K. D. Zang; Ioannou3; University of the Saarland, Dept. for Human Genetics, Homburg/Saar, 1National Center of Mental Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, Germany. 2Institute of Pediatry and Children Surgery, Moscow, Russian Mosaic trisomy 7 has been found in a variety of tumors, non Federation, 3Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. tumorous lesions, and even apparently normal tissues. Although Creation of representative DNA probe collection is still actual characteristic in some condition, the meaning and pathological problem in laboratories of Central and Eastern Europe. Availability of relevance of trisomy 7 is still unclear. Recent investigation has given different DNA probes could help in introduction of FISH technology rise to the question, whether somatic gain of chromosome 7 is rather in many laboratories, and, therefore, increase the efficiency of related to age than to a specific disease. cytogenetic diagnosis. We have identified a large set of original By FISH we analyzed the chromosome 7 copy number in blood cloned DNA sequences, which could be used as DNA probes in lymphocytes of 30 healthy individuals with normal conventional molecular-cytogenetic studies. Alphoid plasmid and cosmid clones, karyotype selected for three different age groups. FISH was containing repetitive elements, hybridized to pericentromeric regions performed as cohybridization of centromeric probes for chromosome of most part of chromosomes were identified and tested in clinical- 7 and 10; 1000 interphase nuclei each were analyzed. cytogenetic studies (Vorsanova et al., 1986, 1991, 1996; Soloviev et Furthermore to identify a potential tissue specific increase of trisomy al.,1993,1994,1995). We have analyzed large-insertion PAC library, 7 in a group of 12 old individuals (> 80 years) 200 interphase nuclei containing more that 110000 genomic clones. We have detected of three different tissues (blood lymphocytes, hair root , and mucosal more than 1600 centromeric and 600 telomeric PAC clones. 350 cells) each were analyzed comparatively by FISH. centromeric and 320 telomeric PAC clones were initially analyzed In blood lymphocytes between all groups for the analyzed by FISH. Large insertion clones from total genomic human PAC chromosomes revealing trisomy rates of below 0,5%, respectively, library were identified for most part of telomeric regions. DNA probes no significant differences were evident; thus an age related increase with high potential for diagnosis of common human aneuploidies, 156 Posters - Cytogenetics 157 involving chromosomes 21, 13, 18, X and Y were carefully selected primers for 11 loci along Y chromosome including SRY, RPS4Y, in cytogenetic studies. DNA probes for centromeric and telomeric DYS14 (Yp), DYZ3 (Ycen), sY84 (AZFa), sY129, sY134 (AZFb), chromosomal regions are usefull both as markers for cytogenetic sY156, sY254, sY255 (AZFc, DAZ gene) and DYZ1 (Yqh) was diagnosis and as tool for detailed analysis of numerical and structural investigated. Two male patients were the Yq breakpoint to the region chromosomal aberrations in pre-, post- and preimplantation between AZFa and AZFb. In female patient, the genes from SRY diagnosis, including the analysis of fetal cells .Supported by grant to AZFb were positive. In other two patients there was a failure to COPERNICUS-2. detect the alpha-satellite (DYZ3) that is an the integral part of the centromere. One of them was the Yp breakpoint between DYS14 P0394. Peculiarities of late replication of chromosomes and DYZ3, and the other having one SRY signal carried the Yp of human fetal and chorionic villi cell at 7 and 12 weeks (SRY, RPS4Y, DYS14) and Yq (sY84, sY129, sY134) except DYZ3 unexpectly. It is assumed that the deletion of distal Yq euchromatin of gestation. playing an important role in the spermatogenetic process lead only to A. V. Vorobyeva, A. A. Pendina, O. G. Chiryaeva, T. V. Kuznetzova; azoospermia. Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. The pattern of late replicating metaphase chromosomes from 24- P0397. The chromosomal abnormalities value in primary hours cultures of CVS and tissues fragments from five human amenorrhea etiology. embryos at 7 and 12 weeks gestation was studied. BrdU was added L. M. Serghei1, A. Stana2, C. Geormaneanu1, V. Stoian3, A. Arghir1, A. by impulses through 2 hours. Monoclonal anti-BrdU antibodies FITC G. Lungeanu1; - conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody were used to identify the 1National Institute”Victor Babes”, Bucharest, Romania, 2Filantropia BrdU-labeled sites. Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3Bucharest University, Faculty of Metaphase spreads with markers of late replications were chosen Biology, Bucharest, Romania. for analyses. The intertissue differences in initiation and termination Cytogenetic analyses were carried out on 54 cases of primary of replication in pericentric heterochromatin of chromosomes 1, amenorrhea, using peripheral blood lymphocytes, GTG and CBG- 9 were shown in chorionic villi and embryonic cells. Pericentric banding. The monosomy X occured in 49 patients with Turner heterochromatin of chromosome 16 was shown to be latest syndrome(TS). Chromosomal sexual assignment was established replicating segment in both tissues compared to pericentric as 46,XY in three phenotypically females. One of them revealed heterochromatin of chromosomes 1, 9. gonadal tumor when she underwent gonadectomy at the age of At 7 weeks of gestation some G-bands of chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 21. The involvement of autosomes in the ethiology of primary 4, 5, 9, 11, 13, 14, 16 replicated simultaneously with pericentric amenorrhea came into discussion in two cases;the karyotyping heterochromatin of chromosomes 1, 9, 16 in chorionic cells, showed the folowing cellular mosaics:[46,XX,+18pter(80%)/45, while in embryonic cells they replicated earlier than pericentric XX,-14,+18pter(20%)] and [45,X0(60%)/46, X0,mar(?)(40%)], heterochromatin. respectively. At 12 weeks of gestation however these segments replicated At the time patient 1 reffered, she had hormonal-induced intermittent, simultaneously with pericentric heterochromatin of chromosomes irregular menses. We attempted to find correlation between the 1, 9, and 16 in both tissues. These data suggest that changes in constitutional +18pter and the observed resistance to hormone- of replication pattern of heterochromatin regions probably reflect replacement therapy. Normal X chromosome pattern was noted both differences in their functional status in embryonic and extraembryonic in hypodiploid and diploid cells. Neither the cryptic sex chromosomal tissues at different stages of embryonic development. abnormalities nor the origin of the 18pter extra material from chromosome 14 are excluded. Regarding patient 2, we mention that P0395. Rare cytogenetic Klinefelter syndrome variant monosomy X was present in all 200 examined metaphases, strongly H. Bruyere1, E. Separovic1, J. Guscott2, T. Pantzar1; suggesting TS as cause of primary amenorrhea, but the patient 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Vancouver lacked Turner stigmata. Moreover, the diploid cells exhibited a marker General Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada. that appeared to be a dicentric derived from a translocation between A 49-year-old male with hypogonadism and gynecomastia was found 21 and 20 chromosomes. The cytogenetic approach proved once to have a 46,XX karyotype with additional chromosomal material on again its value in diagnosis of primary amenorrhea. Our study has the short arm of a chromosome 15. C-banding and NOR-banding to be extended at molecular level, in order to define accurately the as well as fluorescence in situ hybridization with chromosomes 15 provenience and the roles of the markers, especially those derived and Y centromeric probes, a Y chromosome short arm unique locus from autosomes. probe and a Y chromosome long arm heterochromatin probe were Acknowledgements: VIASAN PROJECT NO. 127/2001-2003 perform to further characterize this extra material. It was found to contain the Y chromosome short arm and centromere. This case P0398. Result of Cytogenetic Study of 850 Bone Marrow represents a rare cytogenetic Klinefelter syndrome variant, with a Samples diploid complement and a stable dicentric derivative chromosome M. Zanganeh, R. Karimi-Nejad, T. Nayeb Bagher, S. Voghouie, H. from an unbalanced translocation involving the long arm of the Y Miri, M. Karimi-Nejad; chromosome and the short arm of a chromosome 15. Karimi-Nejad Genetics and Pathology Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P0396. Molecular studies of small marker chromosomes More than 850 bone marrow samples have been analyzed in our in patients with 45,X/46,X,+mar mosaicism center during the past five years. Among 850 patients, 486 (57%) J. W. Kim1, J. M. Kim1, E. H. Cho1, J. T. Seo2, Y. S. Lee2, J. M. Yun2, were referred for malignant disorders and 131 cases (15%) for H. M. Ryu3, S. Y. Park1; non-malignant disease. 233 casses (28%) didn’t have any primary 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Samsung Cheil Hospital and diagnosis at the time samples were taken of which 169 belonged to Women’s Healthcare Center, Seoul, REPUBLIC OF KOREA, the first 500 samples. Of the non-malignant cases, 87 were referred 2Department of Urology, Samsung Cheil Hospital and Women’s for anemia, 43 pre-transplant, 44 post-transplant, and 44 for post Healthcare Center, Seoul, REPUBLIC OF KOREA, 3Department of transplant study of a malignant disorder. The probable clinical Obstetric and Gynecology, Samsung Cheil Hospital and Women’s diagnoses for the malignant cases were as follow: 164 (34%) for ALL, Healthcare Center, Seoul, REPUBLIC OF KOREA. 135 (28%) AML, 123(26%) CML, 23(5%) MDS, 21 (4%) lymphoma, 6 We have studied the small marker chromosome in four patients (1%) Multiple Myeloma, 6 (1%) MPD and 8 (1%) others. with mosaic karyotype 45,X/46,X+mar. Male patients were referred Chromosomal aberrations were detected in 73 (50%) of the 145 for azoospermia and female for primary amenorrhea. We used successful cultures of patients without any diagnosis, 69 (54%) of 128 fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and polymerase chain cultures with diagnosis of ALL, 68 (55%) of 123 AML patients, and 80 reaction (PCR) to determine the origin and structure of the marker (73%) of 109 patients suspected for CML. Among 22 conclusive MDS chromosome. FISH studied with SRY/CEPX probe (Vysis) confirmed cases, 11 (50%) patients had some chromosomal change, ten (50%) the Y origin of the marker and detected that four patients showed out of 20 lymphoma cases and 3 out of 6 MPD and none of the 4 double SRY signals on both ends of abnormal Y chromosome and Multiple myeloma had chromosomal changes. one male patient had only one SRY gene. PCR analysis using Among 88 post-transplant cases, 44 (50%) were malignant and 44 Posters - Cytogenetics 158 159 (50%) non-malignant. 72 (82%) patients showed donor cell line, cousin couples where both partners were carriers. The remaining 9 8 (9%) patients showed the recipient cell line and another 8 (9%) individuals were referred for reasons other than reporductive failure, 1 patients showed chimerism of donor and recipient cell lines. for mental retardation, another for premarital check up and the other 7 for primary amenorrhea. P0399. Evidence for nonhomologous meiotic co- Considering that 13 of the 35 translocation carriers were males, orientation (NMC) in man 7/23 der(13;14) carriers had primary amenorrhea. Cases referred N. V. Kovaleva; for primary amenorrhea were aged 12-19 years without history of Institute of Obstetrics and Gynaecology RAMS, St.Petersburg, menstruation, and with one exception (12 years old) they had normal Russian Federation. age related secondary sexual characteristic development, and Homologous Robertsonian translocations/isochromosomes growth. represent unique model for studying chromosome behavior in the Overall, 413/28000 cases were referred for primary amenorrhea absence of homologous pairing and recombination. Though the who did not show related chromosomal changes such as 46,XY number of published cases is small, and the only data available is and 45,X variants. 10/363 had chromosomal aberrations including the sex of the offspring of the dup(21q) carriers, some conclusions pericentric inversion of chromosome 1 and 2, paracentric inversion of on the segregation pattern of both rearranged chromosomes and chromosome 14 and the other 7 had der(13;14). gonosomes can be made. It was found that 7 male carriers of We would appreciate to be informed of similar findings and any dup(21q) fathered 13 children with Down syndrome of known sex. 12 guidance as to the etiology and possible association our data of them were males, differing from 1:1 ratio (p=0.0017, binomial test). suggest. There was no significant male predominance in cases of maternal transmission (23 males, 16 females). This finding is considered as P0402. Gonosomal Mosaicisms derived from a XY-Zygote a direct evidence for NMC of the dup(21q) and X-chromosome. R. Schellberg1, M. Dobos2, G. Fekete2, G. Schwanitz1, R. Raff1; NMC, proven for Drosophila [Grell, 1971], was proposed to explain 1Institut für Humangenetik, Bonn, Germany, 2II. Kinderklinik der male excess in Down syndrome (DS) with paternally derived trisomy Semmelweis Universität, Budapest, Hungary. [Kovaleva NV.Genetika(Russ)1992,28:5-15]. NCM of chromosomes Mosaicism is caused by postzygotic aberrant mitoses and leads to 21 and X would result in production of different gametes: 23,X, 23,Y, numerical or structural aberrations or a combination of both. The 23(+21,-Y), 22,XY(-21), 22,0(-Y), 22,X(-21), 24,Y(+21), 24,XY, also karyotype of the zygote can be normal or abnormal. explaining the occurrence of gonosome aneuploidy and double Our investigation group comprises 25 cases of gonosomal mosaicism aneuploidy of paternal origin. Further data supporting the NMC with a Y-chromosome analysed in at least one cell system: 45,X/ hypothesis come from studies on sperm in healthy and infertile men 46,XY (n=8), 45,X/46,X,idic(Y)-mosaicism (n=7), 45,X/47,XYY- [Griffin et al,1996; Baumgartner et al,1999], in fathers of patients with mosaicisms (n=5), 45,X/46,X,del(Y) (n=4) and 45,X/46,X,r(Y) (n=1). aneuploidy [Blanco et al,1998; Soares et al,2001] and in carriers of 13 patients were phenotypically male, 7 were female and 5 showed balanced translocations (“interchromosomal effect”) [Morel et al,2001; intersexual external genitalia. Pellestor et al, 2001], together with data on elevated risk of progeny The patients age at the time of chromosome investigation ranged with autosomal trisomies in carriers of sex chromosome anomalies from the prenatal period up to the age of 36 years. (Nivelon-Chevallier et al, 1988; Tarani et al, 1998; Hennebicq et al, The most frequent clinical findings were: growth retardation, 2001). abnormalities of the external genitalia, kidney malformations and different types of heart defect. P0400. One karyotype with two features,a report from Cytogenetic investigations combined metaphase and interphase analyses with FISH (DNA probes: wcp X and Y; CEP X and Y; Yph Iran. 3.4). Between 2 and 5 cell systems per patient were analysed with M. Zamanian1, S. Tootian1, S. Joghehdost1,2, M. Houshmand1,2; regard to their origin from different blastodermic layers. 1Blood transfusion organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of An unequal distribution of the mosaic could be demonstrated in the Iran, 2National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and different cell systems, with no preferential combination. Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Patients with dicentric Y-chromosome revealed the highest instability The index case was a female with a lichenoid lesion on her face. of karyotype. There was no age dependent karyotype changes in our She reffered to our center for G banding karyotype because her sons investigation group. were going to marry and she was worried about her son’s future. Supported by: DAAD/MÖB, Richard-Winter-Stiftung She was an educated woman and a laboratory technician and there wasn’t any sign of mental retardation. Her father had 4 children from her mother and four children from another wife. She had a nephew P0403. 12q22q24.33 Duplication: case report and review from her brother and a neice from her sister in law. Both children of the literature were mentally retarded and translocation (2,11) were found in the S. Cappellacci1, S. Martinelli2, R. Rinaldi1, E. Martinelli1, P. Parisi3, B. both children. Mancini2, P. Grammatico2,1; G banding method was used for karyotypeing of our index and 1Medical Genetics, San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, her sons. Translocation(2,11) was detected in the index.We also 2Medical Genetics, University “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 3Outpatient examined her two sons for translocations and both of them were Service of Pediatric Neurology S. Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, normal.There are two questions here: 1)Is this type of translaocation Italy. a strong cause for mental retardation of the neice and nephew? 2)If We present a case of partial duplication of the long arm of yes why the index case didn’t have any sign of mental retardation? chromosome 12 characterized by FISH techniques using YAC It seems that because our procedure cannot detect all the sub probes. bands in a patient’s chromosomes. Microdeletion or inversion may On physical examination, at 8 years, our patient demonstrated: be change the phenotype in the cases nephew and neice. FISH or macrocephaly, flat occiput, long palpebral fissures, long eyelashes, molecular methods can be help to find out the problem in this family. protruding nasal root, anteverted nostrils, large and asymmetric ears, thin lips, light prognathism, malar hypoplasia, short stubby hands P0401. Association of der(13;14) with primary and femoral dysplasia. Magnetic resonance imaging showed partial agenesis of the cerebellar vermis and cystic dilatation of the fourth amenorrhea ventricle consistent with Dandy-Walker malformation. R. Karimi-Nejad, N. Naghash-pour, F. Azimi, S. Razavi, M. A neurological and behavioural assessment revealed a psychomotor Soleimani, T. Nayeb Bagher, M. Rahimi, S. Voghouie, M. Karimi- retardation and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Nejad; Standard cytogenetic analysis showed a partial duplication of the Karimi-Nejad Genetics and Pathology Center, Tehran, Islamic long arm of chromosome 12. Parents’ karyotypes were normal. Republic of Iran. To define the extension of the duplicated region we performed FISH Among 28000 karyotypes of peripheral blood performed in our center analyses by using the following YAC probes (kindly supplied from for various indications, 35 balanced translocations of chromosomes YAC Screening Centre, Tigem, Milan, Italy): 943B11 (q21; 96.5 cM), 13 and 14 have been detected. Of these 35, 26 were referred for 778F6 (q22; 97.6 cM), 850A12 (q22; 99.6 cM), 934C1 (q23; 108 history of abortions, IUFDs, offspring with congenital anomalies, cM), 827A10 (q24.1; 137.5 cM), 910B10 (q24; 154 cM), and 812D10 and offspring with trisomy 13. Interestingly, 6 cases were 3 first 158 Posters - Cytogenetics 159 (q24.3; 161 cM). The analyses evidenced a tandem duplication of the disease in apparently balanced chromosome rearrangements. We 12q22q24.33 region with the proximal breakpoint located between report on chromosomal findings in a boy with axial hypotonia and 96.5 and 97.6 cM and the distal one between 154 and 161 cM dysmorphy. He was born after a full-term uneventful pregnancy. He resulting in the following karyotype: 46,XY,dup(12)(q22q24.33). was the third child of healthy unrelated parents. The mother has had In order to contribute to the identification of the characteristic clinical nine miscarriages. The child was first admitted at the age of 8 months features associated with 12q partial duplication we reviewed the for gastro-enteritis which was rapidly cured. Physical examination literature and compared our case with those already described. showed moderate axial hypotonia, hypertelorism and bilateral epicanthus, high-arched palate, macroglossia, and antimongoloid P0404. Ring chromosome 4 associated chromosome palpebral fissures. There was no evidence for visceral malformation. instability By conventional cytogenetic analysis a reciprocal balanced M. H. Lee; translocation between chromosomes 3 and 22 was diagnosed. In Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Samsung Cheil Hospital and order to define clearly the breakpoints on the two chromosomes, Women’s Healthcare Center, Seoul, REPUBLIC OF KOREA. chromosome painting was used and revealed a complex, apparently Ring chromosomes are rare abnormalities that typically arise de balanced translocation t(3;22;9). This translocation was inherited from novo. The usual ring phenotype have been shown to have a wide the mother. Fluorescence in situ hybridization with different locus range of intellectual functioning and congenital anomalies. We probes near breakpoints showed a deletion of abl gene located at found several ring chromosome 4 instabilities in mosaic form with 9q34.1 in the patient. This deletion was not found in the mother and a normal cell line in peripheral blood cells of a 27 year old woman in the sister carrying the translocation. Deletion of abl gene has been who was referred for infertility and short stature. The results of described once in a newborn with a complex cardiac anomaly and cytogenetic analysis showed 45,XX,-4/ 46,XX,r(4)/ 46,XX,dic r(4)/ carrying a paracentric inversion of the long arm of chromosome 9 47,XX,r(4),+r(4)/ 46,XX karyotype in three repeated examinations. (Kleyman et al., Am J Med Genet, 1997). FISH analysis executed for precise characterization of the ring Our case emphasises that molecular cytogenetic analysis of chromosome 4 breakpoints using chromosome 4p, 4q telomeric breakpoints in apparently balanced chromosomal translocations probes demonstrated deletion of the 4p telomere from the ring should be systematically carried out in patients with phenotypic chromsome 4. Parental karyotypes were normal. After then, she abnormalities. became naturally pregnant and we performed amniocentesis at 16 weeks gestation. The fetal karyotype was normal. The phenotypes P0407. Prenatal Diagnosis of 45,X/47,XX,+8 mosaicism of our patient seemed to be related to the ring syndrome by the ring E. Popelinska1, D. Leznarova2, P. Vlasin2, P. Kuglik3; chromosome instability. The present study would be offer information 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Prenatal Diagnosis Centre, Brno, Czech to the long-term consequences of ring chromosome instability on Republic, 2Prenatal Diagnosis Centre, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Dept. clinical outcome. of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. P0405. A novel BAC probe set for the analysis of We report a case of prenatally diagnosed mosaicism 45,X/47,XX,+8. Prenatal diagnosis of mosaic trisomy 8 is relatively rare and the hematological malignancies occurence of this abnormality in association with monosomy X is very A. Lee1, D. Lie1, S. Tien2, C. Rudduck Sivaswaren2; unusual. 1Division of Medical Sciences, National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Our patient-24 years old primigravida -was reffered for abnormal Singapore, 2Department of Pathology, Cytogenetics, Singapore ultrasound findings [agenesis corp.callosi,heart defect] at 33 t.g. General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. Routine cytogenetic analysis of fetal blood [FB] cells and cultured Background: Translocations and deletions in the chromosome amniotic fluid [AF] cells was performed. In FB cells the mosaic 11q23 region are frequent in hematologic neoplasms such as karyotype 45,X[10]/47,XX,+8[28] we found. All examined cultured AF acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), acute myelogenous leukemia cells were 45,X. (AML), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and chronic lymphocytic Results of cytogenetic analysis were compared with fluorescent leukemia (CLL). We describe here the use of a bacterial artificial in situ hybridization. FISH confirmed the mosaic karyotype 45,X/ chromosome (BAC) probe set from the 11q23 region, applied to these 47,XX,+8 in FB cells and in uncultured amniocytes as well as in malignancies. peripheral blood lymphocytes and buccal epithelial cells of the Methods: Four BAC probes from one contig, and two BAC probes affected child after delivery. In cultured AF cells trisomy 8 was not from another contig on 11q23 spanning the MLL region were found by FISH. labeled with either biotin or DIG for dual color fluorescence in situ Our findings indicate the difficulties in the prenatal diagnosis hybridization (FISH) analysis. These probes were applied to cases of autosomal mosaicism, namely trisomy 8. This chromosomal with hematologic malignancies with known structural abnormalities abnormality can be missed with routine prenatal cytogenetic analysis involving 11q23. because of a different tissue-specific distribution of the abnormal cell Results: A split signal was detected in one ALL case with line. t(4;11)(q21;q23), one AML case with t(9;11)(p22;q23) and another AML case with t(11;19)(q23;p13), demonstrating that the probes span the MLL region known to be involved in these translocations. P0408. The usage of FISH-WCP technique under the The probes were further tested on one case of AML with cytogenetical observation of 120 Chernobyl liquidators add(11)(q23) and two cases of MDS and two cases of CLL, all with different radiation doses with del(11)(q13q23). The additional material on 11q23 and marker M. A. Pilinskaya; chromosomes were found to be amplification of the regions detected Research Center for Radiation Medicine, Kiev, Ukraine. by the probe set. Although the MDS and CLL cases cytogenetically FISH-WCP technique was introduced in Ukraine for the first time appeared to have the same abnormality, the MDS cases had deletion in cytogenetic lab of RCRM in 1999 in the frame of the Ukrainian- of both contigs, while the CLL cases only had deletion of one contig. American project “Leukemia” for the comparison of different Conclusions: At a molecular level, deletions in our CLL and MDS dosimetry methods (including biodosimetry) in Chernobyl liguidators. cases appeared different. This study demonstrates the importance According to the protocol of the dosimetry part of the Project all of combining molecular and cytogenetic techniques to further define cytogenetecal investigations had been fulfilled in blind manner. chromosome abnormalities. Method FISH (with directly labeled by Spectrum Orange DNA-probes to chromosomes 1, 2, 4) had been tested on the 120 liquidators of P0406. Deletion of abl gene resulting from a the Chernobyl accident ranging in age from 37 to 73 years in dose recombination of a maternal (3;22;9)(q22;q12;q34.1) range from 10 till > 100 cGy. The data received confirmed that at present FISH-WCP technique can be successfully use in delayed translocation in a child with axial hypotonia and terms following the radiation exposure for the indication of human dysmorphy. irradiation and group dosimetry. As regard of the usage FISH method A. Aboura, P. Labrune, F. Perreaux, V. Poncet, S. Brisset, L. Foix- for individual retrospective dosimetry of radiation exposure especially L’Helias, G. Tachdjian; in the range of low doses there are many problems of which needed Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Clamart, France. in further investigations. At present the high and variable background Small deletions near breakpoints may be an important cause of Posters - Cytogenetics 160 161 frequencies of complete translocations, strong age effect and uneventful pregnancy to healthy parents. essential interindividual variability in the rate of radiation-induced After birth, chylothorax, congenital heart disease (VSD, ASD), muscle stable aberrations permit the use FISH for estimation and verification hypotonia, facial dysmorphism and ambiguous genitalia were cardinal of doses in the part of Chernobyl liquidators with assumed radiation features. exposure more than 25 cGy. Chromosome analysis of various tissues revealed trisomy 12 This work had been supported by National Cancer Institute of USA in mosaicism (skin 2/60 cells, muscle 3/43 cells, lung tissue 7/37 cells, the frame of Ukrainian-American Project “Leukemia”. blood and pleura: normal karyotype). Complete trisomy 12 in humans is not viable. To our knowledge this P0409. Chromosomal analyses in infertile men. is the tenth published case of trisomy 12 mosaicism in a liveborn. J. Lissitsina1, R. Mikelsaar1, K. Varb1, M. Punab2; Obviously due to the nature of mosaicism, reported cases show a 1Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu wide spectrum of anomalies ranging from Kartagener syndrome in an University Clinicum, Tartu, Estonia. otherwise healthy man to multiple congenital abnormalities including The incidence of chromosomal abnormalities in infertile males varied complex heart malformations, facial dysmorphism, urogenital from 2.2 to 14.3%. The incidence of chromosomal variants was abnormalities (renal hypoplasia, ectopia vesicae) and further inner shown to be at 34.5% in infertile men and 10-15% in the general malformations (multiple accessory spleens, pancreatic-spleenic population. Our study was performed to determine the frequency of fusion, gallbladder hypoplasia) with neonatal death. No typical mosaic chromosomal abnormalities and polymorphism in infertile men with trisomy 12 phenotype can be delineated. azoospermia and severe oligospermia (sperm density <5x10M/mL). We report the first case of trisomy 12 mosaicism presenting with Chromosomal analysis of 27 infertile men was performed both from chylothorax, facial dysmorphism and genital anomalies as cardinal peripheral blood lymphocytes and skin fibroblasts cultures using features. We compare our patient with earlier described cases. GTG, C banding, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and other methods. In 5 (18.5%) cases chromosomal abnormalities were found. P0412. Coincidental Structural And Numerical There was one case (3.7%) with numerical chromosomal abnormality Aberrations Of The Chromosome 15 - Three Different (47,XXY). Structural abnormalities were revealed in 4 cases (14.8%), Case Reports from which 3 were mosaics (in 3%-98% of cells). The chromosomal E. Kocarek1, D. Novotna2, P. Balicek3, T. Marikova1, M. Malikova2, A. variants were found in 8 (29.6%) patients. In 15 (55.6%) cases the Zumrova1, K. Novotna1, M. Strnad1, P. Goetz1; karyotype was normal. We have found higher than given in the 1Charles University 2nd Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic, literature percentage of chromosomal abnormalities (mainly structural 2Motol University Hospital, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, abnormalities), which could be reason of infertility. This finding could Prague, Czech Republic, 3University Hospital - Department of Clinical be explained partly by small amount of cases. We wish also to Genetics, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic. stress, that to reveal the low percentage mosaicism, it seems to be We report three cases of chromosome 15 aberrations. First necessary to analyze at least 33-50 mitoses. However, the frequency one is a girl with dysmorphic features, seizures, and a delay of of chromosomal variants in infertile men could support the opinion psychomotoric development. Her karyotype was 47,XX,+mar. that chromosomal variants may be associated with reproductive Result of our FISH analysis was 47,XX,+mar.ish idic(15)(q11- failure in men. q13)(D15Z1++,D15S10+,PML-). The second case is a 26-years old healthy pregnant woman, whose foetus has karyotype 47,XX,+mar. P0410. A comparative analysis of G-banding, FISH and Our FISH result was 47,XX,+mar.ish dic(15)(D15Z1++,SNRPN- RT-PCR for the diagnosis of bcr-abl-positive CML , PML-). The third case report desribes a 2-years old boy with R. Brill-Zamir, I. Laevski, D. Sahar, R. Gershoni-Baruch; blindness, deafness, dumbness and cryptoorchism.The cytogenetic Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. analysis revealed a karyotype 45,XY,der(21), t(15;21)(q13;q22.3), Phildelphia (Ph) chromosome-positive CML, with the bcr-abl gene -15. FISH confirmed the cytogenetic result: 45,XY,der(21), translocation, has a dismal prognosis. The identification of Ph-positive t(15;21)(q13;q22.3),-15.ish der(21)(D13Z1/D21Z1+,D15Z1-, SNRPN-, patients is vitally important because only aggressive therapeutic UBE3A/D15S10-, D21S270/D21S337/D21S55/D21S233+, PML+). approaches, such as interferon alpha (IFN-alpha) treatment and The result indicates haploinsufficiency of the critical Prader-Willi/ allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, may result in long-term Angelman region in 15q11-q13. The work was supported by grant disease-free survival. Routine diagnostic methods for detection of the IGA NE5685-3 (Ministry of Health CR) and research project of the bcr-abl translocation include conventional cytogenetics(G-banding), Charles University No.111300003. reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and more recently, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis. P0413. Cytogenetic Analysis of 111 Cases of Adult Acute Routine cytogenetics . sensitive at the initial diagnosis is unreliable Lymphoblastic Leukaemia in an Asian Population. during treatment. RT-PCR analysis is considered the most sensitive C. Rudduck Sivaswaren1, S. L. Tien2,1; tool for the detection of the bcr-abl translocation, and is widely used 1Department of Pathology, Cytogenetics, Singapore General Hospital, alone, or in combination with the other methods. FISH analysis is Singapore, 2Department of Haematology, Singapore General simple, extremely reliable and sensitive. This study compares the Hospital, Singapore. efficiency of the three methods for the initial diagnosis of Ph-positive The majority of cases with acute lymphoblast leukemia (ALL) have CML, and for detection of minimal residual disease during treatment. abnormal chromosomes. Many of these abnormalities have been Conventional G-banding cytogenetics, FISH with BCR and ABL shown to be important clinical prognosticators. Cytogenetic analysis double-color probes and RT-PCR for detecting Ph-positive CML were is therefore used routinely in management of ALL. In the current undertaken in 22 CML patients undergoing either IFN-alpha treatment study we evaluate the cytogenetic abnormalities seen in a series of or allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (allo-BMT). The results cases of adult ALL in an Asian population. obtained using the three methodological approaches were 100% A total of 111 cases of ALL admitted to Singapore General Hospital correlated at diagnosis. Following treatment the cytogenetic analysis between 1995 and 2001 were analysed. The age range was 16-81 becomes technically less feasible and the results less reliable. (46 females, 65 males). Whereas, RT-PCR and FISH analysis remain equally and mutually Chromosome preparations were made from bone marrow cells contributive. We thus conclude that the concomitant use of FISH and using direct and 24 hour cultures. Karyotypes were constructed in RT-PCR remain the optimal diagnostic combination for the detection accordance with ISCN nomenclature. of the bcr-abl translocation. Chromosome abnormalities were seen in 73% of cases a normal karyotype in 21.6% while the remaining 5.4% were unsuccessful. P0411. Trisomy 12 mosaicism in a newborn presenting The most common balanced structural abnormalities were with chylothorax, facial dysmorphism, genital anomalies t(9;22)(q34;q11.2) seen in 24 (21.6%) and 1 variant translocation, and congenital heart disease followed by t(8;14)(q24;q32) in 5 (4.5%) with variant translocations V. Klamroth, R. Exeler, I. Kennerknecht, J. Horst; in 4 additional cases. The diagnostically important abnormalities Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Germany. t(4;11)(q21;q23) were seen in 2 cases and der(19)t(1;19)(q23;p13) We present a newborn girl with trisomy 12 mosaicism,[46,XX/ and it’s balanced form in 3 and 1 case respectively. Deletion of 9q 47,XX+21]. The girl was born at 39 weeks of gestation after an was the most common region of deletion seen in 7 (6.3%) cases.160 Posters - Cytogenetics 161 All the abnormal cases but 3 had structural abnormalities. A P0416. From Mendelian inheritance to telomeres ... hypodiploid karyotype of <46 chromosomes was seen in 10.8 G. Viot1, V. Desportes2, C. Ozilou3, A. Choiset1, S. Girard1, A. %, pseudodiploid in 41.4%, hyperdiploid of 47-50 in 12.6% and Munnich4, M. Prieur3, S. P. Romana5, M. Vekemans3, C. Turleau5; hyperdiploid >50 in 6.3% of cases respectively. 1Hopital Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, France, 2Hopital Saint vincent The most frequent numerical gains were for chromosomes 8, 21, 14, de Paul, Paris, France, 3Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, 18, while loss of chromosome 9 was the most common loss. France, 4Hopital Necker- Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Hopital Necker-enfants Malades, Paris, France. P0414. two new cases with 48, XXXX chromosome and FISH studies using subtelomeric probes allowed us to explain review of the litterature. MR/MCA recurrence in two large families with follow-up of 40 and D. Genenviève1, L. Faivre2, S. Lesourd1, F. Mugneret2, D. Heron1; 20 years respectively. Repeated high-resolution karyotypes were 1Département de Génétique, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, performed in both families. In the first family, a sex-linked recessive France, 2Service de Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France. inheritance was suggested because two related male patients Although 47,XXX, 47,XXY, 47,XYY and 45,X karyotypes are frequent were observed. However a girl with the same clinical abnormalities and occur at least 1 in 400 birth, patients with more than one extra was born recently. A multiprobe subtelomeric FISH study led to the sex chromosomes are very rare. identification of a familial cryptic translocation t(17;22)(q25;q13.3). Here we report on two new cases with 48, XXXX (tetrasomy X) A derivative 22 yielding monosomy 22q13 and trisomy 17q25 was karyotype and reviewed the litterature. The pregnancy and delivery observed in all affected patients tested. The translocation was were normal in both cases. In case one, neonatal measurements segregated over at least four generations. In the second family, were 2625 g for weight (- 1.5 SD), 46.5 cm for length (- 1.5 SD) the observation of recurrent malformations and perinatal deaths and 34 cm for OFC (M). IUGR was noted in case two with 2100g over several generations suggested the presence of a familial for weight and 43 cm for length at birth. In both cases, facial rearrangement. Two cousins, a girl and a boy, with similar clinical dysmorphism including bilateral epicathus, synophris, long eyelashes, findings died at a young age. Recently, photographs of both children bulbous nose, long and flat filtrum, small mouth and bilateral were examined again. They showed facial dysmorphism evocative radioulnar synostosis was noted. Evolution was marked by mild of a 2q27 deletion. FISH studies with chromosome 2 subtelomeric mental retardation with speech difficulties. probes confirmed this imbalance and show that it derived from a In attempt to well define the tetrasomy X, we reviewed the litterature. cryptic familial t(2;17)(q37.3;q25). These observations illustrate that To our knowledge, since the first description of an abnormal number reassessment of “ old “ genetic files using both molecular cytogenetic of chromosome in cultured lymphocytes reported by Lejeune et al tools and new syndromes clinical descriptions can point towards a in 1959, only 40 cases with 48,XXXX have been described in the correct diagnosis. In addition, they emphasise that recurrence of litterature. We found that mental retardation was constant excluding similar MR/MCA findings in different branches of a kinship is highly one case with normal intelligence. Other features were particular suggestive of a chromosomal anomaly. Genetic counselling and facial dysmorphism, radioulnar synostosis and similar but non- prenatal diagnosis are now available for both these large families. specific behavioural problems. This syndrome seems to be clinically recognisable. P0417. Cat eye syndrome associated with a severe phenotype P0415. One event, two cell lines, three chromosomes, T. Martin Denavit1, D. Sanlaville1, C. Grillon2, V. Malan1, P. Nizard1, A. four breakpoints: unusual mosaic complex translocation Ardalan1, L. Burglen3, J. Taillemite1, M. Portnoï1; in a patient with oligospermia. 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique Hôpital Saint Antoine, Paris, France, J. M. Dupont1, F. Baverel1, M. Savale2, A. Lebbar1, D. Le Tessier1, C. 2Service de Néonatologie Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 3Service Patrat3, J. Guibert2, D. Rabineau1; de Génétique hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France. 1Histologie Embryologie Cytogénétique, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, Cat Eye syndrome (CES) is characterized by a variety of congenital France, 2Gynécologie, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 3Histologie defects including ocular coloboma, anal atresia, preauricular tags Embryologie Biologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, or pits, heart and kidneys defects, dysmorphic facial features and France. mental retardation. The penetrance and severity are highly variable. Complex chromosomal rearrangements and mosaic reciprocal This syndrome is associated with a supernumerary bisatellited translocations are rare events in constitutional cytogenetics. We dicentric marker arising from an inverted duplication of chromosome report here on a 52 years old man with variable oligospermia who 22 classified into 2 types based on the location of the breakpoints. was referred to our laboratory for cytogenetic examination before Most common CES chromosomes correspond to the smaller type I. AMP procedure. This man has two healthy children from a previous We describe a female child with a severe phenotype of CES, born union. GTG and RHG banding revealed a complex translocation at 40 weeks of gestation from healthy parents. An intrauterine between chromosomes 9, 12 and 14 in 20% of the cells from two growth retardation was diagnosed at 22 weeks of gestation and was consecutive peripheral blood sampling. These standard banding confirmed at birth. She developed a severe respiratory distress. She techniques led to the proposal of the following chromosomal pattern: had hypotonia, dysmorphic features and malformations including 46,XY,t(9;12;14)(q32;q13;q32)/46,XY. downslanting palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, ocular coloboma, Unexpectedly, FISH revealed a far more complex pattern, with two bilateral aplasia of the external ears, anal stenosis, patent ductus breakpoints on der(12). This derivative chromosome harbors material arteriosus. She died at age 1 month. Chromosome analysis showed from chromosomes 9 and 14 hence correct designation is 46,XY,t(12 a karyotype with an extranumerary bisatellited marker in all cells ;14;12;9)(q13;q32;p13;q32).ish t(12;14;12;9)(Tel14q+,wcp14+,wcp12 examined. The parents had normal karyotypes. FISH using 14/22 +,wcp9+,Tel 9q+;wcp14+,wcp12+,Tel12q+;wcp9+,wcp12+, Tel 12p+)/ alpha satellite, WCP of chromosome 22 and N25 probes showed 46,XY. Careful hematological examination of the patient has been that the marker was a dicentric inverted duplication of the short arm conducted to eliminate a rising malignant process. and proximal long arm of chromosome 22, symmetrical and localized During meiosis, these complex rearrangements are expected distally to the Digeorge locus (type II). to form a multivalent from which multiple gametic combination The severe phenotype of our patient demonstrated the phenotypic can occur, most of which will be unbalanced. However, if female variability which does not seem to be related to the size of the gametogenesis can accomodate itself to the complexity thrust upon it duplication or presence of mosaïcism. This phenotypic variability and produce balanced ovocytes, the rule of the greater vulnerability increases the difficulty of genetic counselling. of spermatogenesis to structural rearrangement applies particularly in the case of complex abnormalities and heterozygote males are often P0418. Mapping of chromosomal breakpoints associated sterile. with orofacial clefts. In our patient, the presence of a normal cell line may explain the E. Ruiz-Casares1,2, Z. Tümer1, M. Bugge1, N. Henriques-Gil2, L. more or less conserved fertility; however, in case of pregnancy Rodriguez3, F. Lopez3, P. Kroisel4, K. Wagner4, C. Lundsteen5, V. following AMP, a prenatal diagnosis should be proposed to the Kalscheuer6, N. Tommerup1; parents as some of the imbalances might be viable. 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, IMBG, Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Seccion de Genetica, Universidad San Pablo CEU, Madrid, Spain, Posters - Cytogenetics 162 163 3Estudio Colaborativo Español de Malformaciones Congenitas chromosome 8 associated with an isolated agenesis of the corpus (ECEMC), Madrid, Spain, 4Institut für Medizinische Biologie und callosum. Humangenetik, Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz, Graz, Austria, 5Dept This is the first pregnancy of a young unrelated couple. During the of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Max- second trimester an isolated agenesis of the corpus callosum was Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. found. As part of an EU-supported project aimed at the clinical, A fetal blood and amniotic fluid sample were performed. The epidemiological and genetic study of cleft-lip-palate (EUROCRAN), conventional karyotype showed an excess of material on the short we have initiated a search for candidate genes for orofacial clefts by arm of chromosome 8 suggesting a duplication. Parental karyotypes mapping apparently balanced chromosomal breakpoints associated were normal. In situ hybridization with the whole chromosome with cleft-lip-palate. The Mendelian Cytogenetics Network database painting of chromosome 8 confirmed the duplication. The couple (http://mcndb.imbg.ku.dk) contains information on 75 breakpoints in chosed to interrupt the pregnancy. Anatomo-pathological examination 25 individuals with oral clefting. Ordered YAC/BAC clones were used showed a total agenesis of the corpus callosum associated with to map the breakpoints associated with two of these rearrangements: discrete dysmorphy. Array 300™ using the Genosensor™ System One involved a 46,XY,ins(9;5)(p22.2;q23.3q33.3) karyotype; the was used to confirm the duplication of 8p chromosome. Presently the 5q33.3 breakpoint has been narrowed to a 250 kb region. Two Genosensor™ System includes 6 clones in the 8p region. 3 of them, overlapping BACs at the 9p22 breakpoint contain a hypothetical the most centromeric ones, were abnormal detecting a duplication unknown gene, and the 5q23.3 breakpoint has been narrowed of the (8p11-8p22) region. We have to use BAC clones and FISH in to a 150 kb region containing three candidate genes, including a order to precise the breakpoints of this duplicated fragment, and to try putative zinc finger gene. None of these three breakpoints affects to reduce the critical zone of the corpus callosum on chromosome 8p. chromosomal regions previously known to harbor loci associated with orofacial clefts. The second case displayed an aberrant banding P0421. Chromosome aberrraton frequency for medical pattern on 7q36, a region previously implicated in congenital staff exposed to ionizing radiation from open and close malformations affecting midline structures and a region included sources among those associated with orofacial clefts in more than one S. Tomanovic, D. Mirkovic, B. Djurovic, M. Hrnjak, M. Misovic; case in MCNdb (1p31, 4q21, 6p24, 7q36, 9p13, 16q24, 17q23 and Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. 17p25). Chromosome 7 paint did not suggest the involvement of It has been evidenced that ionizing radiation induces microscopicaly other chromosomes, the 7q-subtelomeric signals were normal, and detected changes in genetical structure of cell. Analysis of high resolution CGH was normal, excluding deletions/duplications chromosome aberrations give informations about biological effects larger than ~3 Mb. This supports that the abnormal banding pattern and biological responses of living organisms to ionizing radiation. is caused by a small intrachromosomal rearrangement, e.g. an The aim of this paper was to show the results of chromosome inversion. We will try to solve this by a systematic FISH strategy aberration frequency analysis for persons occupationaly exposed to using pooled BACs from 7q36. ionizing radiation from open and close sources. We analised 106 health workers in period 1997-1999, and they were P0419. Fetal isochromosome 18q: a case report and categorised into two groups according to the type of radiation they review of the literature. were exposed to: medical workers in nuclear medicine (24) who were C. Sebaoun, O. Dupuy, C. Borie, N. Bondeux, N. Collot, J. Oury, A. exposed to ionizing radiation from open sources, and medical staff in Delezoide, P. L. Eydoux; diagnostic radiology (82) who were exposed to ionizing radiation from Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. close sources. We report a female fetus with isochromosome 18q showing features The average duration of occupational exposition was 10.2 years for of of both trisomy 18 and monosomy 18p. Few cases of this fetal nuclear medicine staff, and 11.6 years for diagnostic radiology staff. syndrome have been published. The results of cytogenetic examinations showed that chromosome The pregnancy was uneventful, until prenatal sonographic aberration frequency was higher for nuclear medicine employers (in examination at 20 weeks of gestation showed intra-uterine growth 4 persons-16.67%) than for the radiology employers (in 8 persons- retardation (IUGR) and an encephalocele. The parents were non 8.54%), but there was no statistical significance (p=0.4622). consanguineous, and had no relevant history of genetic diseases. There was also no diference in chromosome aberration frequency for Chromosomal examination of amniotic fluid cells showed an diferent professions in any of this group. isochromosome 18q in all examined cells (46,XX,i(18q)). The fetus thus had trisomy 18q associated with monosomy 18p. The parents P0422. Testing the ability of the “Geno Sensor System” elected termination of pregnancy. to measure the DNA copy numbers in 4 cell strains Fetopathologic examination revealed features of monosomy containing cytogenetically mapped abnormalities. 18p (holoprosencephaly and facial malformations, occipital F. Wuilque1, F. Vialard2, D. Molina-Gomes2, C. Le Caignec3, V. meningocele, heart and skeletal malformations), and trisomy 18q Serazin2, L. Grimaud1, M. Boceno3, M. V. Senat2, J. Roume2, J. M. (microcephaly, short neck with pterygium colli, club feet, ovarian Rival3, Y. Guidicelli2, J. Selva2; epithelial hypoplasia). In this case, the severity of the phenotype 1Adgenix, Voisins le Bretoneux, France, 2Fédération de Génétique resulted in prenatal recognition of the chromosomal abnormality. et Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique- Centre Hospitalier Holoprosencephaly is not a common feature in post natal monosomy Intercommunal Poissy-Saint Germain en Laye et Faculté de 18p (16% of all cases). It is thought to result from the deletion of Médecine de Paris Ouest, Poissy, France, 3CHU Nantes, Nantes, HPE4, a gene encoding TGIF and located at 18q11.3. France. Isochromosome 18q is thought to result from centromere fission Microarray bases genomic analysis is a novel technique designed (monocentric chromosome), or from chromatid exchange (dicentric for rapid detection of changes in numbers of human DNA specific chromosomes). Isochromosome (18q) is seen as a derivative sequence copies. The VYSIS GenoSensor™ System contains chromosome; to our knowledge, no cases of supernumerary i(18q) 287 human loci including single copy telomeric sequences, genes have been reported, probably because tetrasomy 18q is not viable. involved in micro-deletion syndromes, single copy sequences near The fetal features of isochromosome (18q) closely resembles the the centromere and different loci reported to be amplified in various post natal phenotype, although the fetal syndrome may be more human cancers. We tested the ability of this system to measure severe. single copy changes in 4 cell strains [a whole 21 chromosome gain (case 1), 2 deletions (1p deletion (case 2), 4p deletion (case 3)), one P0420. Isolated Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum and 8p duplication 8p (case 4)]. Duplication The assay involves sample DNA labelling with Cy3 fluorophore. D. Molina Gomes, V. Nebout, V. Serazin, F. Bru, J. P. Bernard, F. This is mixed with whole genomic reference DNA labelled with Cy5 Daikha-Dahmane, F. Vialard, J. Selva; fluorophore and co-hybridized to an Array 300™ microarray. After Fédération de Génétique et Service de Gyneco-Obstétrique. Centre hybridization, target spots are analysed using the GenoSensor™ Hospitalier Intercommunal Poissy Saint Germain en Laye et Faculté reader system. The proprietary software automatically identifies each de Médecine de Paris Ouest, Poissy, France. spot and calculates for each target a normalized ratio that indicates We report a case of partial duplication of the short arm of the the degree of gain or loss of copy number in the sample DNA.162 Posters - Diabetes 163 All 21 clones were detected as gained for case 1. For cases 2 and 3 P 6. Diabetes the detected DNA loss was in accordance with that found with other techniques results. For case 4 we confirmed the duplication of 8p, as P0425. Polymorphism of APOE gene and its relationship well. to diabetic neuropathy in type 1 diabetes We now intend to use this system for the diagnosis of unknown N. S. Shcherbak; changes in DNA copy number which might occur in different fetal St.Petersburg State Medical University, St.Petersburg, Russian or newborn pathologies with a probable genetic etiology where Federation. abnormalities have not yet been detected with other techniques. Neuropathy is a common complication of type 1 diabetes mellitus. These conditions usually result from diabetic microvascular injury P0423. Meiotic segregation analysis in three infertile involving small blood vessels that supply nerves (vasa nervorum). A patients with balanced reciprocal translocations number of facts suggest that diabetic neuropathy may involve genetic J. Puechberty1, B. Andreo2, G. Lefort3, P. Blanchet1, P. Sarda1, F. susceptibility. Recently, it is reported that APOE polymorphism may Pellestor2; influence to development of diabetic neuropathy. The gene encoding 1Genetics Department - Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, apolipoprotein E (APOE) has been proposed as a candidate gene France, 2Institut de Génétique Humaine, CNRS, Montpellier, for vascular complication in type 1 diabetes. Apolipoprotein E was France, 3Cytogenetics Department - Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, discovered as a plasma protein involved in the metabolism of Montpellier, France. lipoproteins. There are three common alleles, E2, E3, and E4, which Carriers of balanced reciprocal translocations may present with code for three major isoforms, resulting in six common genotypes. infertility, recurrent miscarriages, or offsprings with unbalanced The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of APOE gene karyotype and multiple congenital anomalies. If the risk of polymorphism in the development of diabetic neuropathy in type 1 chromosomal imbalance may be estimated at birth, the implication diabetes patients. The study consists of 51 patients with diabetic of this imbalance for infertility and miscarriages is more difficult neuropathy and 150 without diabetic neuropathy matched to the to determine. To assess the importance of these chromosomal patients by age, gender and diabetes duration. APOE polymorphism anomalies during the gametogenesis, we have explored three was detected by the restriction fragment length polymorphism infertile phenotypically normal men with reciprocal translocations. method after a polymerase chain reaction. The distribution of APOE We performed meiotic segregation analysis of their sperm using genotypes and alleles frequency showed no difference between FISH and PRINS methods. For patients 1 and 2, respectively the patients with diabetic neuropathy and without this complication with reciprocal translocations t(1;4)(q12;q28) and t(4;5)(q35;q34), (p>0.05). The difference between the groups was tested by Fisher’s more than 10000 spermatozoa were screened. In both cases, exact test. These results suggest that APOE gene polymorphism is alternate segregation (giving phenotypically normal offspring) is no associated with diabetic neuropathy in type 1 diabetes patients. the most frequent mode of segregation (68 and 70%) and the most frequent type of imbalance is adjacent 1 segregation (24 and 28%), P0426. A hypothesis about two kind of function of the corresponding to the most expected imbalance at birth. For patient CC-chemokine receptor CCR5 in the case of diabetes. 3 with reciprocal translocation t(1;21)(q11;q21) and with severe I. Kalev1, A. Mikelsaar1, T. Podar2; oligozoospermia, only 981 spermatozoa (from two ejaculates) could 1Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu University, Department of be screened. Alternate segregation is also the most frequent type of Internal Medicine, Tartu, Estonia. segregation (80%) and the two most frequent types of imbalance are We have investigated 38 diabetes Type I and 111 diabetes Type adjacent 1 (10%) and 3:1 exchange (7,5%), this latter is responsible II Estonian patients. No statistical differences were found in for the most expected imbalance at birth. Although alternate CCR5delta32 allele frequencies in diabetes Type I and Type II segregation is the major type of segregation, these three men have patients (0,141 and 0,108, respectively)compared with the control infertility. Likely there are other factors which can participate in the group of native Estonian subjects (0,148). However, we have mechanisms of the reproductive failure, possibly from maternal origin found that in diabetes Type I age of onset was 5,4 years later in as well. Meiotic segregation analysis in sperm is important to adjust a patients carrying the CCR5delta32 mutation and they have less late realistic management of the male infertility. complications (p<0,03). In diabetes Type II there was a difference in the frequency of concomitant diseases (p=0,0006), including obesity, P0424. Detection of a partially cryptic complex thyroid diseases, neoplasias ect., being higher in CCR5 wild-type chromosome translocation by FISH genotype. From these data we can draw a conclusion, that reduced C. Hernando Davalillo1,2, P. Grao2, A. Balaguer3, E. Triviño2, J. CCR5 concentration may be useful in hyperglycemic conditions. We Egozcue1, C. Fuster1; propose, that CCR5 has two types of functions: the well-known is to 1Dpt. de Biologia Cellular, Fisiologia i Immunologia. Unitat de bind chemokines and activate of immune cells, and the second is, as Biologia. Facultat de Medicina. Universidad Autónoma, Barcelona, we propose, regulation of functional state of cell membrane, in some Spain, 2Departamento de Genética. CERBA Internacional, S.A.E. conditions also cell contacts by activating Ras and Rho proteins of Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servicio de Pediatria. Hospital Sant target-cells. Chemokine binding selectivity is mediated by the second Joan de Reus, Barcelona, Spain. extracellular loop, while affinity-sensitive binding is dependent on We report an “apparent” balanced de novo complex chromosome the NH2-terminus and the first extracellular loop of CCR5.In the reorganization by the combined use of G-banding, FISH and CGH hyperglycemic conditions an unspecific glycosylation takes place, techniques in a two-year-old infant with some features vaguely which changes the affinity of ligand binding. It could make the ligand- reminiscent of trisomy 21. Conventional G-banding showed a receptor complex more persistent and extend the time of Gi receptor complex chromosome translocation involving chromosomes 1, 4, 6 activated state. During chronic hyperglycemic conditions the altered and 11. Multicolor FISH (24 colours) confirmed the presence of this functional state of cell membrane might lead to different expression complex chromosome translocation. A more complex reorganization of late complications and/or concomitant diseases depending on the was detected using whole chromosome painting probes for the CCR5 genotype. chromosomes involved in this rearrangement. In this case we found two cryptic interstitial translocations in the same derivative P0427. Analysis of triplet repeat polymorphism in the chromosome: der(6) t(6;11;4;1;4). In the results obtained by CGH transmembrane region of the MHC class I chain-related A did not show any loss or gain of chromosome material in this patient. (MICA) gene in siblings of diabetes with high ICA level. Our results indicate that the phenotypic abnormalities observed in O. S. Glotov1, N. L. Vartanyan2, M. V. Aseev1, T. E. Ivaschenko1, V. S. this infant, with this “apparent” balanced complex rearrangement, Baranov1; may have resulted from either a small structural loss of material or a 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, functional loss of a gene action. Russian Federation, 2Institute of Influenza, St-Petersburg, Russian Acknowledgements. Financial support was given by DGESIC Federation. (PB98-0891). Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus is autoimmune disorder of multifactorial etiology with a strong genetic component. The frequency of IDDM in North-West region of Russia is 1-3 : 1000 newborn. IDDM primarily develops due to selective autoimmune Posters - Diabetes 164 165 destruction of the insulin-producing pancreatic ß cell, which leads to creatinine concentration) after ten years’ diabetes duration. FIND severe insulin deficiency. Recent studies have been demonstrated will contain a large collection of multiplex diabetic families enriched that polymorphism of MICA gene (major histocompatibility complex for the presence of nephropathy. These resources should provide class 1 chain-related genes) are associated with supceptibility to significant power to detect genes contributing to diabetic kidney type 1 diabetes. A total of 34 initially unaffected siblings with the level disease. of cytoplasmatic islet cell antibodies (ICA) titer above 28 Juvenile Diabetes Foundation Units (JDFU) and 42 unrelated non-diabetic P0430. Heritability of blood pressure phenotypes in type peoples from North-West region of Russia were analyzed for exon 2 diabetes 5 polymorphism of MICA gene by DNA heteroduplex analysis. MICA S. S. Rich, L. A. Lange, L. E. Wagenknecht, D. M. Herrington, C. D. gene has a triplet repeat polymorphism in the transmembrane region Langefeld, B. I. Freedman, D. W. Bowden; consisting of five alleles. The frequencies alleles 4, 5, 5.1, 6, 9 were Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC. 13.3%, 8.3%, 43.3%, 16.7%, 18.3% in study group and 8.3%, 16.7%, High blood pressure is a recognized cardiovascular risk factor. 31%, 17.8%, 26.2% in control group accordingly. More then 80% Although emphasis in treatment has focused on lowering diastolic siblings were homozygote or heterozygote for A5.1 allele compared blood pressure (DBP) and pulse pressure (PP), PP may be a better to only 57% of these subject in the control group (c2= 4,11, p<0,05). predictor of events. The role of genetic factors in blood pressure, including systolic (SBP) and DBP, is well known. Fewer data are P0428. Gene polymorphisms of the angiotensin I- available on the extent of genetic control of PP. We hypothesize that converting enzyme and angiotensin II type 1 receptor in families with multiple members having diabetes, blood pressure A1166C in non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus phenotypes are influenced by both genetic and environmental factors. M. Zivkovic1, A. Stankovic1, M. Sumarac-Dumanovic2, S. Glisic1, D. To determine the extent of the familial aggregation of SBP, DBP and Micic2, D. Alavantic1; PP, we studied 245 individuals with type 2 diabetes from 122 families. 1Institute of Nuclear Sciences “Vinca”, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 2Institute Other measured factors included duration of diabetes, ethnicity, body of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Diseases of Metabolism, Clinical mass index (BMI), cigarette smoking, and self-reported medical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. history. Heritability estimates were obtained using genetic variance Background: Patients with non-insulin dependent diabetes components (SOLAR). The sample was 89% Caucasian, 59% female mellitus (NIDDM) have high risk of developing micro and macro and had a mean±SD for age and duration of diabetes of 60.6±10.4 vascular complications and hypertension. ACE gene polymorphism and 11.2±7.9 years, respectively. Adjusting for age, gender and is associated with an increased risk of vascular disease and AT1 ethnicity, heritability (h2±SE) for SBP, DBP and PP was estimated to gene polymorphism with hypertension. The aim of this case/control be 0.21±0.18 (P=0.13), 0.35±0.16 (P=0.01), and 0.38±0.17 (P=0.01). study was to determine genotypes for gene polymorphisms of the No changes in residual heritability were noted after further adjusting angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE-ID) and angiotensin II type for BMI, duration of diabetes or current smoking status. Adjustment 1 receptor (AT1-A1166C) in NIDDM patients and control group. for diagnosis of hypertension only slightly altered the residual Methods: We examined 40 patients (preliminary study) with NIDDM heritability estimates (0.26 for SBP, 0.33 for DBP, 0.37 for PP). These and 100 healthy controls. Genomic DNA was amplified by PCR data provide empirical evidence that blood pressure phenotypes, method for I/D and A1166C polymorphism. Results: Frequencies including pulse pressure, have a significant genetic component in for II, ID, DD ACE genotypes in patients were 16,67%, 59, 52%, families with multiple members with type 2 diabetes. 23,81% respectively and I/D allele frequencies were 0,46/0,54, not significantly different from our healthy population. Frequencies for P0431. AIRE Gene Polymorphisms in Finnish Patients AT1 genotypes in patients were 39,0%, 43,9%, 17,1% for AA, AC, with Type 1 Diabetes CC, respectively. Significant difference between patients and controls T. Nikopensius1, P. Peterson2,3, A. Kurg1, K. J. E. Krohn2,3, M. Saha4, was found for genotype distribution for A1166C polymorphism J. Ilonen5, M. Knip4,6, A. Metspalu1; (p<0,05). Allele C 1166 was slightly but not significantly frequent 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, in patients than in controls (0,39 vs. 0,27). Conclusion: Further Estonia, 2Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, study with larger number of patients with micro and macrovascular Tampere, Finland, 3Department of Pathology, Tampere University complications could reveal possible association of ACE and AT1 Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 4Department of Pediatrics, Tampere genes polymorphism with progression of these complications. University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 5Department of Virology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 6Hospital for Children and P0429. Design of the Family Investigation of Nephropathy Adolescents, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. and Diabetes (FIND) Type 1 diabetes (IDDM) is an autoimmune multifactorial disease B. I. Freedman1, F. I. N. D. Research Group2; characterized by destruction of the pancreatic islet cells, with the 1Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, major susceptibility gene in HLA region on chromosome 6p21. 2Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH. IDDM often occurs in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndromes FIND is a multi-center consortium acquiring DNA from sets of (APS). In APS1, a rare autosomal recessive autoimmune disease families or individuals with well-characterized diabetic nephropathy with Mendelian inheritance, the patients have IDDM independently and performing a genome scan to identify chromosomal regions of the HLA association. Nevertheless, IDDM in APS1 patients linked with diabetic nephropathy. FIND includes families of African-, strongly resembles HLA-associated IDDM with high titers of GAD65 European-, Native- and Hispanic-American ethnicity. Affected sibling autoantibodies and specific lymphocytic destruction of pancreatic pair, discordant sibling pair, affected relative pair, and discordant ß-cells. The gene responsible for APS1 - AIRE (autoimmune relative pair linkage analyses will be performed in the “family” regulator) - has been mapped to chromosome 21q22.3 and arm of the study. Mapping by Admixture Linkage Disequilibrium characterised as a transcriptional activator. IDDM and APS1 are analyses will be performed in the “MALD” arm. Markers at candidate enriched in Finnish population. We designed a DNA chip with genes or chromosomal regions containing putative renal failure AIRE sequence polymorphisms and mutations searching for allelic susceptibility genes identified in previous genome scans, or syntenic variants associated with IDDM. For analysis we used arrayed primer to regions of renal failure susceptibility in model organisms, will be extension (APEX) technology, a resequencing method based on examined. Approximately 10,000 individuals will be recruited in FIND. two-dimensional array of oligonucleotides. We report the allelic and Participants provide medical histories and urine, plasma, and serum genotype frequencies for 11 SNPs in 123 patients with IDDM and 135 samples for determination of glycosylated hemoglobin, serum and controls from the Finnish population. urine creatinine concentration, and urinary albumin:creatinine ratio The genotype frequency of two SNP-s, 1197T>C and 1411C>T (UAC). Lymphocytes from eligible participants are immortalized and was increased among patients, compared to controls. We suggest a repository kept for serum, plasma and urine samples. The family that 1411C>T polymorphism, resulting in amino acid change study is recruiting multiplex diabetic families identified by a proband R471C, may be associated with IDDM autoimmunity in some of with overt nephropathy or end-stage renal disease (ESRD) attributed the Finnish patients. We also show that the most common APS1 to diabetes mellitus. Family eligibility is determined by at least one mutations, R257X and 13-bp deletion in exon 8, as well as the third additional diabetic sibling with either nephropathy (UAC > 0.03 mg/ Finnish mutation K83E, do not contribute to a haplotype carrying mg) or without nephropathy (UAC < 0.03 mg/mg and normal serum susceptibility to IDDM.164 Posters - Gene Structure and Function 165 P 7. Gene Structure and Function factor/s originated from spermatocytes/spermatids. The gene is approximately 6 kb pairs in size and contains three exons. The ORF P0432. Microsatellite repeat analysis of Xq27 region in encodes for a 98 amino acid polypeptide containing two putative Belarus population EF-hand calcium-binding domains. To elucidate the potential role of K. Mosse, G. Tsukerman; calgizzarin gene, we decided to delete the gene in mouse by targeted Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus. disruption (knock-out). A replacement-targeting vector was designed Flanking microsatellite markers and their association with instability to delete the two exons encoding calgizzarin protein and replaced of the FMR-1 CGG repeat, involved in the fragile X syndrome, were them with the neomycin phosphotransferase gene. The ES cell were analyzed in DNA samples from Belarus population. Comparison of transfected with the targeting vector and selected for homologous DXS548-FRAXAC1-FRAXAC2 haplotype frequencies in the 189 recombination event. Five recombinant clones were identified by normal, 22 intermediate and 9 fragile X chromosomes suggested a genomic Southern. Two clones produced germ line transmitting strong linkage disequilibrium between normal alleles and haplotype chimeras after injecting them into blastocyst derived from C57B/J6 7-3-4+ as well as between expanded alleles and haplotype 2-1-3. female. These chimeras were bred with C57B/J6 female to generate Haplotype 2-1-3 was reported to be significantly enriched among F1 animals, which were heterozygous for calgizzarin deleted allele. high-end normal alleles. In our study we also revealed a number Generation of homozygous animal is awaited. The phenotypic and of closely-allied haplotypes (1-1-3, 2-1-2, 3-1-3) which are almost molecular analysis of these mice might give us insights, about the exclusively linked with “gray zone” CGG repeats. We suggest that this potential role of calgizzarin in spermatogenesis. group could arise from the founder chromosome with haplotype 2-1-3 and intermediate size FRAXA allele, by the series of single mutational P0435. Novel mutations in the RFXANK gene. Promotor events, by mechanism similar to replication slippage. It means that binding of mutant RFX without MHC II transactivation. such chromosome must have a higher rate of replication mistakes in W. Wiszniewski1, M. Fondaneche2, P. Louise-Plence3, C. Picard4, J. this region or inability of repair system to correct changes naturally Bal5, A. Fischer2, B. Lisowska-Grospierre2; occurring in repetitive sequences. Remarkably, that the same 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2INSERM U 429, mechanism was proposed for gradual progression of intermediate Paris, France, 3INSERM U 475, Montpellier, France, 4INSERM U 550, alleles towards instability threshold. Instability in both FMR-1 and Paris, France, 5Institute Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. the flanking markers in Xq27 can be influenced by a common trans- MHC class II deficiency or bare lymphocyte syndrome is a combined acting factor promoting general instability in microsatellite sequences. immunodeficiency caused by defects in MHC specific regulatory It can also explain the existence of the haplotypes which are rare or factors that control MHC II expression at transcriptional level. MHC absent in the control samples but are well represented in intermediate II expression is controlled at least by four trans-acting genes: CIITA, and fragile X chromosomes. RFXANK, RFX5 and RFXAP. RFXANK encodes a subunit of the tripartide RFX transcription complex that functions in the assembly of P0433. Possible involvement of chi-like and minisatellite multiple transcription factors on MHC II promoters. It has four ankyrin sequences in the formation of two chimeric CYP21P/ repeats important for interaction with RFXAP and CIITA. So far seven different RFXANK mutations have been reported in 26 unrelated CYP21 genes in steroid 21-hydroxylase deficiency patients. The most frequent mutation - deletion of 26 bp (752delG- H. Lee1, D. Niu2, C. Lin3; 25) was identified in 17 patients. The other mutations are nonsense 1Yuan-Shan Research Institute, I-Lan, Taiwan Republic of China, or splice site mutations leading to proteins lacking all or part of the 2Department of Pediatrics, Veterans General Hospital-Taipei,, Taipei, ankyrin repeat region. Here we report two novel point mutations of Taiwan Republic of China, 3Kingcar Food Industrial Co., Ltd. Yuan- RFXANK gene: D121V and R212X found in two families with BLS Shan Research Institute, I-Lan, Taiwan Republic of China. and additional studies on tyrosine residues 224Y and 235 Y located Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a common autosomal in fourth ankyrin domain. We found D121V allele is expressed in vitro recessive disorder mainly caused by defects in the steroid 21- but is unable to form, with other factors, stable RFX complex. The hydroxylase (CYP21) gene. More than 90% of CAH cases are experimental mutant Y224A is able to form RFX complex which binds caused by mutations of the CYP21 gene. Approximately 75% to the MHC II promoter in vitro but cannot reverse BLS phenotype. of the defective CYP21 genes are generated through intergenic These data the importance of the D121 and Y224 residues deduced recombination termed “apparent gene conversion” from the from modelling studies. neighboring CYP21P pseudogene. A chimeric CYP21P/CYP21 gene with its 5’ end corresponding to CYP21P and 3’ end corresponding to CYP21 has been identified. This kind of gene is nonfunctional P0436. Functional and genomic analysis of the SIX gene because it produces a truncated protein. We have found that family there are two distinct chimeric genes in CAH patients. Both had a I. M. Hanson, A. G. Brown; sequence with -300 nucleotides of the 5’ head as the CYP21P gene. University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Otherwise, the coding region consisted of a fusion molecule with Members of the SIX gene family are involved in a variety of the CYP21P gene in two different regions. One of the junctions was developmental processes in vertebrates and invertebrates. All SIX located in chi-like sequence of GCTGGGC in the third intron and genes encode two highly conserved motifs, a homeodomain that the other was in the minisatillite consensus TGGCAGGAGG of the mediates DNA binding, and a SIX domain that mediates protein- exon 5 of the CYP21P gene. In addition, the analysis of restriction protein interactions. It is now clear that Drosophila has three SIX fragments length polymorphism for these two 3.3-kb chimeric genes (sine oculis, Optix and D-Six4) while humans have six (SIX1- molecules showed these sequences arose as a consequence of 6). Phylogenetic analysis of Drosophila and mammalian amino acid unequal crossover between the CYP21P and CYP21 genes. It is sequences shows that the proteins fall into three clear subgroups, plausible that both consensus sequences may be responsible for the suggesting that a common ancestral organism possessed three SIX gene conversion of these two chimeric genes. genes. An intriguing feature of the human SIX genes is their genomic organisation, as revealed by the Human Genome Sequencing P0434. Sertoli cell-germ cell interaction: Functional Project; five of the six genes are clustered. We have shown that the mouse SIX genes appear to have a similar genomic arrangement. analysis of murine calgizzarin gene. Despite extensive amino acid homology within the SIX-domain, SIX A. U. Mannan, G. Nica, K. Nayernia, W. Engel; proteins differ dramatically in their interactions with transcriptional co- Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany. factors encoded by the EYA gene family. We report work in progress In the present study we undertook functional analysis of a which shows that while SIX1 interacts strongly with EYA2 and EYA4 differentially regulated gene, named calgizzarin, which shows a in a yeast two-hybrid assay, SIX3 interacts with neither. This implies decreased expression in murine Sertoli cell-germ cell cocultures that there are clear functional differences between the subgroups of compared to cultured Sertoli cells alone. Calgizzarin is expressed in SIX proteins. low level in all adult tissues examined; however, a high mRNA level for calgizzarin in mouse testis is maintained until stage P15 and then declines dramatically, whereas the expression pattern in the ovary remains constantly high throughout development. Therefore its expression in Sertoli cells might be repressed by some unknown Posters - Gene Structure and Function 166 167 P0437. Genetic background of the protein regulation of to a consensus sequence. However, many clusters cannot be FGF2 ex vivo assembled into a single consensus sequence. The sequences then P. Greiser1, S. Schulz1, U. Schagdarsurengin1, T. Süß1, D. Rehfeld1, fall into multiple consensus sequences (contigs) within one clusters. A. Nordwig1, A. Kabisch2, U. Müller-Werdan3, K. Werdan3, C. Gläser1; The differences might be due to imperfect sequence data (e.g. 1MLU, Inst. of Human Genetics, Halle, Germany, 2MLU, Bloodbank, partially unspliced sequence templates) or due to alternative splicing. Halle, Germany, 3MLU, Dep. of Internal Med., Halle, Germany. Instead of one gene coding for one mRNA leading to one protein, The potent cytokine FGF2 is involved in the proliferative response alternative splicing of transcripts may lead to potentially different to vascular injury of many cell types and is therefore suggested to proteins. be an important candidate gene for CAD. Materials and methods: Splice variants are often due to alternative exon usage, which we We investigated the individual FGF2 protein- (ELISA; R&D-System) verify by RT-PCR. and mRNA-expression (competitive RT-PCR) in 99 patients with We have set up a medium throughput strategy that does allow us CAD (49.9y, SD 8.7, 85 males). Moreover we examined the potential to screen expression of genes in 31 different human tissues. We role of the exon1-polymorphism C223T of FGF2 in regulating the initiated this project by analysing genes on Chromosome 21 and 22. mRNA- and protein-expression pattern. This polymorphism, located Our results indicate, that the theoretical data represented in EST in the 5’-UTR in the functionally important ribosome entry site, databases can be verified in many cases by our experimental design. modifies the calculated mRNA folding-structure and may therefore We re-sequence PCR products in question, to confirm their origin influence the expression of FGF2. Results: Investigating the FGF2 and nature. In more than 35% of the cases, we cannot experimentally expression on transcriptional and translational level we determined support EST data by RT-PCR. an mRNA expression of 13.23 ag/cell and a protein expression of In future we want to extend splice variant analysis to other 49.19 pg/ml serum in our patient group. Furthermore a significant chromosomes and gene families. We intend to automate RT-PCR positive correlation of FGF2 mRNA and protein expression could and ultimately design a chip to discriminate a large number of be detected (p<0.001). The study of the genotype distribution of different splice forms of medically relevant genes. the C223T-polymorphism resulted in the following frequencies: 0.84 (CC); 0.14 (CT); 0.02 (TT). An analysis of the influence of the P0440. RET upstream sequences modulate gene C223T-polymorphism on the FGF2 expression revealed significant expression via cell-line specific chromatin acetylation. correlations on transcriptional (p<0.01) as well as on translational F. I. Puppo1, P. Griseri1, M. Fanelli2, F. Schena1, G. Romeo3, I. level (p<0.001). The highest values of both mRNA- and protein- Ceccherini1, P. Pelicci4, R. Ravazzolo1, G. Patrone1; expression were determined among CC-carriers (14.3ag/cell; 1G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 2University of Camerino, Camerino 54.4pg/ml serum), whereas CT-carriers showed intermediated (MC), Italy, 3International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon values (8.3ag/cell; 23.2pg/ml serum). The lowest values were found Cedex, France, 4European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy. among TT-carriers: 3.3ag/cell; 14.5pg/ml serum. Conclusions: The Disregulation of the RET proto-oncogene transcription may play a FGF2 mRNA- and protein-expression was shown to be significant role in both inherited cancer syndromes and Hirschsprung disease. dependent on the C223T-polymorphism. Further investigations Understanding the gene regulation might provide new clues to regarding the FGF2 expression pattern should bear this association clarify pathogenesis. Recently, we reported that RET transcription is in mind. highly cell-line specific, while the promoter region is equally active in different cell-lines. P0438. Promoter and mRNA analysis indicate low Here we show that RET upstream sequences can modulate expression level of SLC7A7 gene. gene expression via cell-line specific chromatin acetylation level J. Mykkänen, M. Toivonen, M. Kleemola, A. Peippo, K. Rantanen, M. contributing to promoter function. Acetylation and deacetylation Savontaus, P. Aula, O. Simell, K. Huoponen; activities, working on specific lysines of histonic tails, alter the University of Turku, Turku, Finland. accessibility of transcription factors to DNA thus modulating gene The SLC7A7 gene encodes a cationic amino acid transporter y+LAT1 expression. Histone deacetylase inhibitors, such as sodium butyrate, expressed mainly in basolateral compartment of epithelial cells in up regulate both RET mRNA levels and transcription rate in a RET intestine and renal tubules. Mutations of SLC7A7 cause a rare but expressing cell-line. The same treatment allows transcript detection severe aminoaciduria, lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI). We have in RET negative cell lines (lymphoblasts), while no enhancement investigated putative promoter regions of SLC7A7 using luciferase is seen in cells expressing RET already at high level. Sensitivity reporter gene and electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). The to sodium butyrate appears to be sequence specific in transient expression level of the gene in LPI patients and controls was also transfection assays. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, studied. using antibody against H4 tetra-acetylated hystones, confirm the The 5’ region of the first untranslated exon of SLC7A7 contains no direct role of histone acetylation level within RET upstream region, in classical promoter elements like TATA-box or Sp1 binding sites. regulating gene expression. However, it includes several other putative transcription factor binding Sodium butyrate derepressive effect allowed us to overcome the lack sequences, like CACATG and CCCCTGGC, sufficient to promote of this gene expression in the majority of adult cells and analyse RET luciferase expression in human embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293). mRNA from Hirschsprung patients, by treating lymphoblastoid cell The rise of the luciferase activity was 10-fold in comparison with the lines. Anomalous transcripts, defective gene expression, as well as negative control; no activity was observed in fibroblasts. Accordingly, nucleotide substitutions in the coding region were detected. by EMSA we demonstrated that the sequence elements were able to bind protein in HEK-293 cells and adult kidney tissue extract, but P0441. Genomic organization of human complexin 2 gene not in fibroblasts. Northern blot analysis showed very low and equal N. M. Raevskaya, L. V. Dergunova, I. P. Vladychenskaya, S. A. SLC7A7 mRNA levels in control, carrier and LPI patient fibroblasts. Limborska; In conclusion, it is likely that identified transcription factor binding Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. sites contribute to the low expression level and the epithelial specific We have investigated the structure of the genomic clone Ghfb regulation of the SLC7A7 gene. hybridizing with the brainspecific cDNA clone Hfb1 and obtained from the cosmid chromosome V library. We have shown Hfb1 to be P0439. Experimental verification of predicted splice a fragment of the 3’-terminal exon of the human synaptic protein variants of human genes complexin 2. This exon encodes the extended 3’-untranslated mRNA D. Zink1, S. Haas2, E. Coward2, M. Vingron2, B. Korn3; region. Sequencing of the genomic clone Ghfb let us determine the 1German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Max- complete structure of three exons (3’-terminal and two neighboring) Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3RZPD, and two corresponding introns of the complexin 2 gene. The nucleotide sequence of three named exons includes the partial German Resource Center, Heidelberg, Germany. 5’- untranslated region, the ORF and 3’-untranslated region of the Public EST databases currently contain more than 3 million human corresponding mRNA. Nucleotide sequence of the clone from the EST sequences, representing probably 40-50.000 human genes. human genomic sequences database (AC010241) showing the Within these data exists a large redundancy. We take advantage of highest similarity to Ghfb allowed us to determine the sequences this redundancy by analysing the differences of sequences belonging of two another exons and two corresponding introns. These exons to the same gene. The EST sequences are clustered and assembled 166 Posters - Gene Structure and Function 167 represent the 5’-end of the 5’-untranslated region of the complexin P0444. FOXL2: Evolution and expression. 2 mRNA. Computer analysis of the human EST database proposed J. Cocquet1, E. DeBaere2, F. Jaubert3, X. Xuhua4, L. Messiaen2, E. the existence of an additional exon within the intron 2 sequence at Pailhoux5, C. Cotinot5, M. Fellous1, R. Veitia1; the distance of about 7 kb from the exon III. The resulting alternative 1Département d’immunologie Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, transcript is thought to differ with its 5’-end from that for the previously 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital., described transcript. Using RT-PCR technique we confirmed the Ghent, Belgium, 3Service d’Anatomopathologie, Hôpital Necker- existence of the predicted transcript. Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4Bioinformatics Laboratory, HKU- Pasteur Research Centre, Hong Kong, HONG KONG SPECIAL P0442. The comparison of substrate recognizing regions ADMINISTRATIVE REGION OF China, 5Laboratoire de Biologie du of Cytochrome P450 2C subfamily enzymes suggests the Developement et Biotechnologies, INRA, Jouy en josas, France. diversity-enhancing evolution of these regions during the Mutations in the FOXL2 gene have recently been shown to cause the blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES), evolution. a rare genetic disorder. There are two types of BPES. In BPES S. Kuno; type I, a complex eyelid malformation is associated with premature Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. ovarian failure (POF) while in BPES type II, the eyelid malformation The enzymes belonging to cytochrome P450 2C subfamily occurs as an isolated entity. The FOXL2 protein belongs to the metabolize numerous drugs in liver. Four enzymes (2C8, 2C9, family of forkhead transcription factors. These proteins have a highly 2C18 and 2C19) members of this subfamily have been identified conserved 100 amino-acid DNA-binding domain (the forkhead in humans. These enzymes play roles in metabolizing various domain) and are involved in different developmental processes. The toxic compounds. Considering the diverse nature of the chemical FOXL2 protein also contains a polyalanine tract that might have a structure of these compounds, it is reasonable to assume that role in transcriptional repression. the substrate recognizing regions of these enzymes undergo In order to study the FOXL2 locus (ORF and promoter), we have diversity-enhancing evolution just as the antigen-binding regions performed a comparative analysis of the sequence in several species of major histocompatibility complex. The test for the diversity- including human, goat and mouse. The amino-acid sequences are enhancing evolution is performed by the comparison of synonymous highly similar and conservation is further demonstrated by low Ka/Ks (silent) nucleotide changes versus nonsynonymous (amino acid ratios. From the alignment of the 5’upstream sequences in these altering) nucleotide changes during the molecular evolution. If species, we have deduced the sequence of a “core” promoter. nonsynonymous substitution is estimated to have occurred more In addition, we have produced and characterized two polyclonal frequently than synonymous substitution, then we suspect that antibodies directed against the N- and C-terminal regions of the diversity-enhancing evolution might have occurred. Cytochrome P450 human FOXL2 protein which are also capable of recognizing the 2C subfamily has 6 substrate recognizing regions. By the analysis other orthologs. Immunohistochemistry shows that FOXL2 is a very using a window with 30 codons, nonsynonymous substitutions were early marker of ovarian development as it is expressed in follicular found to augment near the substrate recognizing regions. When the cells. The domain of expression of FOXL2 seems to restrict as comparison was made between synonymous and nonsynonymous development proceeds in the goat ovary. changes in cytochrome P450 2C subfamily enzymes, the diversity- enhancing substitutions were observed in different substrate P0445. EBV infected LCL human cells exhibit high recognizing regions. The hypothesis of diversity-enhancing evolution was tested by the simulation experiments and it was supported expression of p53 gene in almost cases with significance. Similar results were obtained B. Marzec, T. Kubiatowski, D. Szczesniak, M. Gawlowicz, J. in rabbit, rat and golden hamster. These results suggest that the Wojcierowski; substrate recognizing regions of cytochrome P450 2C subfamily Department of Human Genetics,University School of Medicine, enzymes have undergone diversity-enhancing evolution due to the Lublin, Poland. selection pressure favoring the diversity adapting to the environment Infection of B-lymphocytes with Epstein-Barr Virus in vitro induces in which a variety of possibly toxic compounds attack the species. a G0 to G1 transition followed by DNA synthesis and cell division. Infected cells undergo blast transformation resulting in the outgrowth P0443. Zinc fingers on short arm of chromosome 9 of immortal lymphoblastoid cell lines. Numerous cellular proteins are switched on in the infected cells, including p53. DNA viruses encode pointing to lymphocytes oncoproteins that modulate the level of p53 and stimulate host cell A. Reigo1,2, A. Metspalu1,2; DNA synthesis. It was reported earlier that p53 can be bounded by 1University of Tartu, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, EBV gene products: EBNA5 nad BZLF-1 leading to its accumulations. Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. We have investigated expression of p53 and bcl-2 genes on the level Genes encoding for C2H2 zinc finger proteins are known to regulate of its mRNA and protein in LCL human cell lines established from the normal cell proliferation and differentiation and are often involved blasts of EBV infected patients. For estimations of mRNA we have in tumor growth regulation. Therefore we chose this protein motif used RN-ase Protection Assay (h-CC2 multiprobe template set), the consensus as a virtual probe for in silico analysis of EST databases protein level was studied immunocytochemically. In our study we and genomic sequences from 9p22, a chromosomal region of have observed increased level of p53 mRNA and protein expression, our interest. Assembling physically clustered positive sequence similary to observed in mitogene stimulated peripherial blood fragments we detected some putative exons of an uncharacterised lymphocytes from healthy donors. gene, which were then used for primer design to screen transcript The increased level of p53 and bcl-2 expression in EBV infected LCL pools from 12 tissues and 8 cell lines generated by RT-PCR. The may suggest that transcription of p53 might be activated by EBV corresponding full-length cDNAs from human peripheral blood infection. As long as it is physiologically tolerable level it doesn’t lead leukocytes were sequenced and the exon-intron structure of the to growth arrest or apoptosis but promote proliferation. gene was determined. Two main transcripts of the novel gene were visualized by Northern blot hybridization. P0446. Characterization, expression pattern, and The human gene designated as lymphocyclin contains 8 exons spanning approximately 450kb of genomic DNA in 9p22.2-22.3 chromosomal assignment of the novel human RAB22A between markers D9S156(tel) and D9S1218(cen). It has two main gene belonging to Rab small GTPases transcripts of 3.82kb and 0.84kb and also a splice variant lacking D. Schlote, S. Kussmann, S. Worch, I. Hansmann; exon 2 (126nt). The longest transcript encodes a 1099aa protein Institut für Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie, Halle / Saale, with three pairs of adjacent C2H2 zinc fingers close to its C-terminus Germany. and has three putative nuclear localization signals. Other significant The mouse chromosome 2 segment (MMU2) corresponding to features of lymphocyclin are a 22aa leucine zipper motif and an human chromosome 20 (HSA20) is known to be involved in both, alpha-helix forming a serine stripe. maternal as well as paternal noncomplementation (genomic Our experimental data so far indicate quite restricted expression imprinting). Uniparental disomies for distinct regions of MMU2 of this new member of C2H2 zinc finger protein gene superfamily result in different neonatal lethalities with opposite anomalous and refer to its possible role as lymphocyte differentiation and/or phenotypes, strongly suggesting the presence of imprinted genes in proliferation regulator. this region. These chromosomal regions show a conserved synteny Posters - Gene Structure and Function 168 169 of gene loci to human 20q13 segment, predicting the presence of P0449. The interrelationship between type of the copper imprinted genes in this syntenic human chromosomal region. We nutrition and activity of the genes supporting copper have identified a new gene in this region of interest which is located balance in newborn rats during development on a BAC RPCIB753L051096 proximal to GNAS1 on HSA 20q13. N. Platonova1, R. Povalikhin1, B. Mischenko2, T. Zhivul’ko1, E. Sequencing the full-length cDNA revealed a novel isoform of the Zhiguleva1, N. Tsymbalenko1, L. Puchkova1; human RAB22 subfamily of small GTP-binding proteins which are 1Research institute of experimental medicine, St.-Petersburg, located in distinct intracellular compartments and plays an important Russian Federation, 2St.Petersburg State Technical University, St.- role in the regulation of vesicular trafficking. Based on the EST WI- Petersburg, Russian Federation. 12997 this new isoform was isolated containing 2242 nucleotides The effect of copper (Cu) nutrition on genes expression controlled and is designated RAB22A. Structurally, the RAB22A encodes the copper turnover during mammal development has been a polypeptide of 194 amino acids which has 97% identity to the studying. The methods of Northern- and Western-blot hybridization, canine rab22. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous expression immunoelectrophoresis, different enzymatic assays and atomic slightly increased in heart. The genomic structure was completed absorption spectrometry were used. A group of newborn rats were by database analysis and sequencing of the isolated BAC clone fed with baby formula (Cu contains as an inorganic salt) during 8 RPCIB753L051096. The gene consists of 7 exons spanning about 50 days from the 1st day after birth (experimental group). The Cu and kb of genomic sequence. Physical and FISH mapping revealed that ceruloplasmin (Cp) levels in their serum were increased 3 times and RAB22A is located proximal to GNAS1 but downstream of PCK1 on the liver Cu concentration was decreased 2 times when compared human chromosome 20q13. Supported by DHGP. with rats which were fed by rat Dams (Cu packed into milk Cp, control group). The liver Cp-mRNA content was increased and Wilson P0447. Phylogeny of the alternative NF1 exon 10a-2 ATPase gene expression was appeared in liver of the experimental reveals that intron sequences surrounding alternatively group. The effect of baby formula was distinctly appeared in 48 hours spliced exons are highly conserved independent of starting fed of newborn rats (from first or eighth day of B. Bartelt, O. Kenner, R. Müller, W. Vogel, D. Kaufmann; life). The brain Cu concentration was not changed, but both Cp and University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. Cu levels in cerebrospinal fluid of experimental rats were increased We recently found an additional splice product of the 7 times. Cu was progressively accumulated during first 12 days Neurofibromatosis type 1 gene (NF1) with the new 45 bp exon of life and it was found in nuclei and lysosomes, but its level was 10a-2 inserted between exon 10a and 10b. Phylogenetic analysis already decreased to 5th day of experiment. The Menkes and Wilson of gDNA revealed the origin as well as the demise of exon 10a- ATPases as well as Cp genes expression were mainly expressed 2 in evolution. 10a-2 homologous sequences are not present in in hypophysis and choriodic plexus but not in cerebral cortex and Drosophila melanogaster but in Fugu rubripes. It is expressed and cerebellum of 5-days old rats of both groups. highly conserved in birds and mammals but independently lost again The roles of milk Cp and Cp gene expression in mammary glad in in mouse, rat, sheep, cow and dog. Intronic sequences surrounding newborn is discussed. exon 10a-2 are highly conserved over more than 600 bp among mammals expressing 10a-2. We therefore suggest a specific function P0450. Genomic characterisation of the human prion of exon 10a-2 and the surrounding intronic sequences lost again in protein (PrP) gene locus some mammalian species. Extended intron homology, uncommon E. Makrinou1, M. Antoniou2, J. Collinge1, J. Collinge1; for NF1, was also found around three other alternatively spliced 1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2King’s NF1 exons, one of which is rodent-specific (23b). Investigation of College, London, United Kingdom. two other genes, the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance Prion protein (PrP) is intimately linked with a class of regulator (CFTR) and the Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) gene, also revealed neurodegenerative diseases known as transmissible spongiform high intron sequence conservation around the alternative CFTR encephalopathies, which in humans includes Creutzfeldt-Jakob exon 10b and WT1 exons 5 and 9. We therefore speculate that high disease (CJD), Gerstman-Sträussler-Scheinker disease (GSS), Kuru conservation of the intronic sequences surrounding exons is related and the recently recognised form of variant CJD (vCJD). Employing to alternative splicing. bioinformatics and direct molecular analysis we demonstrate that the human PrP gene (PRNP) locus, which is situated at chromosome P0448. Differential HFE gene expression in Caco-2 position 20p12-ter, consists of a functional domain of approximately intestinal cells 55 kb containing three genes; PRNP, DOPPEL or PRND located S. Jacolot1,2, G. Le Gac1,2,3, C. Mura1,2; 20 kb 3’ of PRNP and a novel gene, designated HSM8 that maps 1Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire et génétique épidémiologique 3 kb 3’ to PRND and which is transcribed to generate at least three INSERM 0115, Brest, France, 2Université de Bretagne Occidentale, alternatively spliced mRNAs. All three genes of this locus show a Brest, France, 3Etablissement Français du Sang, Brest, France. similar two-exon structure with the protein coding region restricted to The human HFE gene is clearly involved in hereditary the larger exon 2, but low sequence homology implying that although hemochromatosis a common genetic disorder in caucasian they may be evolutionarily related they are functionally distinct. populations which is characterized by duodenal iron hyperabsorption. Analysis of both adult and foetal human tissues confirmed the However, the precise function of the HFE protein and its role in ubiquitous but variable expression profile of PRNP with highest levels the pathogenesis of the disease are still unknown. A possible role observed in the CNS and testis. Contrastingly, although PRND shows in homeostatic iron regulation is suggested by the co-localization a wide tissue expression pattern in foetal tissues, it is exclusively and the interaction of the HFE protein with the transferrin receptor. expressed in adult testis whereas all three HSM8 isoforms were We recently examined the functional organization of the HFE gene only detected in adult testis implying that PRND is developmentally promoter that did not revealed any iron responsive element. Here, regulated. An investigation of the regulatory mechanisms underlying we studied the HFE gene expression in Caco-2 cells along with this complex gene expression pattern from the PRNP locus should differentiation and holo-transferrin treatment. We used Caco-2 cells provide insight into the function of these genes and their involvement that differentiate with morphological and biochemical features of in prion protein diseases. mature intestine enterocytes as a model to study the HFE mRNA expression. We examined the HFE mRNA level using real-time P0451. Evolution of the Homologues to the PKD1 Gene PCR in Caco-2 human intestinal cells grown on polycarbonate N. Bogdanova1, W. Schempp2, A. Markoff3, B. Dworniczak1, J. Horst1; membrane inserts under different transferrin-saturated iron 1Institute of Human Genetics, Münster, Germany, 2Institute of Human conditions. Preliminary studies indicate that HFE mRNA expression Genetics and Anthropology, Freiburg, Germany, 3Intitute of Medical increases untill cells reach confluence then the level decreases Biochemistry,ZMBE, Münster, Germany. after confluence. HFE mRNA is up-regulated when holo-transferrin PKD1 is the first gene responsible for the condition of autosomal was added to the basolateral compartment during 48h before dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) and its gene product RNA extraction, however the up-regulation is observed only till cell is called polycystin 1. There are several homologous genes (HG) confluence. In conclusion, the iron status seems to play a role in to PKD1 which are located proximally to the master gene on the HFE expression before differentiation of intestinal cells that may be same chromosome. The 3’ regions of the HG contain the previously involved in the iron sensing to regulate iron absorption. described chromosome 16-specific low-copy number repeat element, 168 Posters - Gene Structure and Function 169 mapped to chromosome 16 p13, p12, and q22. They share a high focuses on evaluating the frequency and types of mutations induced degree of homology (95% - 97%) to PKD1 over a large genomic by the R-Y tract. segment. We recently showed that these genes are pseudogenes, duplicated in the course of molecular evolution. P0454. Cloning of a novel gene on 3q25-26 with It is known that homologues to PKD1 are not present in mouse and homology to nonsense mediated mRNA decay (NMD) lower species. We therefore sought to perform searches for PKD1 proteins via a RA-induction gene trap approach. homologous sequences in primates in order to reveal at which O. Batista1, W. Wurst2, I. Hansmann1, M. Schlicker1; stage of evolution HG appeared. For this purpose we performed 1Institut für Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie, Halle (Saale), FISH analysis on chromosome spreads from human, chimp, gorilla Germany, 2Max-Planck Institut, München, Germany. and orang-utan using BACs containing human PKD1 homologues For better understanding retinoic acid (RA)/retinoid (RX) induced genes. The expected pattern of signals was obtained by human teratogenesis we set up an RA-induced gene trap approach using and gorilla whereas chimp and orang-utan gave additional signals mouse ES clones (Forrester et al. 1996). One of these trapped clones on different orthologs of the human chromosome 7. The orang-utan showed repressed RA-induced LacZ reporter gene expression. By lacks in addition the signal on the long arm of human chromosome 16 5´ RACE-PCR a fusion transcript was identified which after cloning ortholog. revealed 1081bp upstream sequences of the integration site. A Sequencing analysis of chimp-PKD1 gene revealed more than 1.754 kb cDNA was established from clones identified by screening 99% identity between the master gene and its homologue(s) in the mouse cDNA libraries. This cDNA was used to isolate a human analysed regions. The implication of these results on our knowledge cDNA by screening a fetal brain Marathon cDNA library. Sequence about the evolution of the PKD1 homologues and their possible homology between both cDNAs with an ORF of 1515 nucleotides is function in primates will be discussed. 90%. The putative protein contains 503 aas which are 94% identical between both species. This protein shows high homology to NMD3 P0452. Simultaneous expression of two murine clustered proteins from yeast species and to proteins conserved in drosophila, ADAM family genes, Testase 2a and Testase 2b, during caenorhabditis, arabidopsis and leishmania. We isolated a mouse testicular germ cell development . P1 clone and a human BAC clone and established genomic structure E. Bolcun-Filas1, K. Nayernia1, P. Grzmil2, T. Rzymski1, W. Engel1; of the gene and characterized 5´ and 3´ sequences. The human 1Institut of Human Genetics, University of Goettingen, Germany, approx. 33 kb gene contains 15 exons and 14 introns. Northern 2Department of Genetics and Evolution,Jagiellonian University, analysis revealed a 2.5 kb transcript in mouse embryos from day Krakow, Poland. 8-15 pc in heart and craniofacial tissue of newborns as well as in The ADAM (A Disintegrin and A Metaloprotease domain) family heart and brain of adult mice. Northern analysis of human RNA presents the best characterized candidates for mediating gamete revealed 2 transcripts of 2.7kb and 3.0kb in heart, liver, pancreas, interaction and membrane fusion in mammals. In this study we skeletal muscle and kidney and weaker transcripts in placenta, brain describe the expression patterns of two clustered ADAM family and lung. The novel and potentially RA-repressed gene was FISH genes for testase 2a and testase 2b. Previous studies showed that mapped to chromosome 3q25q26. (O.B. is a recipient of a DAAD murine testase 2 (ADAMA 25) gene is expressed specifically in testis. fellowship.) However, we found two different restriction patterns of subcloned fragment of the gene, suggesting presence of two novel testase P0455. A T-box containing transcription factor on human 2 transcripts. Further experiments and Celera database search chromosome 15q14 identified through a retinoic acid- revealed that these two transcripts are the products of two separate induction gene trap approach. clustered genes, which show high similarity to the published testase A. Voigt1, M. Weickert1, W. Wurst2, I. Hansmann1, M. Schlicker1; 2 ( 87.8% and 95.4%, respectively) and in 87,4% to each other. Both 1Institut für Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie, Halle (Saale), genes are located on chromosome 8 (as well as ADAM 3, ADAM 5, Germany, 2Mack-Planck Institut, München, Germany. ADAM 9) in close distance of 24 kb. Genomic structure of testase 2a Prenatal exposure to retinoic acid (RA) and retinoids (RX) is related and b is different from other ADAM family members, like cyritestin or with specific congenital anomalies. The molecular mechanism for this fertilin which possess around 20 short exons. They are composed of teratogenesis and the genes involved are not well known. To identify only two exons. The first exon is about 85 bp while the second is over such RA/RX downstream genes we set up an RA-induced gene 2.5 kb long. Both genes demonstrate the same temporal and spatial trap approach based on mouse ES clones (Forrester et al. 1996). expression pattern during testicular germ cell development with onset From a sample of trapped ES clones with RA-induced reporter-gene of expression in haploid stages. Further functional analysis of these repression 5´-RACE-PCR identified a fusion transcript of 1.135 kb molecules will contribute not only to a better understanding of the in clone EScD1. Screening of cDNA libraries and in silico analysis molecular mechanisms underlying mammalian sperm-egg fusion but revealed an approx. 9 kb mouse cDNA. This gene represents a also to the development of new methods for both, fertility regulation transcription factor containing a T-box and a bHLH Zip-domain. and diagnosis and treatment of human infertility. Northern analysis revealed tissue specific expression of this single locus gene with transcripts of varying size. A prominent 9.5 kb P0453. PKD1 Unusual DNA Conformations are transcript is present in spleen, kidney, stomach, lung, brain, testis, Recognized by Nucleotide Excision Repair. ovary, placenta, heart and skeletal muscle. Weaker and smaller J. P. Jakupciak1, A. Bacolla2, A. Jaworski2, J. E. Larson2, C. D. transcripts of 7.2 kb were observed in placenta and testis and of O’Connell1, R. D. Wells2; approx. 4 kb in testis indicating alternative splicing. A genomic P1 1National Institute of Standards & Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, clone isolated contains the complete cDNA. Screening of human 2Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Houston, TX. cDNA libraries and in silico analysis identified the corresponding The genetic defects in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney human gene with sequence homology >82% to mouse cDNA. BACs disease (ADPKD) cases are mutations in PKD1, a gene that were isolated for establishing genomic structure and mapping. The encodes a transcript of 14 kilobases from 46 exons spanning 50 kbp gene contains 24 exons, the same domains as the mouse gene on chromosome 16p13.3. The 2.5kbp poly(purine-pyrimidine)(R- and maps to 15q14, according to FISH. The gene was found to Y) tract in intron 21 of the PKD1 gene may contribute to its high be triplicated in a young proband with mental as well as growth mutation frequency. The rate of somatic mutations must be high retardation and malformations due to partial trisomy 15q14-q15. given the frequent occurrence of ADPKD and the very large number of cysts observed, suggesting the existence of a local hot spot for P0456. Characterization of the promoter and new mutagenesis. The poly(R-Y) tract is one of the ten longest sequences isoforms of CACNA1A gene of this kind; it is 66% G-C-rich with 95% C+T in the sense strand L. E. D’Urbano1, S. Guida1, E. Mantuano2, L. Veneziano2, M. Frontali2, and is partly repeated in introns 1 and 22. The tract contains 23 C. Jodice1; mirror repeat sequences, which would be expected to adopt three- 1Tor Vergata University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 2INMM,CNR, Rome, stranded DNA structures with stems of at least 10 bp. In addition, 163 Italy. direct repeat sequences were identified, which may adopt slipped, The CACNA1A gene, coding for the α1A-voltage-dependent calcium mispaired conformations. These DNA conformations were recognized channel subunit type P/Q, is responsible for Episodic Ataxia type as lesions and were cleaved by the NER system. Current work 2 (EA2), Familial Hemiplegic Migraine (FHM) and Spinocerebellar Posters - Gene Structure and Function 170 171 Ataxia type 6 (SCA6). disorder. Spinal cord responses to peripheral electrical stimuli are Several mutations causing these diseases have been described, altered in Kcc2-/-mice as observed in the mouse mutant spastic. In and they account for aminoacid substitutions, protein truncations and wild-type animals, immunofluorescence and electron microscopy small polyglutamine expansions. In addition, families segregating the demonstrated KCC2 expression close to inhibitory synapses. Patch- disease with the CACNA1A, but not showing any mutations in the clamp measurements of spinal cord motoneurons demonstrated an coding region, have also been found. For this reason we started the excitatory GABA and glycine action in the absence, but not in the characterization of the regulating regions of this gene as possible presence of KCC2. This shows that the functional GABA/glycine sites for mutations. switch in the spinal cord occurs earlier than in the hippocampus. It Through bioinformatic analysis of sequences upstream the first depends crucially on the expression of KCC2, and is indispensable coding exon of the gene, two candidate regions have been identified. for the normal function of motor circuits already at birth. Primer extension experiments have shown a band of about 300 bp suggesting a transcription starting site at 250-300 bp upstream to P0459. The putative mechanisms determining exon 1. The characterization of this region is ongoing. ceruloplasmin gene expression in mammals The CACNA1A gene shows a considerable complexity of ribotypes. N. E. Gyulikhandanova1, O. V. Voronina1, V. S. Babich1, A. V. Vasin2, Different isoforms may be associated with different channel activity, L. V. Puchkova1; as demonstrated in the rabbit. The characterization of different splice 1Research Institute for Experimental Medicine, St. Petersburg, variants and of splice enhancer sites will increase the chances to Russian Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Technical University, St. detect non coding mutations in FHM or EA2 patients. Petersburg, Russian Federation. Comparison of different cDNA clones selected with CACNA1A The numerous of tissue specific extracellular molecular forms of specific probes from an adult cerebellar and a total fetal brain cDNA ceruloplasmin (Cp, multicopper ferroxidase) and its membrane libraries, revealed the presence of new isoforms. Characterization of isoforms: glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchor Cp, receptor Cp isoforms at the 5’ end has been performed. and intracellular membrane Cp-like ferroxidase, play a central This work was supported by Telethon grant E847. role in copper transport through body as well as iron metabolism. Perhaps they are the products of the single Cp gene copy in P0457. Detection Of Rps4x Gene Expression Using Rt-pcr haploid chromosome number whose mutations lead to various S. Yakut1, S. B. Karauzum1, F. C. Sargin1, O. Taskin2, S. Tacoy3, G. neurodegeneration disorders. In this work the structure analysis Luleci1; of Cp gene promote region (4000 bp upstream transcription start 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical point) was carried out by the original programs for identification and Biology and Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of mapping cis-elements potentially taking part in gene regulation. The Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Antalya, Turkey, sequence specific sites for the nuclear receptors of 9-cis-retinoic 3Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, acid and thyroid hormone and sites for specific protein expression Antalya, Turkey. in liver, lung and mammary gland were found and these localization Ribozomal protein S4 (RPS4X) gene is located on chromosome were mapped. The structure and localization of these sites are very X and escapes from X inactivation. Thus, insufficient expression similar in rat and human. In vivo experiments shown that estradiol of RPS4X may play a role in development of Turner syndrome, stimulated Cp transcription and translation in the rat liver to 3 folds. the complex human phenotype associated with monosomy X. In The selective interaction of the hormone responsible elements with this study we have investigated RPS4X gene expression levels in soluble nuclear proteins isolated from liver and brain newborn and peripheral blood of 21 patients with 46,XX karyotype and Turner adult rats was demonstrated by gel-shift assays. The similar results phenotype or its predominant feature primary amenorrhea by RT- were obtained for transcription factors isolated from rat mammary PCR, while two 45,X individuals were studied as control subjects gland during lactation. to be able to compare the expression levels as we expect lower The role of Cp gene tissue specific activity in the safe turnover of the levels of RPS4X gene expression in 45,X patients due to a single copper and iron in mammals is discussed. X chromosome.We found different expression levels in 7 of our 21 patients, 6 of which were diagnosed to have primary amenorrhea P0460. Investigation of chromosomal DNA loop while 1 had a Turner phenotype, yet observed an increased level organization within a region of human chromosome of expression in one of the 45,X control patients as well. Based on 16q22.1 our results, we debate whether haploinsufficieny of RPS4X is the S. Shaposhnikov1, E. Frengen2, P. Thomsen3, V. Zverev1, H. Prydz2; cause of Turner syndrome or not, and plan to perform sequence 1Research Institute for Viral Preparations, Russian Academy of analysis to investigate any possible sequence defects which could Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Biotechnology be responsible for the change in the level of expression in RPS4X Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 3The Royal gene in our cases. Our results were discussed comparatively with the Veterinary and Agricultural University, Copenhagen, Denmark. previously reported data. We have previously generated a 2.8 Mb high-resolution map surrounding the LCAT gene cluster on human chromosome 16q22.1 P0458. Disruption of KCC2 reveals an essential role of (Frengen, Rocca-Serra, Shaposhnikov, et al., Genomics 70:273- K-Cl-cotransport in synaptic inhibition. 285, 2000). We suggest that the tight organization of the LCAT gene C. A. Hübner1,2, V. Stein1, I. Hermans-Borgmeyer1, T. J. Jentsch1; cluster has biological significance. The domain organization of this 1ZMNH, Hamburg, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Hamburg, chromosome region is currently analyzed by COMET-FISH and by Germany. the topoisomerase II-mediated DNA loop excision protocol. COMET- Synaptic inhibition is crucial for the control and modulation of FISH is gel-electrophoresis of DNA from a single nucleus, which is neuronal activity. Disturbing the interplay between excitation and lysed on microscope slide to produce nucleoids. The nucleoids are inhibition causes various neurological disorders. GABA and glycine electrophoresed extending the loops into tails. Subsequent FISH are the main inhibitory neurotransmitters of the adult central nervous allows mapping of specific DNA sequences/genes from the LCAT system. Synaptic inhibition by GABAA and glycine receptors, which region relative to the DNA loops. We are also using a complementary are ligand-gated Cl- channels, depends on the intracellular chloride approach, which is based on the ability of cellular topoisomerase concentration ([Cl-]i). High [Cl-]i can lead to excitatory GABA II to cleave DNA in the presence of several anticancer agents. The responses that are deemed to be important during development. cleavage sites are associated with regions of DNA attachment to the Several potassium-chloride cotransporters can lower [Cl-]i, including nuclear skeleton, thus indicating DNA loop anchorage sites. Analysis the neuronal isoform KCC2, which was substantiated by antisense of the topoisomerase II cleavage sites within the region therefore experiments in vitro. Analysis of the expression pattern of KCC2 permits mapping of the domain organization. Human cells have during murine embryonic and postnatal development by in situ been exposed to topoisomerase II inhibitor, the DNA from the cells hybridization and Western blot analysis, shows that KCC2 parallels was cleaved with restriction enzymes, separated by pulsed field gel neuronal differentiation and precedes the functional GABA switch. electrophoresis, blotted, and hybridized with probes from our map. Neonate KCC2 knockout (Kcc2-/-) mice die due to severe motor This dual approach allows exploration of the topological organization deficits including loss of respiration. Sciatic nerve recordings of the region of human chromosome 16q22.1 and permits correlation reveal abnormal spontaneous electrical activity indicating a spastic of the structural architecture to the functional organization of the DNA.170 Posters - Genetic Counselling and Genetic Education 171 P0461. A transgenic mouse model overexpressing the With the methods of interview and testing there were investigated 58 human prune gene in epidermis. families of children with mucopolyssharidosis,Gaucher disease,leuc A. Andre’1, A. D’Angelo1, E. Marra1, V. Aglio1, S. Olivieri2, G. Arrigoni2, odystrophies.The interview showed that the diagnosis in more cases A. Ballabio1, M. Zollo1; were late ,the parents worried the delayed physical development 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy, of their child,mental retardation ,behavior changes,haemorrhagic 2HSR San Raffaele, Laboratorio di Anatomia Patologica, Milan, Italy. diathesis.The parents need multidisciplinary team of specialists for Transgenic mice have proven to be a powerful system to study treatment their child.To help the doctors and themself the parents normal and pathological functions of genes. We have previously organisated Association for Gaucher disease ,which support the reported the isolation and characterization of the human PRUNE introdussing the Enzyme replacement therapy.The adult patients with gene. Furthermore we have found by “in vitro” experiments that Gaucher diseases had not possibility for ERT. The support of bulbar overexpression of prune increases proliferation in NIH3T3 cells. muscle function were the most important problems by children with The human PRUNE gene is located in the 1q21.3 chromosomal leucodystrophies region, in the epidermis cluster locus where two skin disorders The prenatal diagnosis in these families was very important and have been mapped: (AD) atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. Prune support the parents for a new life.The evaluated psychosocial is expressed in the adult human skin and, in particular, in the problems of patients with lysosomal diseases will be used for basal and granular layers. For these reasons we have cloned recommendations against Ministry of health and Work and Social the human PRUNE cDNA under the control of a peculiar loricrin care. promoter, which drive the expression of the transgene both in the undifferentiated and differentiated layers of the skin. Four P0464. Genetic Counselling for acute infective disease founders lines have been obtained and morphological studies are during pregnancy. Experience of a Italian Genetic Centre in progress by Immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis with anti-prune on 11 years of activity. Ab, keratinocytes markers (K14, K1, K6) and proliferative markers S. Belli1, M. Brugnara1, S. Fiorenza2; (example Ki67). BrdU “in vivo” uptake analysis and apoptosis 1Genetic Centre, Trento, Italy, 2Dep. Morphological Sciences, TUNEL assays will be performed to define if prune may interfere University Modena, Modena, Italy. with apoptosis. Furthermore previous unpublished results have At the Genetic Centre of Trento, from 1990 to half 2001, 1124 Genetic shown a defect in the skin of SCID mice by the use of retrovirus Counselling have been performed about exposure to possible technology. A dominant negative mutation of prune protein (PRUNE- teratogenous factors, 87 cases of which regarding acute infective D) affecting its PDE activity, results in a specific alteration of the disease on pregnancy: 46 cases of herpetic infection , 18 of rubella, cell cycle proliferation and differentiation of the SCID hair follicles. 11 cases of parotitis, 4 cases of hepatitis, 3 infections of parvovirus, 2 For this reason the mutated prune gene has been cloned under the of salmonellosis and 1 case of measles, tuberculosis and borreliosis. same promoter and used for the generation of a dominant negative The average age of the woman arrived at the Genetic Centre for transgenic mouse. acute infective disease was 31 years and 2 months. Chicken-pox: 41 genetic counselling: 8 virus exposures not followed P 8. Genetic Counselling and Genetic Education by disease; 2 induced abortions; 1 spontaneous abortion; 2 new born with congenital malformations; 5 pregnancies still on going; 5 cases P0462. Medical Genetics WebLab lost at follow-up; 20 healthy children. M. DeArce, T. Logan-Phelan, R. Power; Rubella virus: 18 genetic counselling; 8 virus exposures not followed Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. by disease; 6 induced abortions; 4 infections not confirmed. WebLab is a problem-based on-line course in Medical Genetics, Parotitis virus: 11 genetic counselling; in 2 cases maternal infection including original simulations of tests and relevant internet links. The has been excluded; 2 women were not pregnant at the time of course contains >100 problems, and tools to solve them. This is an infection; 5 healthy children ; 2 cases lost at follow-up. abridged description. The course is free. The last 17 pregnancies are resolved in: 16 healthy children and 1 There are four chapters. In ‘Cytogenetics’ the student finds banded case lost at follow-up. metaphases and FISH results from constitutional, acquired and Conclusions: 1) the most represented average age is quite elevated, prenatal cases. A photo-viewer allows to ‘cut and paste’ the since the women were not primipare. Infact, infection disease is chromosomes in a word document, making a karyotype. Clinical mostly transmitted by another child of the couple. 2) rubella virus databases put the karyotype in context. The Human Genome is vaccine reduces the number of epidemic by wild virus, so women not searched for clones suitable for making FISH probes for the regions vaccinated have less probabilities to contract disease but more risk in of interest. pregnancy. In ‘Pedigrees’, risk calculation is introduced through a series of pedigrees, including linked markers. A web page calculates risks P0465. The questionnaire to parents of children with using Bayes theorem. the Down syndrome: how to inform the parents and The ‘DNA Lab’ includes a ‘virtual freezer’ with DNA sequence from psychological responses to counseling families with mutations on the CFTR or FMRX genes. The sequences I. Dimofte1, L. C. Enache2, D. P. Balaban3, V. Broasca Madar4; are not immediately readable but require the use of an original 1Medical Genetics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Constanta, ‘virtual electrophoresis lab’ where four tests can be carried out on the Romania, 2Cell and Molecular Biology Deparment, UMF “Gr.T.Popa”, samples in the freezer; heteroduplex analysis, denaturing gradient gel Iasi, Romania, 3Biochemistry Department, Faculty of Medicine, electrophoresis, sequencing and Southern blotting on double digests Constanta, Romania, 4Management and Public Health Department, (EcoRI and EagI) with probe StB12.3. Faculty of Medicine, Constanta, Romania. Lastly, the ‘Protein Lab’ contains among other items links to metabolic This study determined the experience of the 53 sets of parents when pathway they were informed that their child had Down syndrome and how they charts, 3D viewers, and protein alignment programs. Access to would have preferred this matter to have been handled. all these tools is made for the purpose of solving specific clinical The survey revealed that the majority of parents would have preferred problems. being told as soon as possible, with both of them present, and that they had suspected something wrong at the birth of the child. P0463. Psychosocial care of lysosomal disorders in This information prompted us to analyse critically the parental Bulgaria experiences and to formulate a positive approach with sensitive, M. K. S. I. Ivanova; supportive and progressive counseling. Clinical genetics, Sofia, Bulgaria. Psychosocial problems of genetic disorders in Bulgaria are severe P0466. Experiences, at the time of diagnosis, of parents and not good known.They were created on the base of their who have a child with a bone dysplasia resulting in short complexity by different diseases , the bad medical information of stature. the Society and the medical doctors sometimes and the stress of V. L. Hill1,2, M. Sahhar2,3, M. Aitken1,2, R. Savarirayan2,3, S. Metcalfe1,2; the parents.The aim of our work is to investigate the psychosocial 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, problems in families with children with lysosomal diseases. Australia, 2Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Posters - Genetic Counselling and Genetic Education 172 173 Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, condition, including a wide range of non-fracture problems. Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. In semi-structured interviews, 65 % of GPs felt that lack of knowledge There has been extensive literature pertaining to the time of diagnosis was a problem in managing these patients. 78% believed that they of a disability and the levels of satisfaction with disclosure of a changed their practice, mainly by referring patients more often or disability. The information given and the attitudes of the disclosing attempting to learn more about the condition. A variety of sources health professionals during this critical period can have a significant of knowledge were used, the most common being clinic letters, effect on the family. This study explored parents‘ experience of being textbooks and the WWW. told that their child had a bone dysplasia resulting in short stature, When asked to identify features of information resources that made and discussed ways of improving this experience for families. them useful, aspects related to credibility (perception that information Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 11 families. Families is true) were not seen as more important than accessibility or clinical were recruited through the Bone Dysplasia Clinic at the Royal significance. Credibility was assessed by most GPs using authority Children‘s Hospital, Victoria, Australia and via contact with the Short (from a trusted source) rather than transparency (use of references Statured People‘s Association of Victoria. They were asked about etc). how they were told of their child‘s diagnosis and what effect that had These results will be used in a follow up study to construct and on them and their families. Parents were asked about how they would validate clinical genetics knowledge resources. have preferred to have been told and what would have made the experience less distressing. Of particular interest to the researchers P0469. FOXL2-Mutations in Blepharophimosis-Ptosis- was the role of information in making the experience less distressing Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome (BPES) - Challenges for for the families. Transcripts of the interviews were analysed, and genetic counselling of sporadic female patients major themes were identified relating to the parents‘ experiences. S. Fokstuen, S. E. Antonarakis, J. Blouin; We conclude that the manner in which the diagnosis is conveyed to Division of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Geneva, parents plays an important role in their adjustment and acceptance Switzerland. of the diagnosis. The provision of appropriate written information Mutations in the forkhead transcription factor gene (FOXL2) were relating to the condition, possible medical complications, positive recently reported to cause blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus outlook for their child‘s future, how to find social services and inversus syndrome (BPES) types I and II. Evidence was provided supports were some of the significant issues for the parents. that type I BPES (eyelid abnormalities and female infertility) is caused by mutations resulting in a truncated FOXL2 protein. In contrast, P0467. To tell or not to tell: a qualitative study exploring extension of the FOXL2 protein is found in type II BPES, in which the passing on of genetic knowledge to family members. fertility is generally normal. This genotype/phenotype correlation S. A. Simpson, K. Forrest, N. Haites, E. van Teijlingen, B. Wilson, L. provides challenges for genetic counselling, as molecular testing may McKee, E. Matthews; be predictive of female fertility. University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom. We report a 32-year-old female patient with sporadic BPES and Background: Anecdotal evidence from genetic counsellors suggests a history of menstrual irregularities and periods of secondary that some people tell their relatives genetic risk information, whilst amenorrhoea. Mutation analysis revealed a protein extending others do not. Similarly people tell some of their relatives, but mutation (c959-960insG) in the FOXL2 gene with a modified not others. This issue is important because individuals might be sequence for the last 57 amino acids, suggesting a type II BPES disadvantaged emotionally, socially, financially or medically by having despite the menstrual irregularities. The clinical presentation of our this information withheld or disclosed and conflicts may arise within patient and of three female patients with type II BPES described families if some cannot accept a parent’s or sibling’s right to privacy. by De Baere et al. (Hum Mol Genet, 10, 1591-600; 2001) indicate Methods: In-depth interviews were undertaken with people who have phenotypic overlap between type I and type II BPES. These received genetic counselling for risk of Huntington’s disease and observations question clear-cut prediction of female fertility based hereditary breast/ovarian cancer, and their partners. The interviews on molecular results, particularly in sporadic female patients with explored whether relatives had or had not been told their risk by irregular menstruation and in young women referred for evaluation of participants; the factors which influenced telling or not telling; who facial dysmorphism. should tell; and views of genetic counselling. As a consequence, FOXL2 mutation testing in female patients of Results: In total, 36 consultands and 19 partners were interviewed. child-bearing age with BPES should be handled with caution and The analysis confirms clinicians observations that people tell a two-step genetic counselling approach including a first pre-test some relatives but not others. Data related to telling or not telling information session is proposed. different relatives will be presented. Respondents’ views about whose responsibility it is to pass on this type of information will be P0470. Is Genetic Counselling Unbiased? A 36-Nation particularly explored. Survey Conclusions: The level of disclosure to relatives can at times be D. C. Wertz; limited but also depends on the psychosocial, familial and disease University of Massachusetts Medical School, Waltham, MA. context. Disclosure, moreover, should be viewed as a process of Nondirectiveness has long been the ethically preferred approach telling as opposed to a dichotomy of ‘telling’ versus ‘not telling’. in reproductive genetic counseling. Patients are expected to make Ultimately, we hope this study will contribute towards a wider their own decisions, using unbiased information. To ascertain the understanding into the dynamics within families after someone in that attitudes of genetics professionals worldwide toward directiveness family attends for genetic counselling. in counseling after prenatal diagnosis, we used anonymous mail questionnaire surveys with case vignettes in 12 languages, P0468. A study of information needs of primary care distributed by colleagues in 36 nations with ten or more practicing physicians (GPs) for management of a rare genetic medical geneticists (n=4629). Questionnaires presented 21 disorder: Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI). - Preliminary conditions identified after prenatal diagnosis and asked how the data respondent would counsel. 2906 geneticists (63%), including 1084 P. Zack; in US (70%) and 499 US nongeneticist physicians (59%) responded. Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom. Except in North America, the UK, and Australia, many geneticists Does lack of knowledge form an important barrier to primary care reported that they would be both directive and pessimistic for many management of a genetic disorder, and if so, how can we overcoming conditions, especially in Eastern Europe and Asia. In the UK, 10% it? These questions were addressed using qualitative and quantitative would counsel in favor of abortion for Trisomy 21; in Northern Europe, methods. 34%; in Southern Europe, 47%; in Eastern Europe, 63%. For cystic Parents of all children with OI in Greater London were contacted fibrosis, percents were 10%, 33%, 43%, and 63% respectively, and and their consent requested. From a total of 59, consent was gained for Huntington disease 10%, 21%, 34%, and 48%. Most regarded from 37 (63%). Details of over 1000 clinical encounters (including educational success of a session as more important than empathy or telephone) were extracted from hospital and GP notes for a 5-year support; many thought their goal was to prevent the birth of children period. Mean GP contacts were 3.8/yr, compared with 3.2/yr at the with genetic conditions, by prenatal diagnosis and selective abortion specialist hospital clinic. Many (31%) GP contacts were related to the if necessary. Although internationally recognized ethical standards 172 Posters - Genetic Counselling and Genetic Education 173 support counseling that is as unbiased as possible, it appears that are proportionally more prevalent there than elsewhere. Myotonic many geneticists would use other approaches. There is a need for dystrophy and familial hypercholesterolemia figure among the most global discussion of optimum counseling approaches. frequent dominant diseases; cytochrome oxidase deficiency, spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay, type 1 tyrosinemia, sensorimotor P0471. Evaluating Internet Information on Down neuropathy with agenesis of the corpus callosum as well as cystic Syndrome: Descriptive criteria are not enough fibrosis are the recessive diseases which have been observed. A. Zahn1, J. Kunze2, J. Pelz1; With a view to better understand this problematic and seek solutions 1Reformstudiengang Medizin, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, to it, parents, researchers and health professionals have regrouped, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Charité Campus Virchow, twenty years ago, to create the Corporation for Research and Action Berlin, Germany. on Hereditary Diseases (CORAMH). This organization’s mission is Because of the huge number of websites, it is difficult to find relevant to promote awareness, information and prevention of these health information on the internet which supports coping with genetic problems in the population. conditions. There are also concerns about the quality of the medical To achieve this goal, one of CORAMH’s activity encloses the information available in the internet. Therefore, many authors dissemination of a genetics information program, which consists in published criteria mainly descriptive ones for rating medical websites. presentations on basic notions related to heredity and monogenic But many problems persist: diseases present in the region. Every year, through the program, Data can change quickly; there is no way to search the internet CORAMH provides information to over 2500 youngsters in academic entirely; it is not clear who should set criteria and control websites; environments. Since the beginning of the program in 1983, almost 30 indirect markers of quality like the numbers of links to a site or the 000 people have received information via the latter. number of visitors a day are easy to manipulate. Moreover, it is CORAMH is also the community partner of an important research unknown if such criteria reflect the quality of medical information. program called ECOGENE-21: From DNA to the community. In After having conducted a search for “Down syndrome” with two this regard, the corporation plays an essential role in the transfer search engines and in two languages (Altavista and Yahoo in of knowledge between the universe of scientists and that of the German and in English), we investigated 324 hits using a catalogue community. of medical, psychosocial and formal criteria drawn from pediatric textbooks and litterature. P0474. Genetic Counselling: A case report. A dilemma Formal criteria were more often met than medical or psychosocial between Science and Ethics criteria. Neither the medical content nor the psychosocial content of M. R. V. C. Pinto Leite1, M. Martins1, M. Souto2, E. Ribeiro2; websites correlated with the formal content. Beyond that, there were 1Hospital S. Pedro, Vila Real, Portugal, 2Hospital S: Pedro, Vila Real, no important correlation between the search engine ranking and the Portugal. catalogue ranking. However, authorship, language and search engine Male with 46, XX chromosome constitution is a rare disorder, influenced the information score. occurring only 1 in 20.000 newborn males. Affected individuals Descriptive parameters are useful but cannot replace an analysis by have a male phenotype, small testes and small phallus. This an expert since they don´t correlate automatically with a website´s disorder resembles Klinefelter Syndrome. Approximately 80% of medical content. Combining formal description with expert review is phenotipycally XX males, one of the X chromosomes carries the SRY necessary. gene. The authors present a case of a prenatal diagnosis, which P0472. The theoretical and normative foundations of cytogenetic result was 46, XX. The amniocentese was performed at genetic counselling - completing a jigsaw puzzle without 14 weeks of gestation with the indication of advanced maternal age. The diagnosis was made with the routine GTG banding. a picture. A morphological ultrassonography made at 21 weeks of gestation H. S. Hasan; showed a fetus with a visible phallus and testis, with normal Centre for Medical Ethics, Oslo, Norway. development. Maternal contamination was excluded. The speciality of genetic counselling is paradigmatic in many aspects. After birth, the confirmation of the cytogenetic diagnosis was done As a fairly recent member on the medical frontier its practitioners are in cord blood, and with FISH studies using the SRY probe- the SRY pioneers of an evolving ethos. gene was localized at the Xp chromosome. Upon examination of the theoretical foundations of genetic How and when should the information be given to the parents? counselling there appears to be an absence of a formal ethical The authors present their perspective in the social and ethics issues framework. This is further highlighted by the lack of presence of a and genetic counselling in this particularly case. formal implementation of the four main bioethical principles that are commonly perceived to govern good clinical practice. The normative foundations of genetic counselling rely heavily on the formality that P0475. The study of the prevalence of different types of lies within the code of ethics by which a genetic counsellor practises. disorders with different proportions of pathogenetic role There is a commendable objective for the counsellor to be adequately of genetic factors in families with severe reproductive trained in order to deliver the best service they can, however, it is not disorders sufficient to have good intentions. S. Vilimova, P. Potuznikova, M. Macek, sr.; This paper will explore the implications and importance of having a Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of 2nd Medical School and formal ethical framework and whether it can be universally attainable. of University Hospital Motol of Charles University, Prague, Czech It will question if regulating the ethics of conduct is a sufficient activity Republic. or whether the professionals (genetic counsellors and geneticists) The aim of this pilot study is the ascertainment of different types have a parallel duty to define boundaries (and thereby dispelling of genetic load in 307 families with 2482 members of partners with possible ambiguities and inconsistencies in clinical practice), and severe reproductive disorders. The three generation genealogy debate the desirability (and feasibility) for these boundaries to be including only first degree relatives did not find any disorders with independent of the laws of society and public opinion. Mendelian or multifactorial inheritance or solid tumors in 51/307 families (16.6%). In 142/307 families (46.3%) only one disorder P0473. Community genetics in Saguenay-Lac-St- was found. In 114/307 families (37.1%) two or three disorders were Jean(Quebec,Canada) revealed. N. Tremblay1, C. Prevost1,2, A. Vigneault1, D. Gaudet1,3; Monogenic diseases were found in 56/2482 (2.26%) of family 1Corporation for Research and Action on Hereditary Diseases members with most frequent prevalence of cystic fibrosis and ECOGENE 21 Project, Chicoutimi, PQ, Canada, 2Genetic and carriers of CFTR mutations (10/2482), (5/2482), different Counselling, Complexe hospitalier de la Sagamie, Chicoutimi, PQ, thromboembolic diseases (17/2482). Myotonic dystrophy, polycystic Canada, 3University of Montreal Preventive and Community Genomic kidney disease, hearing deffects, M. Scheuermann and idiopathic Medicine Center, Chicoutimi, PQ, Canada. thrombocytopenic purpura were found in 4-7/2482. Multifactorial Historical and demographic phenomena explain that certain disorders were revealed in 94/2482 with rather equal proportion hereditary diseases are specific to the Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean region of congenital anomalies (48/2482) an other diseases (46/2482). (Quebec, Canada) while others, although not peculiar to a region, Congenital anomalies of cardiovascular and uropoetic system were Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 174 175 disclosed in 11 - 16/2482 respectively and congenital hip luxation P0478. Understanding of risk by patients and physicians in 10/2482. In multifactorial diseases prevailed immunity disorders - how to raise the haze of Bayes? (90/2482), cardiovascular diseases (76/2482) and type 2 diabetes J. Pelz; mellitus (58/2482). In different types of tumors (89/2482) prevailed Reformstudiengang Medizin, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany. tumors of gastrointestinal system (23/2482), breast carcinoma with Genetic tests become increasingly accessible. Possible benefits gynaecologic tumors (31/2482) and tumors of urogenital system of testing for susceptibility to chronic disease may be substantially (10/2482). The hematopoetic malignancies represented only 7/89 outweighed by confusion raised by test results. The concept of patients with malignancies. sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive value of a test are Further study of different types of genetic loads might contribute to all complex and therefore not necessarily understandable to an the elucidation of their family impact on reproductive disorders and uninitiated patient. On the other Hand in order to make informed vice versa to the improved genetic counselling and genetic care for decisions on participation in genetic screening programs and in families with these problems. prenatal diagnosis patients should be told about these concepts. Study was supported by grants: 00000064203, 111300003, LN- Moreover several studies have shown that even physicians have a 00A079, IGA6462-3, IGA6411-3 poor understanding of probabilities and the predictive value of test results. Gigerenzer and coworkers hypothesised that due to human P0476. Play The Odds : Don’t Bet Everything On The evolutionary development mental algorithms were not designed for Apparent Syndrome probabilities and a Bayesian reasoning but for the understanding of P. Blanchet1, M. Mondain2, N. Pallares-Ruiz3, P. Sarda1, M. natural frequencies. Claustres3, A. F. Roux3; In order to test their hypothesis for genetic counselling four 1Genetics Department - Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, problems were presented to more than 200 of our fellow students France, 2Pediatric ORL Department - Gui de Chauliac Hospital, (representatives of an upper-middle class lay population) either as Montpellier, France, 3Molecular Genetics Department - IURC, probabilities or as natural frequencies: (1) positive triple test and Montpellier, France. the risk of trisomy 21, (2) insulin dependent diabetes mellitus and We have studied two cases referred for multiple congenital anomalies DR3/DR4, (3) breast cancer and BRCA1/BRCA2, (4) inheritance of associated with profound deafness. Case 1 : the child was born in familial polyposis and symptom free ageing. Participants received in 1990 and presented a ventricular septal defect, camptodactyly of the a randomised order all four problems, two presented as probabilities toes, right embryotoxon, bifid uvula with submucous cleft palate and and two as natural frequencies. They generally ranked the natural facial dysmorphism. At one year, she presented an acute polyarthritis frequency questions as less difficult and yielded a significant better affecting both large and small joints. At the age of 7 years, she understanding of the risk. The representation of complex concepts was evaluated in the genetics department. Karyotyping with probe in natural frequencies rather than in probabilities can improve the D22S75 showed a 22q11 deletion and the sensorineural deafness, understanding of patients and of physicians. diagnosed at the age of 9 months, was thought to be related to this 22q11 deletion. Case 2 : the patient was born in august 2001, 7th P 9. Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics child of first cousins parents. The child was diagnosed with Down syndrome (47,XY,+21) with atrial septal defect. Additional tests were P0479. VNTR Cassette Sequence Diversity In The performed for known familial history of vesico-renal reflux (VRR), European R408W-1.8 And R408W-2.3 Phenylketonuria myopia and deafness. The child was shown to have also VRR, optic Mutation Lineages nerve hypoplasia and deafness. Despite the context of syndromic D. T. Croke1, O. Tighe1, C. O’Neill2, P. Mayne2; associated anomalies, we tested the GJB2 gene (CX26) to evaluate 1Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, 2The the origin of the profound deafness. Both cases were found to be Children’s Hospital, Temple Street, Dublin, Ireland. homozygote for the 35delG mutation. R408W, the predominant European Phenylalanine Hydroxylase (PAH) mutation in Phenylketonuria (PKU), has arisen by recurrent P0477. The meaning of ‘prevention’ in the realm of human mutation on chromosomes of haplotypes 2.3 and 1.8. The R408W- genetics 2.3 and R408W-1.8 mutations exhibit west-east and east-west clinal B. Press, J. Pelz; distributions across Europe respectively. Crucial evidence for the Reformstudiengang Medizin, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany. origin of R408W by recurrent mutation was provided by a previous Within the specialities of medicine human genetics is one of report [Byck et al. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1994; 3: 1675-1677.], which the youngest. The introduction of its concepts and its molecular demonstrated that R408W had arisen on a rare VNTR cassette methods has an influence on medical thinking and the use of basic sequence variant of haplotype 1.8. We have investigated VNTR medical concepts. Genetic research is highly interdisciplinary and sequence variation across a range of European populations. DNA collaborative which makes necessary the communication between samples (n=141) from thirteen European regions were obtained geneticists, various academic disciplines and the public. The (with appropriate ethical approval) in collaboration with the members informational content of technical terms, which have a (nearly) clear of the European PAH VNTR cassette sequence variation study meaning in the realm of medicine in general, is liable to be garbled group. VNTR alleles were amplified by PCR, gel-purified and cycle- when transferred to and uncritically used within human genetics. One sequenced in forward and reverse orientation. Cassette sequences of the technical terms we focussed on is ‘prevention’, which e.g. as were identified according to the standard nomenclature. VNTR-3 primary prevention means keeping a disease from occurring at all alleles exhibited a single cassette organisation (a2-b2-c1) common by removing risk factors but in human genetics especially in prenatal to all chromosomes whether of wild-type or R408W mutant genotype. diagnosis is mainly understood as prevention of the ill. In contrast, wild-type VNTR-8 alleles had two different cassette Fourteen scenarios were developed from genetic counselling before structures represented within the study cohort at roughly equal conception to abortion of a child with trisomy 21. Three groups of frequency, namely (a1)5-b3-b2-c1 and (a1)5-b5-b2-c1. R408W-1.8 students of medicine differing in their level of clinical and theoretical chromosomes exhibited the (a1)5-b5-b2-c1 VNTR structure alone experience (1st, 3rd and 6th years of medical education) were but were associated with different STR alleles compared to wild- interviewed using these scenarios in a structured questionnaire. type 1.8 chromosomes. These data confirm the earlier suggestion Confounders, concepts of disease and assessment of human that recurrent mutation gave rise to R408W mutations on different genetics in the realm of medicine were recorded. haplotype backgrounds in Europe and raise interesting questions About 50% of the study group made a distinction between prevention regarding the relative ages of the R408W-1.8 and -2.3 lineages. of a disease and ‘prevention’ of a (genetically)diseased human being, while on the other hand rating human genetics highly responsible P0480. Haplotype Diversity of the Y-chromosome in Four for the prevention of genetically caused diseases. The judgement of Mexican Populations the different scenarios by the participants was done without a clear H. Rangel-Villalobos1, L. Sandoval2, B. Ibarra2, J. Ana Rebeca2, A. concept of ‘prevention’. Gonzalez-Martin3, L. Figuera2; 1Centro Universitario de la Cienega (CUCI-UdeG), Ocotlán, Jalisco, Mexico, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica de Occidente (IMSS), 174 Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 175 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico, 3Universidad Autonoma del Estado de places, including the capital (Ponta Delgada) and other rural Hidalgo, Hidalgo, Mexico. communities (Achada, Bretanha, Furnas, Ginetes, Maia, Nordeste, The non-pseudoautosomal region of the Y-chromosome constitutes a Rabo-de-Peixe, Povoação, Salga and Sete Cidades), were chosen genetic record easily interpretable to obtain valuable anthropological according to population size and geographic isolation. Isonymy (I), information about the history of worldwide populations. Two bi-allelic inbreeding coefficient (Fst), coefficient of kinship between locations loci (YAP and DYS199) and five STRs (DYS19, 389a, 390, 391 (Ri), Fisher’s α (α), Karlin-McGregor ν (ν) and Nei’s distance were and 393) of the non-pseudoautosomal region of the Y-chromosome calculated. Salga presents the highest values of isonymy (0.0576) were analyzed in males from the largest and most widely distributed and Fst (0.0144) and the lowest value of α (17.36). Sete Cidades population in Mexico (Mestizos) and from three Mexican Amerindian presents the highest value of ν (0.130). Moreover, 51% of Salga’s tribes: Huichols, Purepechas and Tarahumaras. The allelic population and 52% of Sete Cidades’s population are represented distribution of all seven loci was established and it was pairwise by 6 and 8 surnames, respectively. These results demonstrate the compared between populations. For YAP locus, any significant effective isolation and high rates of emigration of these two places, difference (p> 0.05) was observed among all four populations. The located in opposite edges of the San Miguel island. In contrast, the Amerindian-specific allele DYS199-T was more frequent in Mexican capital shows the lowest values of isonymy (0.0128), Fst (0.0032) tribes than in Mestizos, establishing the minimum Amerindian and ν (0.0136) and the highest value of α (78.13). Our analysis component in the Mestizo sample as 18.6%. Tarahumaras were suggests a high degree of inbreeding in rural communities of San peculiar by its diminished frequency for DYS199-T respecting to Miguel island which often constitute a model for genetic mapping Purepechas and Huichols. Mexican Mestizos were different (p<0.05) studies. (claudia.branco@clix.pt) to Huichols, Purepechas and Tarahumaras in five, four and two STRs, respectively. Eighty-eight different haplotypes were observed P0483. G6PD mutations and UDPGT1 promoter among the 156 haplotypes obtained. They were grouped in three polymorphism among G6PD deficient Kuwaitis haplogroups according to the markers YAP (+/-) and DYS199 (C/T): E. Samilchuk1, I. Al-Suliman1, E. Usanga2, S. Al-Awadi1; -/C, -/T and +/C. The greater haplotype diversity (D) was observed 1Kuwait Medical Genetics Centre, Ministry of Health, Kuwait, 2Faculty in Mestizos (98.6 %) and the lower in Huichols (87.17 %). The of Allied Health, Kuwait University, Kuwait. haplotype variation of the Y-chromosome in Mexican populations Glucose-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is caused was analyzed by AMOVA. The inter-population and intra-population by mutations in the G6PD gene. The clinical manifestation of variations were significant (p<0.0001) and constituted the 78.5% and G6PD deficiency may be influenced by a (TA)n polymorphisn in a 21.5%, respectively. We discuss our findings with previous results promoter of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1 (UDPGT1) gene. about the same populations using autosomal markers (Hum. Biol. The (TA)7 allele is associated with increase in the incidence of 2000, 72: 983-995). neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia in G6PD deficient newborns. To analyze G6PD mutations and UDPGT1 polymorphism in G6PD deficient P0481. Human mitochondrial DNA control region Kuwaitis, 1080 male blood donors were screened for G6PD activity. sequence variations in Lithuanian population G6PD deficiency was identified in 70 (6.5%) individuals. Mutation D. Kasperaviciute, V. Kucinskas; analysis revealed the Mediterranean (C563T) mutation in 51 (73%), Human Genetics Centre of Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. A- (G202A) in 10 (14%), Chatham (G1003A) in 5 (7.1%), Aures The Lithuanians and Latvians are the only two Baltic cultures that (T143C) in 1 (1.4%) of 70 G6PD deficient cases. In three (4.2%) survived until today. There are conflicting anthropological findings cases mutations remain unknown. Both the Mediterranean and Aures regarding the process of neolithization in the Baltic region and the mutations were associated with the C1131T polymorphism while the formation of the Baltic tribes. However, since neolithic period the A- mutation was accompanied by the A376G substitution. UDPGT1 native inhabitants of Lithuanian territory have not been replaced by genotyping revealed the (TA)6/(TA)6 genotype in 27 (38.6%), (TA)6/ any other ethnic group. Therefore the genetic characterization of the (TA)7 in 31 (44.3%), (TA)7/(TA)7 in 11 (15.7%), and (TA)6/(TA)8 in present day Lithuanians may shed more light on the early history of 1 (1.4%) of 70 G6PD deficient cases. The frequencies of the (TA)6, the Balts. (TA)7, and (TA)8 alleles among G6PD deficient Kuwaitis were 0.6143, We have analyzed 120 DNA samples from two Lithuanian 0.3786 and 0.0071, respectively. The rare (TA)8 allele was observed ethnolinguistic groups (Aukstaiciai and Zemaiciai) using direct in a G6PD deficient individual with the A- mutation (both A- and (TA)8 sequencing of the first hypervariable segment (HVI) of the control are known to be of African origin). region of the mitochondrial DNA and restriction enzyme digestion for polymorphic site 00073. On the basis of specific substitutions P0484. Evidence of a founder effect for the tissue- the obtained sequences were classified to mtDNA clusters defined nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) gene E174K by Richards et al. Sequences of almost all major European mutation in hypophosphatasia patients clusters (except X) were found in Lithuania. Haplogroup H was the M. Herasse1, M. Spentchian2, A. Taillandier1,3, E. Mornet1,3; most common mtDNA lineage reaching frequencies from ~40% 1Université de Versailles-Saint Quentin en Yvelines, Versailles, in Zemaiciai to ~45% in Aukstaiciai. The second most prevalent France, 2Hopital André Mignot, Versailles, France, 3Laboratoire haplogroup was U, comprising from 25% to 36% of the sequences SESEP, Versailles, France. in Aukstaiciai and Zemaiciai respectively. The frequencies of Hypophosphatasia is an inborn error of metabolism characterized remaining haplogroups were from 2% to 10%. In general, the mtDNA by defective bone mineralization caused by a deficiency of liver-, lineages reflecting more ancient demographic expansion seem to bone- or kidney-type alkaline phosphatase due to mutations in the be more frequent, which is compatible with anthropological findings tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) gene. The clinical that neolithization in the Baltic region has been largely indigenous expression of the disease is highly variable, ranging from stillbirth process. However, the lineages reflecting the spread of early farmers with poor mineralized skeleton to pathologic skeletal fractures which from the Near East are also present, indicating different processes in develop in late adulthood only. This clinical heterogeneity is due the history of Lithuanian population. to the strong allelic heterogeneity in the TNSALP gene. Mutation E174K is the most frequent mutation in Caucasian patients and P0482. Isonymy, inbreeding and isolation in San Miguel represents 8% of hypophosphatasia chromosomes. This mutation Island (Azores, Portugal): A surname study. was found in patients from various geographic origins but was more C. C. Branco, L. Mota-Vieira; frequent in the North of Western Europe. We therefore investigated Genetic and Molecular Pathology Unit, Hospital of Divino Espirito the likelihood of its unique origine or the likelihood of a multiple Santo, Azores Islands, Portugal. origin due to recurrence of the mutation on several chromosomes. Small islands constitute isolated populations that offer advantages in Three intragenic polymorphisms, S93S, 472+12delG and V505A disease locus positioning and gene identification. Here we present were genotyped in patients carrying E174K and in normal unrelated the population structure of San Miguel island (131 530 inhabitants, individuals. The results show that all the E174K mutations are carried 2001 Census), the biggest of nine islands of the Azorean Archipelago out by a common ancestral haplotype, also found at low frequency in (Portugal). Our study was based on surname frequencies that were normal and hypophosphatasia chromosomes. We conclude that the obtained from the most recent telephone list (2001). We identified E174K mutation is the result of an ancestral mutation that ocurred 1 315 different surnames in a total of 27 621 subscribers. Eleven on a single chromosome in the North of Western Europe and spread Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 176 177 throughout the rest of Europe and into the New World as a result of Federation, 3Institute of Arts, Ethnography and Folklore, Belarussian migrations. Academy of Science, Minsk, Belarus. Over the past years multilocus DNA fingerprinting have been widely P0485. Population data of Y-chromosomal STRs in the applied for the genetic population studies on the different kinds of Lithuanian population organisms. We have used this technique with M13 phage DNA as a D. Ambrasiene, V. Kucinskas; hypervariable minisatellite probe to investigate 13 human populations Human Genetics Centre, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. from Eastern Europe and Asia. These populations belongs to three The human Y chromosome is uniparentally inherited and language families: Indo-European language family (Slavonic branch: nonrecombining along most of its length. Short tandem repeat (STR) Belarussian), Uralic language family (Finno-Ugric branch: Mari, polymorphisms from the male specific part of Y chromosome have Mordvinians, Udmurts, Komi), Altai language family (Turkic branch: been already recognised to be highly valuable in human evolutionary Bashkirs, Tatars, Chuvashes, Yakuts). studies and population genetics. Present-day Lithuanians represent The matrice of all the fragments with the sizes from 10,000-2,000 bp the Baltic branch of the populations speaking languages of the was constructed as a result of the analysis of restriction fragments Proto-Indo-European descent. Although Lithuanian population was patterns generated by hybridization. The set of individual patterns formed under the pressure of various migration forces, its deep roots was presented as a binary matrice like “Object-Trait”. preserved the genetic composition of the forebears. Therefore, it Level of the population differentiation was estimated according to is reasonable to analyse genetic differences among the Lithuanian Lynch (1). ethnolinguistic groups as well as between Lithuanians and other Different statitical analyses (cluster analysis, multiple correspondence European populations. We present results of the investigation of analysis, multidimensional scaling) were applied for the treatment genetic structure of Lithuanian population by using Y-chromosomal of distance matrice obtained from the populations profiles of the microsatellite markers. We examined the allele and haplotype fragments frequencies and binary populations matrices as well. frequencies of the Y chromosome-specific STR systems (DYS19, Two territorially separated Belarussian populations produced no DYS389I/II, DYS390, DYS391, DYS392, DYS393, DYS385) in 57 regional differnces whereas four separated Bashkir populations males from two main Lithuanian ethnolinguistic groups: Aukstaiciai appeared to be quite different. (A) and Zemaiciai (Z). PCR products were detected using capillary On the whole the correlation between our results and the linguistic electrophoresis on the ABI PRISM 310. In total 44 different affinity data is not absolute. haplotypes were identified as a result of combining the 32 alleles 1. Lynch M. (1990). The Similarity Index and DNA Fingerprinting. Mol. of the 7 Y-linked systems containing 9 loci. 35 haplotypes were Biol. Evol. 7(5). seen only once, five - twice, four - thrice. The most frequent allele of DYS19 was 15 (52.6%), DYS389-I - 13 (71.9%), DYS389-II - 30 P0488. Familial Mediterranean Fever is a frequent disease (57.9%), DYS390 - 25 (49.1%), DYS391 - 11 (54.4%), DYS392 - 11 among Cypriots (59.5%), DYS393 - 13 (61.4%), DYS385 - 11/14 (43.9%). Our results C. Deltas1, E. Rossou1, R. Mean1, P. Koupepidou1, C. Costi1, M. were compared with the data of other European populations. Koptides1, V. Atamian2, A. Pierides3; 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, P0486. High resolution analysis of human Y-chromosome 2Private Practice, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Dept of Nephrology, Nicosia, diversity in the Western Mediterranean area Cyprus. F. Cruciani1, P. Santolamazza1, P. Moral2, G. Vona3, R. La Fratta1, V. Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive Proietto1, A. Torroni1,4, R. Scozzari1; disease of high prevalence in four ethnic groups, Non-Ashkenazi 1Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, Università Jews, Armenians, Arabs and Turks. Typically it presents as acute “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 2Departament de Biologia Animal, episodes of periodic fever accompanied by abdominal pain, chest Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Dipartimento di Biologia pain, or joint pain. The attack usually lasts from 12 to 72 hours, Sperimentale, Università di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 4Dipartimento di with arthralgia or arthritis often lasting longer. The most dangerous Genetica e Microbiologia, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy. potential complication is amyloidosis that can lead to ESRF. About Y chromosome variation was analyzed by surveying 33 biallelic 40 mutations have been identified so far, some of them being very markers in a sample of about 900 males belonging to 23 populations frequent. Founder effects have been postulated to be responsible from the Western Mediterranean area. Some populations from for the high frequency of certain mutations in selected populations. the Middle East were also included for comparison. This survey Molecular investigation of the Cypriot population reveals that about 1: revealed a total of 21 binary haplotypes which were combined with 8 is a carrier of one of four mutations, E148Q being the most frequent the data from 7 microsatellites to evaluate internal diversities and (1:12). Among 87 MEFV chromosomes analysed, the results are: coalescence ages. The dissection of the YAP+ lineage in several V726A 27.6%; F479L 21.8%; M694V 20.7%; E148Q 6.9%; M694I distinct haplotypes showed that only a few derivative haplotypes are 2.3%; R761H 2.3%; Unknown 18.4%. Mutation F479L is rather rare present in Europe. One of these haplotypes, defined by the mutation in other populations. Preliminary evidence suggests that this frequent M81, is phylogenetically equivalent to the previously described Cypriot mutation is associated with later age of onset of symptoms, haplogroup 25.2 (Scozzari et al. Hum Immunol 62:871, 2001). This the most debilitating of which is strong and frequent abdominal pain, haplotype is very common in North Western Africa and most likely with or without fevers and arthralgias. Despite the high frequuency originated in the Berbers of Morocco where it reaches frequencies of of E148Q, only 6 of 53 patients carried it, supporting its mild nature. about 70%. The same haplotype is rare in Europe, the only exception More than have of documented cases were diagnosed during the being represented by the Spanish from the Pas Valley (43%), thus past year, after announcing the availability of molecular testing and indicating a strong component of Northern African origin in that providing evidence that FMF is not rare. Molecular testing is expected region. The haplotype defined by the M26 mutation resulted to be to assist further in identifying ambiguous cases, while general phylogenetically equivalent to the haplotype carrying the 11 repeats newborn screening is under consideration. allele at the YCAIIb microsatellite. This haplotype is very frequent in Sardinia but is rare or absent in other regions. Overall this study P0489. The Incidence of Down Syndrome in Estonia demonstrates that the dissection of Y-chromosome variation into during 1990-2000 haplogroups/haplotypes with a more restricted geographic distribution T. Reimand1,2, K. Õunap2, R. Zordania3, T. Ilus2, T. Talvik1, M. Sitska2; can reveal important affinities between populations and provides new 1University of Tartu, Department of Pediatrics, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu clues about their past interactions. University Clinics, Medical Genetics Center, Tartu, Estonia, 3Children Hospital of Tallinn, Tallinn, Estonia. P0487. Multilocus DNA Fingerprinting Analysis as a Tool The aim of this study was to investigate the incidence of Down for Human DNA Divertsity Study syndrome (DS) in Estonia. E. V. Shabrova1, E. K. Khusnutdinova2, A. I. Mikulich3, L. A. Tarskaia1, Methods: The data about the children with DS were collected from S. A. Limborska1; genetic centers of Estonia, from database of Down Syndrome 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Supportive Groups, from institutions of disabled children and from Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, the registers of family doctors/pediatricians. The study subjects were Ufa scientific center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian 196 DS patients born from 1990 to 2000. Three of them died before 176 Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 177 cytogenetic investigation was performed. Therefore 193 children with observed, but there were differences in congenital anomaly rates cytogenetically confirmed DS were included into the study. between different regions (p<0.01). Limb anomalies (32.3%) and Results: Regular trisomy was found in 173 cases (90%), translocation congenital heart defects (24.2%) represent the largest groups of in 14 cases (7%) and mosaicism in 6 cases (3%). In one patient anomalies detected, followed by the defects of the urogenital system, there was regular trisomy 21 and translocation between 13;14 gastrointestinal system and central nervous system. An unusually chromosomes. Mosaicism and translocation at the same time high rate of polydactyly was observed in Varazdin (16.9/10000 (47,XY,t(7;21)(80%)/46,XY(20%)) was found in one child. Thirty compared with mean rate of 8.0/10000 for EUROCAT registries). percent of the mothers were older than 35 years. The most frequent congenital heart defects were ventricular In 1995 screening of chromosome anomalies for advanced maternal septal defect (14.5/ 10 000), atrial septal defect (8.4/10 000) and age (>35) was started. Therefore we divided the DS children into transposition of the great vessels (2.2/10 000). Down syndrome was two groups: born in 1990-1994 and 1995-2000. The first group the most frequent chromosomal aberration (10.7/ 10.000 births). consist 108 patients (birth-rate: 89015). According to these data the CONCLUSIONS: Differences in congenital anomaly rates between incidence of DS was 1:824. In the second group DS was diagnosed different regions of Croatia require further investigation in order to in 85 children (birth-rate: 76767). According to the data of Medical determine whether they represent a true difference in the prevalence Genetic Center in 32 cases of DS was diagnosed prenatally; in 31 rates or they are due to small number variation, differences in clinical cases the pregnancy was terminated. If those 31 DS children were reporting or characteristics of the population (e.g. size, maternal age). born the incidence of DS in the second group would be 1:662. In conclusion we may say that the provisional incidence of DS is 1: P0492. Allelic associations of COL1A1 and VDR3 700. genes with one-year rates of bone mineral mass loss in postmenopausal women. P0490. Y-chromosome haplotype analysis in three M. V. Moskalenko, M. V. Aseev, I. E. Zazerskaya, V. S. Baranov; Eastern Europe populations - Belorusia, Russia and Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Ukraine. Russian Federation. S. A. Kravchenko1, S. A. Limborskaya2, L. A. Livshits1; Genetic factors play an important role in the pathogenesis of 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine, 2Institute osteoporosis but the genes that determine susceptibility to of the Molecular Genetics, Moskow, Russian Federation. pathological BMD are still not fully determined. Y-chromosomal microsatellite haplotypes are highly valuable The alleles rates of COL1A1 and VDR genes in North-West Russian in human evolutionary and human history populations studies. population and in the group of the postmenopausal women were Distribution of Y-chromosome haplotypes for 5 microsatellite loci ( investigated. The control group included 174 women without any DYS393, DYS392, DYS391, DYS390 and DYS19 ) was investigated clinical or laboratory traits of osteoporosis. The group of patients in three population- Belorussia, Russia and Ukraine to reconstruct comprised 119 postmenopausal women (all of them had been in the evolution of paternal lineage in populations with Slavic origin from menopause for 4-5 years). Respective of BMD loss speed. two East Europe. groups of the postmenopausal women were allocated after 12 To determine affinity between Belorussian, Russian, Ukrainian and months survey: women with fast loss of BMD (T-criteria decrease to other populations comparative analysis of allele frequencies was 10±6,38%) and women with slow loss of BMD (T-criteria decrease performed and Neighbour-Joining tree based on Nei distances was during 12 month (2±8,23%). The polymorphisms of COL1A1 and constructed. So, highly significant differences were observed when VDR genes were studied by PCR-RFLP method (polymorphism comparing the populations from East Europe with populations from COL1A1/Apa I and VDR3/Taq I). West Europe. But although the Y-chromosome microsatellites seem The differences in allele combinations of VDR and COL1A1 genes to be very useful in comparing closely related populations, we have between control group and the group of postmenopausal women with not found significant differences between Ukrainian, Russian and osteoporosis were proved. Frequencies of functionally impaired allele Belorussian populations. of COL1A1 gene (s allele) was 17,9% (control group), 2.4% (patients For more than 360 Y chromosome assuming a stepwise mutation with slow loss of BMD), 30.8% (patients with fast loss of BMD). model haplotypes net was constructed. The three populations tested Frequencies of functionally impaired allele (t -allele )of VDR gene had significant differences in their haplotypes distributions. The most was 32,7% (control), 13.9% (patients with slow loss of BMD), 46.8% common haplotype (13/11/11/24/16) was found in 14% of Ukrainian (patients with fast loss of BMD) . Significant association of BMD loss individuals. In population from Russia the most common haplotype values with functionally inferior alleles for COL1A1(s) and VDR (t) (13/11/10/25/16) was observed in 22% individuals. For population genes has been proved (p<0,001). from Belorussia both of these haplotypes were most frequent - 13% and 10% respectively. Also it is interested to note that these P0493. PedigreeQuery: a pedigree drawing software. haplotypes in Western European populations are to be found with A. V. Kirichenko; very low frequency. On the other hand, the frequencies of these Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. haplotypes in some Central Asian populations reaches extremely Modern human genetics data includes large (hundreds of people) high level - up to 50%. . Perhaps, male-lineage diversity in Slavic pedigrees coming, in particular, from isolated populations. It is a populations underdone of migration influence from East. problem to draw these pedigrees and to analyze the pictures due to their complex structure. Our software PedigreeQuery is based P0491. Epidemiological surveillance of congenital on step-by-step drawing in which a nuclear pedigree is added at anomalies in north-western Croatia each step. The direction of a pedigree extension is indicated by I. Barisic1, I. Ligutic1, R. Gjergja1, Z. Beer2, Z. Modrusan-Mozetic3, A. the user. The software helps visualizing the transmission of rare Zuzek4, N. Vondracek5; alleles, extracting the fragment of complex pedigree with identical 1Childrens University Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2General mitochondrial genome or identical Y-chromosome. Hospital Varazdin, Varazdin, Croatia, 3Clinical Hospital Centre The software uses a data file with LINKAGE format and creates Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, 4Medical Centre Pula, Pula, Croatia, 5General PostScript files for printing. PedigreeQuery draws complex pedigrees Hospital Koprivnica, Koprivnica, Croatia. with multiple loops, inter-generation mating, individuals with multiple BACKGROUND: Birth defects are the most important cause of mates. There are several additional features for visualization of perinatal mortality in European countries. International standardised genetic data: different colors of symbols according to the different networks of registries of patients such as the Eurocat allow data phenotypes, crossing symbols, text underneath the person’s symbol comparison and give the possibility of gaining experience in which includes any desired information (genotype markers, name, surveillance and prevention of rare diseases. AIM: To to determine age, etc.). Drawing pedigrees is highly configurable and may be population-based prevalence rates, types and epidemiological specified by nine parameters, i.e., font and symbol’s size, space characteristics of the major congenital anomalies in northwestern between symbols, and others. Croatia using standardised Eurocat methodology. RESULTS: During This software can be widely used both in population genetics and the 1990-1999 period, 1274 children with congenital anomalies per genetic epidemiology. 64.364 births were registered, with the mean prevalence of 19.7/10 000 births. Stability in the overall prevalence of malformations was Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 178 179 P0494. Genetic polymorphism in Cumanian population we analysed seven multiallelic STR loci in normal X chromosomes determined by analysis of ancient bone samples from Han Chinese, Malay and Asian Indian populations. The markers E. Szabo1, T. Kalmar1, F. Horvath2, I. Rasko1; examined were the 3‘ flanking DYSI, intragenic STR44, STR45, 1Institute of Genetics, Biological Research Center of Hungarian STR50, STR62, STRHI, and the 5‘ flanking DYSIII microsatellites Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary, 2Mora Ferenc Museum of located at Xp21. Allele frequencies, heterozygosity values, and pair- Szeged, Szeged, Hungary. wise population differentiation were calculated using the GENEPOP Between 1975 and 1999 thirty-nine tombs were discovered in (version 3.1d) software. The number of alleles ranged from 4 to Csengele (Hungary). The archeologists presumed that the buried 15, with the highest and lowest average heterozygosity values persons belonged to the Cumanian ethnic group who, according to observed at STR44 (87%) and STR62 (34%), respectively. Genetic the historical data, settled down in that area of the early Hungary differentiation was observed between all population pairs at STR44, during the XII-XIII centuries. The anthropological analyses of the STR62, and STRHI. The allele frequency distributions at all loci Cumanians suggest that they might be originated from Asia, however showed varied patterns: DYSI, STR62 and STRHI showed unimodal their genetic origin has not been known. patterns while DYSIII was bimodal; STR45 showed complex, DNA was extracted from 11 bones for studying the genetic origin bimodal, and unimodal patterns while STR44 and STR50 showed of Cumanians. From the extracted DNA gender determination and complex patterns in all populations. Small to significant differences mitochondrial D-loop sequence analysis has been carried out. were seen between the data observed in our populations and Using X and Y chromosome specific alphoid satellite markers the those reported for other Asian and Caucasian populations. Genetic gender of the 6 bone samples out of 11 were determined. Our heterogeneity found for the microsatellite loci demonstrate that these analysis confirmed the anthropological sex identification of four adult markers are effective tools for linkage analysis for non-deletion cases individuals as males and was successful in cases of the female of Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy families, as well as for juvenile individuals. The remaining five samples did not preserve the anthropological studies. investigated genomic DNA markers in detectable form. The nucleotide sequences of the mitochondrial hypervariable region P0497. Extent of linkage disequilibrium in Sardinian I were determined. The genetic homogeneity was investigated population. within the studied Cumanians, and the phylogenetic relationship G. Sole1, L. Balaci2, D. Altea2, N. Olla1, C. Spada2, A. Maschio1, E. among the Cumanian samples and modern populations was also Mocci1, S. Doratiotto1, M. Devoto3, A. Cao1,2, G. Pilia1,2; established. One part of the investigated Cumanian bone samples 1IRTAM - CNR, Selargius - Cagliari, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze carries common maternal lineages with the Asian Mongol and Buryat Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Università di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, populations, while the other part shows common mitochondrial 3Dipartimento di Oncologia, Biologia e Genetica,Università di haplotypes with some modern European populations. We postulated Genova, Genova, Italy. that the Cumanian population originated from that area (putative There is evidence that Linkage disequilibrium (LD), the non random homeland) where the modern Buryat and Mongol populations live, association of alleles at closely linked loci, vary between populations. at that time when they reached Hungary they were not genetically As the feasibility of linkage disequilibrium mapping studies are homogenous. critically dependent on the extent of linkage disequilibrium, we examined the patterns of LD for 24 polymorphisms in a sample from P0495. Search for Factor V Cambridge and Hong Kong Sardinian population. Founder haplotype sets were identified by mutations Simwalk2 program in a sample of 100 families. Microsatellite markers V. Havasi1, K. Komlosi1, J. Bene1, M. Ghosh1, A. Nagy2, K. Méhes1, came from three genomic regions - 118 Kb on chromosome 12q14, G. Kosztolányi1, B. Melegh1, Z. Szolnoki3, G. Melegh4, G. Tóth1; 10 Mb on chromosome 13q14.2-q21.1 and 128 Kb on chromosome 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University on chromosome 16p12.1-p11.2. For each marker pair, the strength of of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 21st Department of Internal Medicine, association was measured by a chi-square test and the standardized University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 3Pándy Kálmán County Hospital, multiallelic D’ was calculated. A useful measure is the half-length of Gyula, Hungary, 4Semmelweis Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary. LD - the distance at which the average D’ drops below 0.5. The presence of mutations of the factor V gene such as Arg306Thr As expected, LD tended to be most significant for nearby markers, (factor V Cambridge), Arg306Gly (factor V Hong Kong) and but occasionally markers at 6 - 6,5 Mb apart showed p< 0.05. At Arg506Gln (factor V Leiden) were tested in 1360 Hungarian distances up to 200 Kb, all the marker pairs LD but one (95%) thrombotic patients and in 670 controls. We examined 553 appeared significant (p<0.05). The negative correlation between D’ hematological patients (e.g. deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary and physical distance was striking and significant (rs = -.625, p<0.01). embolism) and 807 patients with different neurovascular diseases Average D’ value was 0.51 at distances up to 50 Kb, but it dropped (including stroke, ischaemic cerebral attacks, sinus thrombosis, to 0.28 at distances up to 100 Kb. We are at present extending this cerebral infarctions). For the FV Cambridge and Hong Kong mutation study, genotyping other markers in the same and another genomic tests a PCR-based method was developed in our laboratory. After regions. These results, if representative of the whole genome, amplification of a 252 bp fragment of the gene, it was digested with would suggest the feasibility of whole-genome association studies in MvaI. Both the above mutations abolish the cleavage site for this Sardinian population. enzyme. Further differentiation was performed by digestion of the original PCR product by HpaII. For the factor V Leiden mutation we P0498. Mutation A1555G in the 12S rRNA gene and its found 111 heterozygotes and 6 homozygotes in the hematological epidemiological importance in German, Hungarian and group (allele frequency:11.1%), 83 heterozygotes and 5 homozygotes Polish patients in the neurovascular cohort (5.76%) and 43 heterozygotes and 3 S. Kupka1,2, T. Tóth3, M. Wróbel4, W. Szyfter4, H. Zenner2, I. Sziklai3, homozygotes among the controls (3.66%). The allele frequencies of N. Blin1, M. Pfister2; the Leiden mutation showed statistically significant difference in the 1Department of Anthropology and Human Genetics, University of disease groups versus the controls. In contrast to our expectations Tübingen, Germany, 2Department of Otolaryngology, University neither the factor V Cambridge nor the factor V Hong Kong mutations of Tübingen, Germany, 3Medical and Health Science Center, could be detected in the above mentioned groups. Our findings Department of Otolaryngology, University of Debrecen, Hungary, suggest that the FV Cambridge and Hong Kong mutations are 4Department of Otolaryngology, University of Medical Sciences, even more rare than previously supposed and cannot be significant Poznan, Poland. contributors to the APC resistance related thrombophilias. The A1555G mutation in the 12SrRNA gene has been associated with aminoglycoside induced and nonsyndromic sensorineural P0496. Microsatellite DNA variability in the dystrophin hearing impairment. In this study we analyzed Hungarian, Polish gene in three Asian populations and German patients with nonsyndromic severe to profound hearing J. Miranda1, H. L. Lim2, M. H. Liew2, W. L. Lee1, P. S. Low2, P. S. Lai2; impairment of unknown origin for this mutation. The frequency of the 1National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore, Singapore, 2National A1555G mutation in the Hungarian hearing impaired population was University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. below 1.8 %. Three out of 125 Polish patients carrying the A1555G In order to establish the informativeness of polymorphic markers in mutation were identified. Among German patients one carrier was the dystrophin gene for linkage analysis in our local ethnic groups, found (0.7 %) revealing a homoplastic A1555G mutation, whereas 178 Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 179 no mutation was detected in control individuals with normal hearing P0501. Insertion-Deletion Polymorphism of the Ace Gene (frequency < 0.6%). In summary the frequencies of the A1555G in Populations of North Caucasus and of Middle Asia mutation are low in the hearing impaired as well as in the normal T. Y. Korshunova1, A. Z. Salimova1, V. L. Akhmetova1, M. A. population in Hungary, Poland and Germany. Since the importance Bermisheva1, G. M. Berezina2, I. A. Kutyev1, R. I. Fatkhlislamova1, G. of this mutation and its relationship with aminoglycoside exposure S. Svyatova2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; is not well understood yet, patients with nonsyndromic hearing 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of the Ufa scientific centre impairment should be routinely screened for this mutation to avoid of RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Republican Centre of Health aminoglycoside induced hearing impairment due to increased Protection of Mother and Child, Almaty, KAZAKHSTAN. sensitivity of maternal relatives. Polymorphic Alu-repeats (polymorphisms consisting of the presence/ absence of an Alu element at a particular location) present a very P0499. NAT polymorphisms in Bulgarian patients with useful markers for human population genetics and evolution studies. Balkan Endemic Nephropathy (BEN) A well studied polymorphism in the intron 16 of the angiotensin- S. Atanasova1, N. von Ahsen2, T. Dimitrov3, M. Oellerich2, D. converting enzyme (ACE) gene due to insertion (I) or deletion (D) Toncheva1; of a 287 bp sequence has been reported to occur producing three 1Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinical genotypes DD, DI and II. Chemistry, Georg-August University, Göttingen, Germany, We have investigated the frequency of ACE insertion/deletion (ID) 3Department of Nephrology, Medical University-Sofia, Bulgaria. polymorphism in two populations of North Caucasus : Cuban Nogays NAT enzymes are involved in metabolic activation and deactivation from republic Karachaevo-Cherkesia (n=102) and Caranogays from of environmental carcinogens, such as arylamines. Several allelic republic Dagestan (n=121) and in two populations of the Middle variants determine the phenotype of rapid or slow acetylators. Each Asia: Kazakhs (n=168) and Uzbeks (n=105). Caucasus and Middle phenotype has been associated with different risk to certain cancers, Asia are an interesting regions for studying relative influence of related to carcinogenic exposure. Various environmental carcinogens linguistic variability and geographic barriers on the genetic structure are suspected to be etiological factors for the chronic nephritis and of populations. for the frequent development of uroepithelial (bladder, renal pelvis We used PCR method. PCR product was subjected to polyacrilamid and ureter) tumours in BEN patients. There is a lack of data on NAT gell electrophoresis. ACE genotypes frequencies for DD, ID and allelic frequencies in BEN patients and in the healthy Bulgarian II were determined 19,6%, 58,3%, 22,1% in Kazakhs and 12,4%, population. 72 Bulgarian BEN patients and 112 healthy Bulgarians as 73,3%, 14,3% in Uzbeks and 24,5%, 58,8%, 16,7% in Nogays and controls were genotyped for NAT1 (C1095A, T1088A, C559T, G560A, 23,9%, 67,8%, 8,3% in Caranogays. The ACE allelic frequency T640G) and NAT2 (T341C, C282T). Rapid cycle PCR and melting distribution for D and I alleles was 48,8% and 51,2% in Kazakhs, 49% curve analysis were used for genotyping. To increase the throughput and 51% Uzbeks, 53,9% and 46,1% in Nogays, 57,8% and 42,2% in of genotyping probes were designed for temperature multiplexing Caranogays. where possible. The estimated frequency of the predictive NAT2 Results of our investigations as compare to analoges of literature phenotype for the rapid acetylators was 0.486 in BEN patients group data. versus 0.464 in the control group and for the slow acetylators 0.514 versus 0.536 respectively. The frequency of the predictive NAT1 P0502. The mutation spectrum of CFTR gene in the CF phenotype for the homozygous normal acetylators was 0.639 in BEN patients from Bashkortostan. patients group versus 0.580 in the control group; for the homozygous G. F. Korytina1, T. Victorova1, T. Ivaschenco2, B. Baranov2, E. rapid acetylators 0.042 versus 0.071; for the heterozygous rapid Khusnutdinova1; acetylators 0.292 versus 0.339 and for the heterozygous slow 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, acetylators 0.028 versus 0.009. Homozygous slow acetylators were 2Research Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecology, St. Petersburg, not identified. Allele variants and frequencies did not significantly Russian Federation. differ between the two groups and were similar to those reported for Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most common autosomal recessive the Caucasian population. disorders. A mutations CFTR gene causes this disorder. The aim of our study was to identify the most common mutations and P0500. Interest of haplotypic tests to detect the role of a create a CF-screening programme that would enable complete CF candidate gene in multifactorial diseases mutations detection among our patients. We have screened 141 P. Verpillat1,2, P. Margaritte-Jeannin1, C. Bourgain1, F. Clerget- CF chromosomes for 18 previously reported mutations: delF508, Darpoux1; 1677delTA CFTRdele2,3(21kb), 394delTT, 1154insTC, R347P, 1INSERM U535, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 2CHU Bichat-Claude R334W, G542X, G551D, R553X, S549N, 2184insA, 2143delT, Bernard, Paris, France. S1196X, 3737delA, 3849+10kbT C, W1282X, N1303K. We also Background: When studying the potential role of a candidate gene used SSCP-analysis for exons 3, 7, 10, 11, 13, 19 and 20, to find in a multifactorial disease, information may be not available on the other mutations. The results of molecular analysis revealed the functional marker, but only on two neutral markers which are in following frequency of detected mutations: delF508 (34%), 394delTT linkage disequilibrium with the functional one. (3,5%), CFTRdele2,3(21kb) (1,4%), R334W (1,4%), G542X (0,7%), Objective: To compare the power of haplotypic tests, taking into 2184insA (0,7%), S1196X (0,7%), 3849+10kbT>C (1,4%), W1282X account simultaneously the information on two neutral markers, to the (0,7%), N1303K (1,4%). Six novel mutations are detected I488M power of tests realised individually on each marker. (0,7%) Q493E (0,7%) in 10 exon, 1811+12A C (1,4%) - 11 intron, Methods: A program was written to calculate for patients and T663S (1,4%) - 13 exon, I1226R ( 0,7%) -19 exon, 4005+9A>C controls the frequency of haplotypes and alleles for the two markers, (0,7%) - 20 intron. And two new polymorphisms was found - 2097A C according to different models for the functional polymorphism (allelic (A655A) -13 exon (0,7%), 3996G>C (V1288V) - 20 exon (2,1 %). This frequency, different genotype penetrances) and different values of leading study resulted in the identification of 16 different mutations linkage disequilibrium. Power was then calculated for the haplotypic accounting for almost 50% of CF alleles. test and the tests on each marker. Results: In many situations, the role of the candidate gene is P0503. Mitochondrial DNA diversity in the populations of detected by the haplotypic test when it can not be detected by Middle Asia and Northern Caucasus. the separated study of each marker. The power increase of the M. Bermisheva1, A. Salimova1, T. Korshunova1, G. Svyatova2, G. haplotypic test depends on the contrast of the linkage disequilibrium Berezina2, R. Villems3, E. Khusnutdinova1; between patients and controls, disequilibrium which may be 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, sometimes of contrary sign in the two samples. This situation was 2Repablican Center of health protection of mother and child., Alma- observed in the study of the low density lipoprotein receptor-related Ata, KAZAKHSTAN, 3Dept. Evolutionary Biology Tartu University., protein gene in Alzheimer’s disease (Verpillat et al, 2001). Tartu, Estonia. Conclusion: In some situations, the use of simultaneous information Hypervariable segment 1(HVS-1) sequences of mitochondrial DNA on two markers of a candidate gene, using haplotypic tests, can together with RFLP sites diagnostic analyzed in the populations of strongly increase the power to detect the role of this gene. Middle Asia - Uzbeks, Kazakhs and population of Northen Caucasus - Nogays in order to determine the haplogroup structure. The Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 180 181 Nogays was found to have a large portion of mtDNA belonging to Conclusions: The study being still progressing, FVL gene mutation haplogroups observed in West Eurasian populations. The majority seems to be relatively common in pregnancies with preeclampsia of the mtDNA lineages of Nogays belong to haplogroups H (23,6%) than the uncomplicated ones. Both prothrombin 20210A and MTHFR and U (20,2.%). East-Asian-specific lineages of mtDNAs were C677T mutations were detected in certain groups, but the number of observed in 38,2% (haplogroups M,C,Z,D,G,A,B,F). On the data of subjects is not sufficient for reasonable statistical analysis. However mtDNA genetic variation we demonstrated that the Nogays have it looks likely that the suggestion coming out of some other studies slightly more similarities with South-Eastern Bashkirs, which live in to screen women with complicated pregnancies for thrombophilia the Volga-Ural region of Russia than with other populations from markers can be supported. Caucasus. The most maternal lineages of Kazakhs and Uzbeks have the Asian mtDNA haplogroups. However, the relative frequencies of P0506. Unusual frequency of the GSTM1 0/0 genotype in this continental fraction of the mtDNA pool vary considerably over the a Russian population of Ural region populations studied. The frequency of Asian haplogroups in Kazakhs G. V. Pavlov, G. A. Tsaur, S. V. Tsvirenko; reached 62,38%, in Uzbeks - 52,52%. Thus, based on the mtDNA Ural State Medical Academy, Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation. haplogroups composition analysis, the Kazakhs and Uzbeks were Glutathione S-transferase M1 (GSTM1) belongs to the GST gene found to be the closest population to the East Asian populations. family. GSTM1 enzyme is responsible for the detoxification of active metabolites many potential carcinogens like trans-stilbene oxide, P0504. Phylogeography of Y chromosome lineages in the benzopyrene and other polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). Old World Therefore GSTM1 may be important in modulating susceptibility to V. A. Stepanov1, V. Puzyrev1, T. Kivisild2, V. Kharkov1, M. cancers. GSTM 1 exert part of glutathione peroxidase activity and Spiridonova1, S. Rootsi2, I. Khitrinskaya1, R. Villems2; have an important function in intracellular binding and transport of 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Estonian a wide variety of endogenous (steroid hormones) and exogenous Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. (drugs) compounds. GSTM1 is polymorphic, and the null alleles We have analyzed the distribution of Y chromosome haplogroups result in a lack of corresponding enzyme activities. The presence (HGs) in the Old World with the special attention to the population of of the GSTM1 null genotype is responsible for the highest level and North Eurasia. We have constructed the database containing data significant induction of chromosomal aberrations. on Y chromosome lineage`s frequency in 300 world populations The GSTM1 genotype was analysed from blood spots by means of including our experimental data on 30 populations of Siberia and PCR assay. Mutation in GSTM1 gene was investigated in a random Central Asia and all data published in the literature. We standardized sample of healthy subjects from villages of Ural’s region (around the HGs nomenclature used by different authors to the unified format Ekaterinburg-city), Russia (Jobling et al. (1998), with modifications). Graphic representation of All the results were divided into 2 groups: GSTM1-positive (included HGs distribution was made using Surfer software. GSTM1 1/1 and 1/0 genotypes) and GSTM1-negative (GSTM1 The general picture of the Y lineages distribution is consistent with 0/0 genotype). Frequency of the GSTM1 0/0 genotype in our study the hypothesis of recent African origin of modern human. Several was more than 60%. This unusually high proportion of GSTM1- HGs marks the following migrations of modern human to Europe, null genotype among healthy individuals could be attributed to the Asia, Pacific and colonization of the New World. possible founder effect in villages which have stable populations. Also As to population of North Eurasia, phylogeographic analysis reveals Ural region is the place where mix Caucasian and Asian populations several components of different age and origin in their modern Y On the other hand, It might reflect real geographical-dependent lineages pool, penetrating the territory through boreal and southern differences among Slavic populations. migration routs. Initial colonization of this territory, probably, through West, Middle and Central Asia in upper Paleolithic brings to the P0507. Minisatellite DNA diversity in East European territory HG2 and 4. A next Paleolithic migrations from the West is populations. traced by HG1. After last glacial maximum, mongoloid populations D. A. Verbenko1, T. V. Kekeeva1, T. V. Pogoda1, V. A. Spitsyn2, E. K. from the South, descendants of “austratic population” which settled Khusnutdinova3, A. I. Mikulich4, L. V. Bets5, N. A. Bebyakova6, V. P. the South-East Asia, penetrates the North Eurasia. The genetic Ivanov7, N. G. Abolmasov8, S. A. Limborska1; traces of these migrants in male gene pool are, probably, HG10 and 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 26. Population migrations on the territory of North Eurasia in the Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre of Medical Genetics, Neolithic form the distribution picture of HGs 3, 9, 12 and 16. Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre of P0505. Incidance of Genetic Thrombophilia in Turkish Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 4Institute Women with Obstetric Complications-Preliminary of Arts, Ethnography and Folklore, National Academy of Sciences findings of Belarus, Minsk, Belarus, 5Moscow State University, Moscow, R. Bircan1, C. Erzik1, B. Saygi Erzik2, F. Akbas2, I. Güney1, E. Oral2, Russian Federation, 6North State Medical University, Arkhangelsk, B. Cirakoglu1; Russian Federation, 7Kursk State Medical University, Kursk, Russian 1Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept of Medical Biol & Federation, 8Smolensk State Medical University, Smolensk, Russian Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Faculty of Medicine, Federation. Dept of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Istanbul, Turkey. Most of the populations of Eastern Europe inhabit an area of long Background: Venous thrombosis is related with some mutations time relations between Caucasoid and Mongoloid peoples. This like Factor V Leiden (FVL) and prothrombin 20210A. Obstetrical makes it possible to analyse the interaction during ethnogenesis of complications such as preeeclampsia, IUFGR and some others European peoples. The normal variability of minisatellite loci D1S80 are known to be associated with placental thrombosis. This study (pMCT118) and 3’ApoB have been analysed in some East European investigates the relation between certain gene mutations and populations. There are both Caucasoid populations (Belorussians, obstetrical complications in Turkish women. Russians) and admixture populations with different levels of a Methods: 88 pregnant women with obstetrical complication and 44 Mongoloid component (Komis, Mari, Bashkirs). Kalmyk population, control subjects were studied. FVL, prothrombin 20210A and MTHFR belongs to Mongoloid group, was also considered. More than 1200 C677T mutations were screened using PCR-RFLP method. native individuals from 14 population samples were studied. Results: Results have yet been obtained for 54 patients and 44 The analysis of minisatellite polymorphisms was carried out using controls. The incidance of FVL heterozygosity was found to be the PCR and subsequent electrophoresis followed by silver staining. 20.37% among patients, being most common in preeclamptics (7/34) We detected 27 alleles of the D1S80 locus and 24 alleles of the followed by stillbirth (2/9) and IUFGR (2/10) groups. Only 2 stillbirth 3’ApoB locus. Observed allele frequency distributions in Russians, cases of 54 patients (3.7%) carry both the prothrombin 20210A and Belorussians, and Mari were appeared to be similar with European FVL mutations. Of 22 patients screened for MTHFR C677T mutation, populations ones. Minisatellite allele frequency distributions in 12 (55%) were found to be heterozygous carriers whereas the ratio of Kalmyks are very special but more similar with distributions in other homozygotes is 9%. (2/22, both preeclamptics). In the control group, Asian peoples. FVL mutation was found in 6.82% of the cases although prothrombin Genetic diversity analysis based on calculation of Nei’s genetic 20210A mutation was absent. distances with allocation of populations studied in multidimensional 180 Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 181 space. The plots obtained revealed certain differentiation between Universitario, Messina, Italy, 2Unità Operativa di Terapia Subintensiva East European ethnic groups. In spite of the patterns similarity, the e Dialisi Policlinico Universitario, Messina, Italy. total genetic variability of the 3’ApoB locus changes more extremely It is known the correlation between the FC epsilon receptor I in comparison to total variability of the D1S80 locus. The genetic beta(FCERIB) gene and IgE levels.Indeed,the beta-chain of diversity of Komis and Bashkirs indicate a number of peculiarities that the high-affinity receptor for IgE is found on mast cells and supposed to reflect an intermediate position of these ethnic groups basophils.Crosslinking of this receptor leads to increased IL-4 between Caucasoid and Mongoloid peoples. production by these cells.Mutations in the FCERIB gene could alter IL-4 production and thus modify IgE levels.IL-4 is essential for B P0508. Mitochondrial DNA analysis in Poles and cells switching to IgE antibody production and for maturation of T- Russians helper cells to the Th2 phenotype.A panel of 100 children(58 girls B. A. Malyarchuk1, T. Grzybowski2, M. Derenko1, J. Czarny2, D. and 42 boys) with atopy was selected from 24 families of Sicily Miscicka-Sliwka2; (Southern Italy).A group of 103(50 girls and 53 boys) nonatopic 1Institute of Biological Problems of the North, Magadan, Russian controls included outpatients with no history of allergic diseases Federation, 2The Ludwik Rydygier Medical University in Bydgoszcz, was recruited.Atopy was defined by the presence at least of two of Forensic Medicine Institute, Bydgoszcz, Poland. following criteria:1)a positive skin prick test;2)elevated specific IgE at Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) control region sequences were least class 2;3)elevated circulating total IgE.In both groups,we have determined in Poles (n = 436) and Russians (n = 201). Despite the performed the molecular screening of FCERIB gene GLU237Gly and high mtDNA diversity, both populations are characterized by similar IL-4 promoter C-590T polymorphisms(RFLPs)by allele-specific PCR pattern of mtDNA haplogroup distribution, which is also typical and PCR-SSCP.Significant difference was observed in the genotype for many European populations studied. The analysis of mtDNA frequency at codon 237 of the FCERIB gene between atopic children haplotype distribution has shown that both Slavonic populations and not atopic controls (p=0.044).This RFLP was also associated share them mainly with Germans and Finns. The following numbers to elevated levels of IgE,positive prick and rast tests.There was no of the rare shared haplotypes and subclusters were found between difference in genotype frequency of IL-4 promoter -590C/T between populations analyzed: 10% between Poles and Germans, 7.4% the two groups.No associations were observed between this RFLP between Poles and Russians, and 4.5% between Russians and and total IgE and allergic tests.The results of our study suggests that Germans. A novel subcluster U4-310, defined by mutation at genetic markers of atopy can be identified and could be used in the nucleotide position 310 in HVS II, was found predominantly in clinical setting to identify individuals at risk for atopy. common between Poles and Russians (at frequency of 2%). Given the relatively high frequency and diversity of this marker among P0511. Does accounting for gene-environment (GxE) Poles and its low frequency in the neighbouring German and Finnish interaction increase the power to detect the main effect populations, we suggest a central European origin of U4-310, of a gene in a multifactorial disease ? following by subsequent dispersal of this mtDNA subgroup in eastern H. Selinger-Leneman1, E. Genin1, J. M. Norris2, M. Khlat3; European populations during the Slavonic migrations in early Middle 1INSERM, U535, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 2University of Colorado Ages. This work was supported by the Russian Fund for Basic Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO, 3INED, Paris, France. Research (00-06-80448) and by grant from the Ludwik Rydygier Despite tremendous efforts, few genes involved in the susceptibility Medical University in Bydgoszcz (BW66/2002). for complex disorders have been identified. One explanation is that these disorders are a result of an interaction between genes P0509. Population structure of Adygs, as revealed using and environment, and under such conditions, it may be difficult to DNA data and surname frequencies. measure the true genetic effect without accounting for the interaction. E. Balanovska1, E. Pocheschkhova2, D. Verbenko3, O. Balanovsky1, Umbach and Weinberg (2000) have proposed an association test Y. Seryogin1, D. Subbota1, K. Mamgetov2, S. Limborska3, R. Villems4; which looks at the joint effects of genotype and environment using 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian case-parent trios. In this study, we explore under which conditions Federation, 2Kuban Medical Academy, Maikop, Russian Federation, accounting for GxE interaction enhances one?s ability to detect the 3Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, main effect of the gene. Using asymptotic power calculations, we 4Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. investigate the power to detect the gene effect over varying exposure Adygs people represents indigenous population of Caucasus and frequencies and several models of GxE interaction. We show that, belongs to the North Caucasus linguistic family. The ethnos is for a given sample size, interaction model and allele frequency, strongly subdivided into four tribes, each consists of some smaller the gain in power while accounting for the interaction depends on groups. The most peculiar tribe is Shapsugs, which is divided the exposure frequency : the largest gain are seen for the smallest from other Adygs by main Caucasus mountains chain. Analysis of exposure frequencies, and a loss of power can even be observed inter- and intra group genetic diversity has been performed in the when the exposure is frequent and/or the exposure effect is strong. hierarhical population system: ethnos - tribes - villages. If we consider a gene with a disease allele frequency of 0.2, with Surname frequencies were obtained almost totally for all Adygean no effect in the absence of exposure, an exposure with a 10-fold local populations (61 villages, near 60000 individuals). Nuclear increase risk and a GxE relative risk of 2, then : when the exposure DNA markers (ApoB and D1S80 minisatellites) and mtDNA markers frequency is 0.1, accounting for GxE interaction increases the power (HVR1) have been analysed. More than 400 individuals have been to detect the gene effect in 200 trios by 10%; when the exposure studied in total. frequency is 0.9 it decreases the power by 15%. We detected more than 16 alleles for each minisatellite loci. The geterozigosyty values are: 0.72 (D1S80) and 0.85 (3’ApoB) in Adygs; P0512. Mutation spectrum of CAPN3 gene in LGMD2A in Shapsugs 0.76 and 0.67 accordingly. As for HVR1 mtDNA, in patients in Croatia Shapsugs 64 mitotypes and in other Adygs 80 mitotypes have been A. Milic1, G. Piluso2, V. Ventriglia2, F. DAmico2, B. Kovac3, A. Trlaja4, revealed (sample sizes are 107 and 239). Z. Mitrovic5, N. Zurak5, L. Politano2, N. Canki-Klain1; Fst level of intergroup diversity in whole population system of Adygs 1Croatian Institute for Brain Research and Dept of Neurology, Zagreb as revealed by surname data amount to 0.0209. Different tribes University Medical School, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Dept of Pathology and appeared to be quite different by Fst levels: level varies from 0.0025 Dept of Internal Medicine, 2nd University of Napoli, Napoli, Italy, for Kabardinians to 0.0253 for Shapsugs. Since, strong genetic 3Dept of Neurology, University of Osijek, Osijek, Croatia, 4Dept of heterogeneity has been revealed in population system of Adygs. The Transfusiology, Universita of Split, Split, Croatia, 5Dept of Neurology, work was supported by RFBR grants. Zagreb University Medical School, Zagreb, Croatia. Background. Our previous results have shown that the most frequent P0510. Allelic association of gene markers in the FC mutation in CANP3 gene in patients from Croatia is the 550delA epsilon receptor I beta gene and IL-4 gene promoter in mutation, while the Y537X mutation was found only in 1 family. We Italian atopic children. report the results of the screening of CANP3 gene on 27 families, 8 of D. C. Salpietro1, L. Rigoli1, C. Di Bella1, G. Calabrò1, V. Procopio1, E. them never investigated, in which one or both mutations have been Cavallaro2, S. Briuglia1, M. V. Merlino1; identified. 1Unità Operativa di Genetica ed Immunologia Pediatrica Policlinico Objective. To determine mutation spectrum of CAPN3 in patients from Croatia.Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 182 183 Patients and Methods. During a 3-year-long project concerning e1267delG may enable a more accurate age-dating of this particular etiology and epidemiology of muscular dystrophies in our country, 37 mutation. This may help to understand the origin, evolution and patients from 27 families with potential calpainopathy were selected dispersion of the disease in the Romani populations. by clinical and family study. In the only sporadic patient the diagnosis was confirmed by CAPN3 Western blot. Beside the 550delA mutation P0515. in exon 4, two new mutations (R49H and R541W) and one gross Melanocortin 4 receptor mutations - a cause of common deletion (F200-L204del) were identified by DHPLC, Transgenomic obesity Wave System. Furthermore, we developed screening methods for S. M. Echwald1, L. H. Larsen1, T. I. A. Sørensen2, T. Hansen1, T. these mutations which included PCR and use of restriction enzymes. Andersen3, O. Pedersen1; Results. Analysis of 54 CANP3 chromosomes by 5 mutations 1Steno Diabetes Center, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Danish revealed the presence of 550delA in 36/54 (67%), R541W in 3/54 Epidemiology Science Centre at Institute of Preventive Medicine, (5.5%), R49H in 1/54 (1.85%), Y537 in 1/54(1.85%) and delFWSAL in Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Roskilde County Hospital, Roskilde, 1/54 (1.85%). Denmark. Conclusions. CANP3 gene screening by 5 mutations is able to Background: Human obesity is a prevalent, complex disorder, which identify 77% of patients with calpainopathy (LGMD2A) in our is now reaching epidemic proportions in the Western world. It is population. R541W and R49H are novel mutations. assumed that genetic disposition to obesity determine susceptibility to environmental factors. Discovery of the molecular basis for obesity in P0513. Lack of association between endothelial nitric the Agouti mouse has implicated the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) oxide synthase gene polymorphism and coronary artery in the development of obesity in rodents as well as in man. Aim: The disease in the Greek population aim of the present study was to analyze the prevalence of MC4R K. Lamnissou1, M. Vasilakou1, C. Maratheftis1, C. Kasparian2, N. J. mutations in a Danish sample of obese subjects. Subjects and Pantazopoulos2, C. Deltas3; Methods: Using PCR-dHPLC and direct sequencing, we screened 1Dept of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Dept of a cohort of 751 obese male subjects with early-onset obesity Cardiology, “Laiko” Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Dept of Molecular recruited at the draft board examinations as having a BMI ≥ 31 kg/m2 Genetics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, (BMI=33,3±2,4 kg/m2) and a control group consisting of 706 randomly Cyprus. sampled draftees (BMI=21,4±2,1kg/m2). Genetic polymorphism in the gene for endothelial nitric oxide Results: A total of 14 different nucleotide substitutions were synthase (ecNOS) has been considered as a potential risk factor identified. Among these, 11 nucleotide substitutions were found only for the development of coronary artery disease (CAD) in some in the obese study cohort. Among these, 9 carriers of a Tyr35Ter populations. We studied a 27 base-pair tandem repeat polymorphism variant and 6 carriers of the Arg165Gln variants were identified in intron 4 ecNOS gene in 105 control and 82 patients of Greek and showed direct association to obesity (p= 0.004 and p=0.02, population. The patient group consisted of subjects aged under 58 respectively). Combined, the carrier prevalence of mutations in the years presenting with symptomatic CAD, documented by coronary MC4R among obese Danish men is 2.8%. In conclusion, we find a angiography. The dada between the two groups were analysed by 2.8% carrier frequency of possible functional variants of the MC4R chi- square test. We found no significant difference in the frequency gene among obese Danish subjects which is consistent with reported of 4ab genotypes between patients and controls. The frequencies carrier frequencies in other European populations, making the for ecNOS4bb, ecNOS4ab and ecNOS4aa genotypes were 0.69, genetic variability in the MC4R the most common cause of genetically 0.28, 0.03, respectively, in controls compared to 0.71, 0.24, 0.05 in determined human obesity with known aetiology. patients. Thus, in contrast to earlier findings by others from some Asian populations, we have found no evidence for an association P0516. Spectrum of Genetic Disorders among Saudi between ecNOS4a allele as well as ecNOS4aa genotype and the risk Populations of premature coronary disease in the Greek population. M. A. F. El-Hazmi; King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. P0514. Congenital Myasthenic Syndrome in southeastern The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia occupies over 2/3rd of the Arabian European Roma (Gypsies) Peninsula The overwhelming majority of the population of Saudi V. Karcagi1, I. Tourrnev2, C. Schmidt3, A. Herczegfalvi4, V. Arabia are Arabs belonging to different nomadic tribes. In early Guergueltcheva2, I. Litvinenko2, I. Song3, A. Abicht3, H. Lochmüller5; 1960s, investigations began to identify the nature of genetic disorders 1National Center for Public Health, Budapest, Hungary, 2Alexandroff in the Saudi population and to determine the frequency of the University Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Gene Center and Friedrich-Baur- common abnormal genes. Among the single gene disorders, a large Institute, Munich, Germany, 4Bethesda Children’s Hospital, Budapest, number of disorders are identified and some exhibit polymorphism Hungary, 5Gene Center of LMU and Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Munich, in certain regions of Saudi Arabia. These include sickle cell, a- Germany. and b-thalassaemia and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS), a heterogeneous group deficiency genes. A significant number of amino acidurias and of disorders arise from various defects of the neuromuscular other inborn errors of metabolism have been reported. The majority transmission. The majority of CMS are inherited as autosomal of these disorders contribute significantly to the development of recessive traits due to loss-of-function mutations of the acetylcholin mental retardation in Saudi population. Cystic fibrosis, congenital receptor (AChR) subunit genes or the collagenic tail subunit of hypothyroidism, Bardet-Biedl Syndrome, fragile X syndrome, Lower acetylcholinesterase (ColQ) gene. Many of the e subunit deficiencies, syndrome, and a number of other genetic disorders, have been as most frequent causes of CMS, were found to be due to “private” reported amongst the Saudis. Chromosomal disorders contribute mutations and produce clinical phenotypes with great variations. significantly to morbidity and mortality in the Saudi population. This study summarizes data of the genetic analysis of a common Amongst the most frequent Down’s syndrome which occurs at a mutation, a homozygous basepair deletion in exon 12 of the AChR frequency of 1 in 800. Multifactorial disorders are the most common e subunit gene (e1267delG) in 66 CMS patients from 46 non-related genetic defects and are significant factors underlying morbidity families. All patients were clinically characterized as having sporadic amongst the Saudis. The community studies clarified several of or autosomal recessive CMS. All e1267delG families were of Romani these disorders including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, obesity (Gypsy) and/or southeastern European origin. Phenotype analyses and cardiovascular diseases. A comprehensive national study has revealed a uniform pattern of clinical features including bilateral determined the contribution of genetic causes in the development of ptosis, moderate fatigable weakness of ocular, facial, bulbar and limb disability in different regions of Saudi Arabia. muscles, positive response to anticholinesterase treatment and a This paper will present an overall coverage of genetic disorders in the benign natural course of the disease. Genotype analysis was carried Saudi population and suggest preventive measures. out and indicated a common ancestor (founder). We conclude that the mutation e1267delG might be the most frequent cause of CMS P0517. Genetics diversity of microsatellite loci in in patients of Romani (Gypsy) ethnic origin. Therefore, carrier and/or populations of Siberia and Central Asia newborn testing may be beneficial in this group, as the disease is M. Spiridonova, V. Stepanov, V. Puzyrev; treatable. Moreover, additional haplotype studies in patients harboring Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.182 Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 183 1600 individuals from 23 populations belonging to 13 ethnic groups P0520. Low density lipoprotein receptor gene mutations living on the territory Siberia and Central Asia was investigated. and polymorphisms in St.-Petersburg patients with These are Northern and Southern Altai, Tuvinian, Buryat, Evenk, familial hypercholesterolemia. Yakut, Kirghize, Uzbek, Tajik, Dungan, Russian, Ukrainian, Tatar. F. M. Zakharova, V. V. Egorov; Nine autosomal (D4S397, D5S393, D7S640, D8S514, D9S161, Institute for Experimental Medicine, St.-Peterburg, Russian D10S197, D11S1358, D12S364 and D13S173) microsatellites Federation. loci (STR) have been studied. Automated genotyping of STR loci Familal hypercholesterolemia (FH) is one of the most common was performed with HEX-, TET- or FAM-labeled primers with the inherited diseases (1:500), leading to atherosclerosis and premature ABIPrism310 genetic analyzer and Genescan software. High level myocardial infarctions. FH is caused by mutations in the human of microsatellite loci diversity was shown. In total, 128 different low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene. The early diagnosis allels at nine studied loci were found. Only 2.5 % of genetic of disease by means of DNA analysis allows to perform genetic variability of microsatellites was attributable to the differences counseling and to prevent the development of the disease in the between populations, whereas 97.5% of genetic diversity was found FH patients by drug treatment. Aiming to identify the FH-causing within populations. Autosomal STR system is most adequately for mutations of the LDL receptor gene we have screened the separate detection of genetic relationship between closely-related group exons of the gene in collection of 42 FH probands by means of of populations. The greatest level genetic differentiated of local PCR/SSCP analysis followed by DNA sequencing. During this study populations was observed in three Tuva populations (FST=2.68%). we have identified the following DNA mutations: C74X (c.285 C>A, Principal component analysis and phylogenetic analysis showed TGC→TGA), E397X (c.1252 G>T, GAG→TAG), G571E (c.1775 substantial difference between gene pool of Altai and Indo-European G>A, GGG→GAG), that seems to be causative for FH development, populations. High similarity of gene pool in local populations within and two neutral mutations: H229H (c.750 T>C, CAT→CAC), T705I certain ethnic group was demonstrated both by principal component (c.2177 C>T, ACC→ACT). All the mutations with the exception of and phylogenetic analysis. Phylogenetic analysis revealed genetic C74X and T705I were new and not reported elsewhere. Besides the close relation between Evenks and Buryats. mutations we have identified five neutral changes considered as DNA polymorphisms, namely c.66 C/T (C18C, TAC→TAT), c.1171 G/A P0518. Demogenetic study of three populations within a (A370T, GCC→ACC), c.1773 T/C (N570N, AAT→AAC), c.1959 C/T region with strong founder effect (V632V, GTC→GTT), c.2231 G/A (R730R, CGG→CGA). We have M. Tremblay, È. Lavoie, L. Houde, H. Vézina; compared the occurrence of the polymorphism alleles in FH group University of Quebec at Chicoutimi, Chicoutimi, PQ, Canada. and in the group of control (68 non-related subjects) that have not For more than three decades, the Saguenay population (Quebec, differed besides allele C of c.66 C/T polymorphism and allele A of Canada) has been the subject of many studies in population genetics. c.1171 G/A polymorphism were more common in control rather than It has been shown that 82% of the region’s gene pool originated from in FH group. nearly 2600 founders who settled in New-France during the 17th century. Some of these founders are believed to have introduced P0521. Impact of Misspecifying Parental Relationships in rare deleterious genes in the Quebec population. The demographic Maximum Lod Score Affected Sib-Pair Method behaviour of these founders’ descendants is at the heart of the A. L. Leutenegger1,2, E. Génin1, E. Thompson2, F. Clerget-Darpoux1; process by which some of these rare alleles were transmitted and are 1I.N.S.E.R.M. U535, Le Kremlin-Bicetre, France, 2University of now found at an elevated frequency in the contemporary Saguenay Washington, Seattle, WA. population. This study aims to a better understanding of the origins Many linkage studies are done in small isolated populations and and stratification of the Saguenay gene pool. The region has been populations where marriages between relatives are encouraged. In divided in three sub-populations based on geographical and historical these populations, missing information on pedigree structure is quite criteria: Lower Saguenay, Upper Saguenay and Lac St. Jean. frequent. Here, we study the impact of misspecifying the parental Three hundred extended genealogies (100 for each sub-population) relationships of the sib-pairs in the Maximum Lod Score method have been reconstructed, using the BALSAC population register. (Risch, 1990) and on the triangle constraints (Holmans, 1993). These genealogies have an average depth of 10 generations. Characterising the parental relationships by the kinship coefficient Kinship and inbreeding measurements, as well as the founders’ between the parents (f), the maternal inbreeding coefficient (a ) and genetic contribution, frequency and number of occurrences were m the paternal inbreeding coefficient (a), we studied the behaviour examined. Founders’ geographical origins, intraregional migratory p of the identity by descent (IBD) vector expected under the null movements as well as frequency and concentration of surnames hypothesis of no linkage with respect to these quantities. We find that were also considered. Preliminary results indicate lower inbreeding the expected IBD vector is not anymore (0.25, 0.5, 0.25) when they coefficients within the Upper Saguenay population, which is more differ from zero. There is an increased probability of sharing one or industrialized and has benefited from a dynamic migratory input. two alleles IBD. And in some cases the vector is even outside the Kinship coefficients between the three sub-populations become triangle constraints. distinguishable from the 6th generation onward; highest values are We simulated data on two different family structures: (1) parents those between Lower Saguenay and Upper Saguenay. are double first cousins (f = 0.125, a = a = 0), (2) each parent is m p offspring of first cousins (f = 0, a = a = 0.0625). We then analysed P0519. Polymorphisms of G894T, C774T and VNTR NOS3 the data underestimating the parmentalp relationships. We find that gene in the Siberian Populations. ignoring the kinship and/or inbreeding of the parents increases the T. V. Kosyankova, N. R. Maksimova, A. N. Kucher, V. P. Puzyrev, S. type I error of the test when data on the parents are not available. V. Buikin; But when parents are typed, we observe a decrease in type I Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. error. We also point out some unpleasant feature of the software The study of three polymorphism’s (G894T, C774T and VNTR) of GENEHUNTER even when parental relationships are properly endothelial nitric oxide syntase gene (NOS3) in Siberian populations specified. of different race and ethnic specificity (Russians, Tuvinians, Buryats, Yakuts) was carried out. For the studied markers the distributions of P0522. Evaluation of a cluster of congenital abnormalities genotypes in the most populations corresponded to Hardy-Weinberg particularly Down syndrome in a small Hungarian village equilibrium (HWE). A deviation from HWE was shown only for C774T L. Timar1, Z. Viragh2, K. Sperling3, A. Czeizel4; in Russian and Tuvinians (p<0.01). There were an excess of allele 1National Centre of Health Promotion, Budapest, Hungary, 2National C774 (82%) in Russian and G894 (69%) and VNTR B (93%) in Centre of Public Health, Budapest, Hungary, 3Inst. of Human Buryats. Have been shown significant difference in alleles prevalence Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4Found. of Comm. Contr.of Hered. Dis., for all markers between Russian and Buryats and for VNTR between Budapest, Hungary. Russian and Tuvinians.These data append accumulating information A unique cluster of congenital abnormalities, particularly Down on Siberian populations gene-poll; and there are all reasons to deem syndrome and twins was detected in a small Hungarian village in that the studies in this field will help to resolve both fundamental 1989-1990. biological issues, and appliedones, medical, that is especially actual Of 15 livebirths 11 (73.3 %) were affected by congenital abnormalities in the light of genomic medicine development. and 6 (40 %) were twins. Of eleven malformed babies 4 had Down syndrome.Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 184 185 The usual causes of congenital abnormality clusters : familial Eastern Arabs (as well as from Ethiopians) in one more important inheritence, consanguinity, classical teratogenic factors including aspect: while the latter populations possess a significant proportion alcohol could be excluded. of a variety of sister branches of H and V, in particular, preHV, such Different approaches of field studies, including a case-control study, mtDNA variants are much less frequent or nearly absent in Morocco, and laboratory examinations indicated the germinal mutagenic and whereas haplogroup V is virtually absent in northeast Africa and in teratogenic effect of the excessive use of trichlorfon at local fish the Near East. That, and several other phylogeographic arguments farms. suggest a limited recent migration of female lineages alongside the The content of this chemical was very high in fish (100 mg/kg) and northern Africa and should be considered as an important aspect several pregnant women, including all mothers of babies with Down where the spread of languages and genes is discussed. syndrome, had consumed contaminated fish in the critical period for the congenital abnormalities observed. P0525. Maternal legacy of Bretons reveals common Here the main experiences of the environmental abuse are features with the extant Scottish mtDNA summarized. J. P. Moisan1, E. Pennarun1, K. Tambets2, R. Villems2, A. Chaventre3; 1Laboratoire d’Etude du Polymorphisme de l’ADN (LEPA), Faculte de P0523. Gene-environment interaction in hereditary Medecine, Nantes, France, 2Estonian Biocentre and Tartu University, haemochromatosis: effect of excessive alcohol use on Tartu, Estonia, 3Laboratoire d’Etude du Polymorphisme de l’ADN, iron overload in patients homozygous for the C282Y Faculte de Medecine, Nantes, France. mutation Information about the variability of maternal lineages in France is very M. C. Mérour1, V. Scotet2, A. Y. Mercier1, B. Chanu1, T. Le Faou3, O. limited. Here we bring new data about 400 mtDNAs from different Raguénès2, G. Le Gac1, C. Mura2, C. Férec1,2; localities in France with a specific emphasize to Brittany. We have 1EFS-Bretagne, Brest, France, 2INSERM EMI 01-15, Laboratoire analyzed about 120 mtDNAs of native northern Bretons by HVR de Génétique Moléculaire, Brest, France, 3EFS-Bretagne, Quimper, sequencing and extensive search for coding region polymorphisms. France. Phylogenetic analysis was carried out using median networks. Hereditary haemochromatosis (HHC) is the most common inherited All found in Bretons mtDNA lineages belong to well-established disorder in Caucasian populations. Characterised by an iron overload, European-specific haplogroups H, I, J, K, T, U, V and W. French the disease is associated with increased risk of hepatocarcinoma mtDNA samples from different localities were analyzed likewise. The but is effectively treated by phlebotomies. The HFE gene was cloned obtained phylogenetic trees were compared with mtDNA variability in 1996 and a single mutation (C282Y) is responsible for 80-95% of in English, Scottish, Irish, Welsh, German and Iberian populations, cases. HHC presents a genetic heterogeneity and its expression can known from published data. This extensive search over more than be modified by environmental factors. The aim of this study was to 3000 mtDNAs revealed that, apart of trivial overlaps among common identify the influence of alcohol use on the intensity of iron overload, all over western Europe mtDNA lineages, there is a subset of more measured by serum ferritin, in patients homozygous for the main rare mtDNA variants present both in Bretons and Scots. It may mutation. suggest that a part of maternal inheritance of northern Brittany gene We retrospectively registered patients C282Y/C282Y treated in pool may come from Scotland, in accordance with historical data a blood centre of western Brittany. A clinical questionnaire was indicating the replacement of the imperial Roman Legions from the completed at their first visit, informing on biological and clinical signs, northern England to the coastal Brittany some 1500 years ago. life customs, …. The analysis was made using a linear regression model. P0526. The phylogeographic context of the southern This study included 351 subjects of whom 60.4% were males. Slavs: A mitochondrial perspective The most frequent clinical signs were: weakness (58.5%), arthritis H. V. Tolk1, M. Pericic2, L. Barac2, S. Cvjetan2, P. Rudan2, K. (44.7%), melanoderma (28.1%) and hepatomegaly (14.8%). Twenty- Tambets1, R. Villems1; five patients had an excessive alcohol use (>60 g/day - 7.2%). Those 1Estonian Biocentre and Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute for subjects presented a significantly increased serum ferritin (1865.5 Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia. vs 940.3 ng/ml - p<0.001) and a higher risk of hepatomegaly and Mitochondrial DNA lineages of three South Slavonic-speaking melanoderma. The result of regression analysis remained unchanged populations of the northwestern Balkan peninsula - Croats, Bosnians, after adjustment on sex and age at onset. and Slovenians (N ~1,200; ~370 haplotypes) - were identified Excessive alcohol use accentuates iron overload in C282Y/C282Y combining the sequences of mtDNA HVS-I region and the RFLP data patients. This aggravating factor increases the risk of cancer and from coding region. These lineages were compared with a dataset of cirrhosis. Consequently, it is recommended to those patients to of about 12,000 samples from elswhere. This phylogeographic have a reasonable alcohol use. This study illustrates an interaction knowledge base was used to interpret demographic events of the between genetic and environmental factors. past since the peopeling of Europe. An absolute majority of the lineages found belong to the common western-Eurasian haplogroups P0524. A comprehensive analysis of Arab and Berber - H, I, J, K, T, U, V, and W. Low-frequency haplogroups, e.g., N1, maternal lineages in Morocco. R, HV, and pre-HV, are present as well. Lineages, characteristic for E. Pennarun1,2, E. Metspalu2, T. Kivisild2, H. El Amri3, S. El Kabbaj3, sub-Saharan Africa or eastern Eurasia, occurred in single cases. A. Chaventré1, R. Villems2, J. P. Moisan1; For better phylogeographic resolution the data of the populations 1LEPA, faculte de medecine, Nantes, France, 2Estonian Biocentre from different geographic areas were compared in a sub-haplogroup and Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia, 3Laboratoire de Recherche et level, and the fraction of the identical haplotypes between population d’Analyse Medicale, Gendarmerie Royale, Rabat, Morocco. groups was determined. The distribution and diversity of many Moroccan mtDNA sample (N~540) was collected from different subhaplogroups reveals that the gene pool of the populations of localities of the country and an ethnic origin of individuals (~320 northwestern Balkans has not gained much influence from the Arabs and ~220 Berbers) has been established for the last 100 Near East during the Holocene. With some interesting exceptions, years.The variability of the sample was studied using mtDNA southern Slavs tend to have more common phylogenetic branches hypervariable region sequencing and extensive RFLP typing of shared with Germanic (e.g. T2), West Slavonic, or, in some cases, phylo-genetically informative coding region positions. Sub-Saharan with Finno-Ugric speakers (e.g., U4, U5), but significantly less so with African lineages (L) comprise more than a fifth of the sample, being, southern European and eastern Mediterranean populations. however, somewhat more frequent among Arabs than Berbers, though a relative proportion of subtypes of haplogroup L does not P0527. Alu-deletion polymorphism at CD4 locus differ among the two groups. In both populations, the rest of the correlates with Mongoloid component in the gene pool of lineages is split between 10%-11% African-specific varieties (U6 Northern Eurasia population. and M1) and those, typically found in western Eurasia. Meanwhile, I. Y. Khitrinskaya, V. Stepanov; Berbers possess haplogroup V at three-fold higher frequency than Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Arabs (~6.4% and ~2.2%, respectively) while the content of the Insertion-deletion Alu-polymorphism at the CD4 locus located on pre-V variants differs less (~4.6 and 2.8%). Furthermore, Moroccan chromosome 12 has been studied in more than 1400 individuals Afroasiatic speakers differ from northeastern African and Near sampled from 11 ethnic groups inhabiting Siberia and Central 184 Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 185 Asia. The investigated populations related to two basic racial P0529. “Implication of population genetics dimension in types of Eurasia: Mongoloid and Caucasoid. In contrast to other unrelated bone marrow transplantation organisation” polymorphic Alu-insertion the presence repeat (allele Alu+) is P. A. Gourraud1, C. Raffoux2, A. Cambon-Thomsen1; ancestral for insertion at the CD4 locus. Primates (chimpanzees, 1INSERM UNIT 558, Toulouse, France, 2FGM, Paris, France. gibbons and gorillas) are found to be monomorphic relative to The human major histocompatibility complex (MHC) which contains insertion presence. All studied ethnic groups are polymorphic at polymorphic multicopy genes such as HLA (Human Leukocyte the CD4 locus. It is interesting to note that deletion frequency Antigen), is particularly interesting in terms of polymorphism and (allele Alu-) decreases with increased Mongoloid component in genetic markers. the population. Maximal frequency of deletion allele is shown For bone marrow transplantation, most allogeneic transplants in Russians (0.339). It decreases to the east and is minimal in are from HLA-identical sibling donors. However many patients do Yakuts (0.025). For Caucasoids living in Central Asia, i.e. Tajiks not have a suitable familial donor and transplants from unrelated and Uzbeks the frequency of Alu allele was 0.143 and 0.130, while volunteer donors are required. those for Mongoloids, i.e. Kazakh and Kirghiz was 0.129 and 0.125, Since 1980, Donor Registries have gathered more than 7 x 106 respectively. In the territory of East Siberia the intensity of Mongoloid potential donors worldwide. signs increases in the following series: Tuvinians, Buryats, Dungans, We analysed the 100 000 HLA- A-B-DRB1 typed French donors, and Evenks and Yakuts, while the frequency of Alu-deletion decreases patients since 1998. Haplotype frequencies, regional distribution and as 0.074; 0.051; 0.045; 0.043 and 0.025, respectively. The study comparison between donors and patients HLA distribution, provide proved the importance of analyzing insertion-deletion polymorphism good basis for the optimisation of new recruitment strategies. We at the CD4 gene, which is very informative. This polymorphism assume that within the MHC “Polymorphic Frozen Blocks”, new SNP may probably serve as a marker correlated with the degree of the inside and outside the genes and Microsatellites would characterise Mongoloid component in populations. It may be also useful for the some genetic profiles (including non-HLA genes). Pre-test for such specialists of related fields - ethnographers, archaeologists and markers would help choosing which entering donors to fully HLA type. anthropologists. Some of 150 highly polymorphic MHC Microsatellites are in linkage disequilibrium with HLA alleles. We tested the ability of 6 Msat P0528. Association between Matrix Metalloproteinase-1 to predict HLA types on 800 DNA. To investigate differences and (+2506) gene polymorphism and Early Onset Periodontal similarities compared to SNP, we reanalysed HLA class 1 alignment. Disease (EOP) These technical and genetic issues associated with economical M. R. Bazrafshani1, W. E. R. Ollier1, M. H. Thornhill2, A. Hajeer1; considerations contribute to imagine new scenarios for current BMT 1The Centre for Integrated Genomic Medical Research, University organisation where the most polymorphic human system is playing a of Manchester, Medical School, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Oral central clinical role. [Work performed as part of an EU contract QLG7- Disease Research Centre, St Bart’s and The Royal London School of CT-2001-00065: MADO]. Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom. Background: Periodontal disease is a chronic inflammatory disease P0530. The effect of DNA polymorphisms in angiotensin of the supporting tissues of the teeth, starting with gingivae and I-converting enzyme and angiotensin II type1 receptor progressing to gradual destruction of the bony support and peridontal genes with arterial blood pressure levels in Serbian attachment of the teeth. Early onset periodontal diseases (EOP) are population a group of inflammatory disorders characterised by a rapid rate of A. Stankovic, M. Zivkovic, T. Djuric, D. Alavantic; periodontal tissue destruction, in young individuals. There is now Institute of Nuclear Sciences “Vinca”, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. substantial evidence to suggest that genetic factors play a role in the Polymorphism of angiotensin I-converting enzyme gene (ACE) and pathogenesis of EOP. angiotensin II receptor gene (ATR1), the crucial components of the Polymorphisms in the MMP-1 gene, which may underpin inter renin-angiotensin system, have been investigated with respect to individual differences in MMP-1 synthesis and secretion have regulation of arterial blood pressure. Aim of the study: Possible been associated with other diseases, which have an inflammatory association between polymorphisms of the I/D in the ACE gene, and pathogenesis. Genetic variation within candidate genes in EOP the A1166C of the ATR1 gene and arterial blood pressure and serum patients may represent a mechanism by which individuals are lipid levels in human population from the Belgrade area.Subjects rendered susceptible to disease. and Methods: We have investigated 285 healthy persons Objective: To investigate whether three biallelic polymorphisms recruited from the general population. Genotyping was performed occurring within the exonic regions of the MMP-1 gene (positions by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using a modified tree primer +85*, +2506** and +2613**) are associated with EOP. method for I/D and genotyping of A1166C by using allele specific Methods: The MMP-1 polymorphisms were detected using a PCR- amplification. SNP-SHOT method. MMP-1 polymorphisms were examined in 72 Results: Frequencies of the genotypes were a) for ACE - 0,18 (II), patients with EOP and 91 healthy matched UK controls. 0,51 (ID), 0,31 (DD), with allele frequencies 0,43 (I), 0,57 (D); b) for Results: No differences in allele and genotype frequencies were ATR1 - 0,54 (AA), 0,38 (AC), 0,08 (CC) with allele frequencies 0,73 observed for the +85 and +2613 SNP’s. In contrast significant (A), 0,27 (C). In males there is a correlation of the DD genotype increases in the +2506 A allele and A/G genotype were observed in with hypertension (OR=4,25; p=0,05). Frequencies of genotypes EOP cases. and alleles of A1166C significantly differ between the hypertensive Controls Cases males and controls (p<0,05). The male persons with CC genotype MMP-1 (+2506) N=91 % N=72 % have an three time higher relative chance of being hypertensive. In Genotype two-way ANOVA, a synergistic effect of ACE and ATR1 on the total G/G 78 85.7 41 56.9 cholesterol and LDL cholesterol was obtained. The male persons with G/A 11 12.1 291 40.3 DD/CC genotype have an eight time higher relative chance of being hypertensive. Conclusion: The results of this study are a contribution A/A 2 2.2 2 2.8 to prevention and therapy of hypertension and cardiovascular disease Allele in our population. G 167 91.8 111 77.1 A 15 8.2 332 22.9 P0531. 1O.R.=4.9, C.I. 95% 2.3-10.6, χ2 =17.3, P<0.05 Mutation analysis of PAH gene in phenylketonuria 2O.R.=3.3, C.I. 95% 1.7-6.3, χ2 =13.8, P<0.05 patients from Moscow region Conclusion: Several polymorphisms exist in the MMP-1 gene that A. Anichkina, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov; influences the MMP-1 biological activity. Our results demonstrated Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. association for EOP risk with the A allele and G/A genotype of the Phenilketonuria (PKU), one of the common inborn error of amino acid MMP-1 (+2506) gene. metabolism, is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations *Exon 1 in phenilalanin hydroxylase gene (PAH). Up to date it is known more **Exon 5 than 400 mutations but in every population there are some most frequent for each other. We have create the multiplex system for Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 186 187 ACRS PCR analysis for most prevalent mutations in Europe (R408W; molecular study using 117 families with at least two affected children R158Q; P281L; I65T; IVS10-11g→a; IVS12+1g→a; R261Q; R252W) and 236 healthy individuals. These families were ascertained from and carried out the mutation analysis in PKU patients from Moscow deaf schools from the whole of Tunisia. Clinical investigation was region. Among 94 alleles studied 47 (50%) were positive for R408W done on all affected and unaffected individuals. Linkage analysis mutation, 8 (8.7%) for IVS10-11g→a mutation, 6 (6.3%) for P281L was undertaken in informative families and sequencing was done mutation, 2 (2.2%) for R252W mutation and 1 (1%) for IVS12+1g→ when families were found to be linked to one DFNB known gene. In a. No allele was positive for R158Q, I65T and R261Q mutations. all families and unrelated controls, Cx26 mutations were screened The total informative of our system was 68% for our patients. The by DGGE and/or sequencing. Our results indicated that all families informative of this system were 87.4% for St-Petersburg PKU patients present a recessive mode of inheritance and at least 8 different and 80.5% for Novosibirsk PKU patients (by published date). The DFNB genes are involved. Homozygous mutations in the Cx26 R158Q and R261Q substitutions were detected in this regions but the gene was revealed in 21 (18.6%) unrelated families. The most frequent of Mediterranean origin mutation IVS10-11g→a were less frequent mutation found was the 35delG in patients (86.5%) and in (0.7% and 1.5% correspondently). All alleles with R408W mutation the healthy population (1.3%). On the basis of the known apparent for which it was possible to determined the gaplotype (n=10) had the mean consanguineous coefficient, we have determined the increase same VNTR3/STR234 minigaplotype. We propose that the population rate (3.40) of recessive deafness due to the 35delG mutation. In from central Russia include Moscow region has the other frequent conclusion, the consanguinity increases the frequency of recessive mutation(s) differ from other and more sensitive technique for its deafness gene but didn’t alter the genetic heterogeneity in Tunisia. detection has to be used. P0534. The presence of the western Eurasian mtDNA P0532. Phylogeography of maternal and paternal DNA haplogroup U5 in sub-Saharan Africans lineages in South Siberia A. Rosa1,2, E. Metspalu2, V. Macaulay3, A. Brehm1; M. V. Derenko1, T. Grzybowski2, B. A. Malyarchuk1, J. Czarny2, G. 1Madeira University, Madeira, Portugal, 2Estonian Biocenter and Tartu A. Denisova1, M. Wozniak2, I. K. Dambueva3, C. M. Dorzhu4, D. University, Tartu, Estonia, 3Dept. of Statistics, University of Oxford, Miscicka-Sliwka2, I. A. Zakharov5; Oxford, United Kingdom. 1Institute of Biological Problems of the North, Magadan, Russian We have studied mtDNA variation in 370 people from Guinea- Federation, 2The Ludwik Rydygier Medical University in Bydgoszcz, Bissau from different ethnic groups. More than 90% of the mtDNAs Forensic Medicine Institute, Bydgoszcz, Poland, 3Institute of General belong to the sub-Saharan African haplogroups within L1, L2 and Experimental Biology, Ulan-Ude, Russian Federation, 4Tuva and L3. Haplogroups M1 and U6 - the two African subsets of State University, Kyzyl, Russian Federation, 5Vavilov Institute of macrohaplogroups M and U, respectively - are present at much General Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. lower frequencies and exhibit little diversity. Surprisingly, the typically Based on mitochondrial DNA and Y-chromosome variability data western Eurasian haplogroup U5 was found at a frequency of the genetic structure of seven Southern Siberian groups, Tuvinians, ~3%. All of these U5 mtDNAs belong to individuals from the Fulbe Todjins, Burjats, Sojots, Tofalars, Altaians and Khakassians subpopulation of our sample - people who inhabit sub-Saharan (the total sample size is 480 individuals) was described. It was Africa from Sudan to Senegal. U5 appears to be among the earliest shown that populations studied were formed on heterogeneous branches of mtDNA outside Africa and can be found all over western genetic substratum encompassing both Asian and West-Eurasian Eurasia. Since U5 is either absent or extremely rare in Sudan, components. Phylogeographic analysis of Europeoid lineages Ethiopia and Egypt and rare in the Near East, it seems that its specific for Siberian populations confirms the “southern” origin presence in the Fulbe of Guinea-Bissau is best interpreted as a result for the majority (60%) of mtDNA lineages and assumes that their of gene flow from north-western Africa, where U5 is present both occurrence is due to migrations of Europeoids from West Asia. It among Arabs and Berbers. In contrast, our sample lacks the most was shown that the Y-chromosome lineages of HG10 as well as frequent west Eurasian lineage clusters, e.g. H, J and T, suggesting mtDNA lineages of five (A, B, C, D, X) haplogroups specific for Native that a specific founder event and not recurrent maternal gene flow Americans are present in Altai and Sayan populations gene pools. was operable here. This fact together with the presence of palaeo-Europeoid component, represented by Y-chromosome 92R7T-lineages, in Altai and Sayan P0535. ALU Genetic Diversity in British and Indian populations gives an evidence of the participation of South Siberian Populations. aboriginal groups in peopling of Americas. The high frequencies of S. S. Mastana1, S. S. Papiha2, P. Singh3, M. Singh3, K. Das4, A. Y-chromosome HG12, which is ancestral to HG16, in populations of Pacynko1, P. Fisher1, M. Das4, N. Malik5, P. Reddy6; Altai and Sayan region (up to 30% in Tofalars) were revealed thus 1Loughborough University, Loughborough, United Kingdom, 2Institute indicating the autochthonous Siberian origin of Y-chromosome TAT- of Human Genetics, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Human C lineages. The results of phylogenetic analyses based on mtDNA Biology Punjabi University, Patiala, India, 4ISI, Calcutta, India, and Y-chromosome variability data testify the considerable inter- 5SGSIPU, Delhi, India, 6Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, population differentiation of Southern and Eastern Siberian groups OR. studied. The degree of genetic differentiation is defined rather by ALU polymorphisms provide a useful tool to population geneticists geographical, historical and evolutionary factors, than linguistical for understanding the population dynamics that have occurred and anthropological ones. This work was supported by RFBR (99- over time. We report here a study of Six Alu insertion loci (TPA25, 06-80430) and the Ludwik Rydygier Medical University in Bydgoszcz D1, APO, PV92, FXIIIB and ACE) from 20 endogamous caste and (BW66/2002). tribal populations of India and 5 regionally subdivided populations of Britain. Overall spectrum of variation in these populations is very P0533. Nonsyndromic hereditary hearing loss in Tunisia: interesting at different geographical and cultural levels. High level of Molecular study and impact of consanguinity insertion frequencies was observed in some highly inbred groups. S. Masmoudi1, A. Ghorbel2, A. Elgaied-Boulila1, M. Hmani1, S. Ben Average levels of heterozygosities were found to be relatively high Arab1, A. Kassab3, S. Hachicha4, M. Drira2, H. Ayadi1; in these populations (range 41% to 49.8%). The genetic diversity 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Faculté de coefficient GST among this group of populations was observed to be Médecine de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service d’O.R.L., C.H.U. H. high. Phylogenetic trees and principal components analysis (PCA) Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service d’O.R.L., C.H.U. F. Bourguiba, computed from Alu frequencies provide support for socio-cultural and Monastir, Tunisia, 4Service d’O.R.L., C.H.U. Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia. geographical assignment of these populations in Indian population In industrial countries, about 60% of congenital hearing impairment structure. Comparisons are made with other world populations to cases are due to genetics defects and about 80% of hereditary understand genetic diversity and dynamics of Alu variation in British hearing loss are nonsyndromic recessive deafness. Although more and Indian populations. than 30 recessive genes have been localised, mutations involving the Cx26 gene (DFNB1) are the most common cause of deafness P0536. Population genetic analysis of CAG repeats of in many populations. In order to determine the genetic basis and IT15 in populations of Volga-Ural region of Russia the impact of consanguinity on the hereditary nonsyndromic hearing I. A. Kutuyev1, I. M. Khidijatova1, R. I. Fatkhlislamova1, R. V. impairment in Tunisia, we have conducted an epidemiological and Magzhanov2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1;186 Posters - Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 187 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Science Center of deletion than expected. In the patients with the detected deletion the Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir clinical diagnosis is thus confirmed and prenatal diagnosis can be State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. made. The mutation causing Huntington disease (HD) is expansion of a trinucleotide repeat in the 5’ end of IT15 gene on 4p16.3 beyond P0539. Genetic polimorphism of CYP2C9 and CYP2D6 in the normal range of 35 repeats. The investigation addresses the Croatian population genetic factors associated with normal variation of the CAG N. Bozina, I. Tramisak, P. Granic, A. Stavljenic-Rukavina; repeat polymorphism in HD gene. In the study blood samples of University of Zagreb, School of Medicine and University Hospital 602 individuals from 8 populations from Volga-Ural region were Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. investigated: 4 ethnic groups of Bashkirs, Tatars, Russians, Genetic polymorphism of drug metabolizing enzymes can lead to Chuvashes, Mordvinians, Maris, Udmurts, and Komis. The method severe toxicity or therapeutic failure of pharmacotherapy. Additionally, involved PCR amplification using primers flanking only CAG genetically determined differences in the activity of the metabolic polymorphic cite (without CCG repeats) with subsequent PAGE and enzymes can increase an individual’s susceptibility to certain types of dyeing with ethidium bromide. In all populations normal distribution of chemically induced cancers and possibly other diseases. Cytochrome CAG repeats was found (p<0,001) showing unimodal nature peaking P450 ( CYP) is one of the most important metabolic systems of around repeat CAG17; the distribution skewness varied from 0.74 the organism involved in the oxidation of different drugs and other in Chuvashs to 1.98 in Bashkirs. 26 alleles containing from 9 to 36 xenobiotics. repeats were revealed in total sample. A new sporadic case of HD Based on the metabolic activity the population is divided into three was revealed in a person clinically silent and without positive family phenotypes: ultraextensive, extensive and poor metabolizers. Inter history of the disease with genotype CAG17/36. Fst, Fis, Fit, Gst, ethnic differences in the activity of CYP’s have been reported. Dst were calculated. Four populations showed rather high rate of Cytochromes CYP2C9 and CYP2D6 are involved in metabolism of intermediate alleles (CAG29-35): Russians, Chuvashes, Mordvinians, more than 50 drugs. It is questionable which of the mutant alleles and Udmurts (0.06, 0.01, 0.02, and 0.01 subsequently). We found should routinely be identified to allow a sufficiently reliable but still extremely heterogeneity of investigated populations as in comparison practicable estimation of a persons metabolic capacity. with each other so with others world populations (Caucasians, In our study, we inwestigated the prevalence of most frequent alleles Asians, and African Blacks). Total observed and expected of CYP2C9 and CYP2D6 among 200 unrelated Croatian individuals. heterozigosity for the locus were 0.751 and 0.769 respectively. The most frequent CYP2C9 alleles are 2C9*1 ( 0.74), 2C9*2 (0.165) Almost all populations were in HW equilibrium. and 2C9*3 (0.095). The prevalence of CYP2D6 alleles was: 2D6*1 (0.863), 2D6*2 P0537. The impact of prevention strategies on the (0.040), 2D6*3( 0.011), 2D6*4 ( 0.068), 2D6*5 (0.008), 2D6*6 ( prevalence of neural tube defects in Hungary, 1987-1999 0.010). J. Metneki, K. Szalma, M. Szunyogh, C. Siffel; Pharmacogenetic studies may be of great relevance in clinical National Center for Epidemiology, Budapest, Hungary. practice. It can predict the drug efficiency in patients prior to Neural tube defects (NTD) are one of the most common and treatment, help physicians to identify patients susceptible to the serious congenital anomalies. As a result of prevention strategies, development of harmful side effects to specific drugs and, thus, a decrease in prevalence at birth has been reported worldwide. We increase safety and efficacy of therapeutic treatments. aimed to investigate the impact of prenatal diagnosis and folic acid supplementation on the live birth prevalence of NTD in Hungary. We P0540. Candidate Gene Polymorphisms In Thrombotic included all liveborn, stillborn, and terminated cases diagnosed with Disease NTD and reported to the Hungarian Congenital Abnormality Registry S. Penco1, M. Grow2, L. Baglietto3, G. Lando1, M. Patrosso1, F. from 1987 through 1999. Additional cases with NTD obtained from Baudo1, S. Cheng2, A. Marocchi1; our nationwide field study were also recorded. There were a total 1Niguarda Ca’ Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy, 2Roche MS, Alameda, of 1,772 cases with NTD among 1,497,515 births. Thus, the overall CA, 3IEO, Milan, Italy. prevalence was 11.8 per 10,000 births. Anencephaly accounted for Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a multifactorial disease 25.3%, spina bifida 61.0%, encephalocele 13.7% of all cases with that depends on variable combinations of acquired and genetic NTD. The proportion of NTD-pregnancies terminated increased risk factors. Well established risk factors include advancing from 17% during 1987-1996 to 72% during 1997-1999, while the age, prolonged bed rest and surgery. Genetic risk factors are proportion of live births significantly declined from 58% to 21%. also common and may play a role in approximately 25% of the This two-fold reduction in live birth prevalence is resulted from individuals who develop VTE. Factor V, Factor II, MTHFR and CBS improvements in the accuracy of prenatal detection of NTD-affected polymorphisms are genetic markers associated with VTE; their pregnancies with an increase in termination of these pregnancies. single contribution could be not so evident to allow its identification. Previous surveys of mothers showed that most of them took folic acid It has been postulated that more than one genetic risk factor may supplementation during pregnancy but only about 10% had started co-segregate with a consequent cumulative or synergistic effect on it before conception. Thus, the impact of primary prevention on the thrombotic risk (1). prevalence of NTD is far from optimal compared to the impact of A multilocus assay was used to genotype 65 biallelic polymorphisms prenatal diagnosis in Hungary in recent years. or mutations within 36 genes (2) in an Italian population (638 individuals) affected (323) or not affected (315) by venous thrombotic P0538. A Reccurent Deletion In Nemo Gene In Slovene events. These genes are involved in lipid metabolism, homocysteine Patients With Incontinentia Pigmenti metabolism, blood viscosity, platelet aggregation, leukocyte adhesion K. Writzl, B. Peterlin; and renin-angiotensin system. Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Genotype frequencies for all the markers were compared between Gynecology, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. the two groups. For each locus the association between genotype Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) (OMIM 308300) is a rare genodermatosis and VTE event has been evaluated by means of a logistic model, that segregates as an X-linked dominant disorder and is in male assuming that event’s risk depends on the genotype. almost always lethal prenatally. The disorder demonstrates complete Markers showing an association with VTE, witha p-value <0.05 at penetrance, but its phenotypic expression is highly variable. In univariate level, are reported. affected females it causes abnormalities of the skin, nails, teeth, hair, eyes and central nervous system. The gene responsible for IP has recently been identified as the NEMO (NF-kB Essential Modulator) gene. A common deletion mutation that removes exons 4 through 10 was observed in approximately 80% of IP patients. Ten Slovene families (14 female patients containing 10 probands) were included in this study. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used for the deletion analysis of the NEMO gene. Three probands showed deletion of NEMO gene. In our study we identified less patients with Posters - Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 188 189 results show a differential male and female non-African contribution likelihood ratio test Marker to Afro-Brazilian populations: European men had a larger contribution p-value as compared to Amerindians concerning Y-chromosome, whereas the data from mitochondrial DNA show a larger contribution of Factor II.G20210A 0.004 Amerindian women to the non-African heritage of Afro-Brazilians. Factor V.arg506gln <0.001 Historical and social data explain these results, that indicate that ICAM.gly214arg 0.039 the Afro-Brazilian communities were formed basically by people of Angiotensin Receptor 1.A1166C 0.047 African origin and the non-Africans incorporated were predominantly European men and Amerindian women. 1) Seligsohn U and Lubetsky. N Engl J Med. 2001; 344: 1222.2) Supported by FAPESP, CAPES & UESB. Cheng S, Grow MA, Pallaud C, Klitz W, Erlich HA, Visvikis S, et al. Genome Research. 1999; P 10. Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy P0541. The influence of FV-Leiden, FII-20210G→ P0543. Hemophilia situation in northwest of Iran A and 677C→T MTHFR gene mutations on prenatal M. Omrani1, S. Salehi Gargari2; 1Cytogenetic and Molecular Medicine unit, Uromia, Islamic Republic development, risk of deep venous thrombosis and of Iran, 2Imam Reza hospital, Uromia, Islamic Republic of Iran. ischemic stroke in Czech children / adult patients. Despite molecular advances in carrier detection and prenatal E. Hladikova1, I. Hadacová2, M. Koudová1, E. Mikesová1, S. diagnosis, in many rural and border area of Iran and Turkey, Vilímová1, I. Spálová3, M. Brandejská3, B. Petrák4, V. Krutílková1, M. hemophilia is still a major problem. RFLP/PCR method for factor Hejtmánková5, I. Anguelová1, M. Fialová1, I. Soldátova1, M. Macek1, VIII mutations screening were carried out. Questionnaires for all M. Macek, Jr1; patients and their families who are receiving clothing factor were 1Cystic Fibrosis Center / Laboratory of Assisted Reproduction, obtained. The necessary DNA was gathered using peripheral blood Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2. School of Medicine of and Protinase K method. PCR and RFLP analysis were carried Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech out according to the literature. Interestingly in many of the villages Republic, 2Department of Clinical Hematology and Blood Bank, 2. still it is possible to see affected female with hemophilia A. Even in School of Medicine of Charles University and University Hospital some families more than 5 members are affected. This happening Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics; mostly because of the consanguineous marriage. In more than 2. School of Medicine of Charles University and University Hospital 70% of the cases the carrier females are marrying with theirs Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Clinic of Pediatric Neurology, 2. affected first cousin. Therefore their entire child is affected. Despite School of Medicine of Charles University and University Hospital prenatal diagnosis facilities in the region, still they are not seeking Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 5GENNET Ltd., Prague, Czech any of them. In more than 60% of the cases family has noted to the Republic. disease by accident such as dental operation or general surgery. The aim of this study was to ascertain population frequency of FV- This makes the duty of the Cytogenesis and counseling centers Leiden (FV-L), FII 20210G→A (FII) and of 677C→T MTHFR gene much heavier. Even it gives an idea to health care organizers that if mutations in Czech controls and to assess their impact on pre- / they going to offer any help in establishing any center in developing postnatal development due to hemocoagulation disturbances. In countries check many factors like cultural, educational and traditional controls FV-L was found in 25/436 (5.7 %), FII in 3/130 (2.3 %) and background of needed people. In this study we are going to present MTHFR in 74/198 (37.4 %). In the case of deep venous thrombosis the results of our study in carrier detection as well as sharing our in children / adults only FV-L was significantly increased to 8/44 (18.0 experience with other collogues for working in rural area. %) / 25/160 (15.6 %; p<0.001). In ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attacks in children / adults there was a tendency towards an P0544. Polymorphisms Of The Detoxification System increase of FV-L 3/22 (13.6 %) / 7/50 (14.0 %; p<0.08). Interestingly, Genes, Predisposing To Atopic Asthma FV-L was found to be associated with an increased risk of stillbirth 4/24 (16.6 %; p<0.05). In a cohort of females with reproductive O. Sideleva1, T. Ivaschenko1, J. Ostankova1, M. Petrova2, T. Gembitskaya2, A. Orlov3, V. Baranov1; disorders, referred for genetic testing from a collaborating assisted 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, reproduction clinic, there was a trend towards a decrease of FV-L Russian Federation, 2Institute of Pulmology, St.Petersburg, Russian 4/134 (3.0 %; p<0.08) in agreement with recent hypothesis (Lancet Federation, 3St. Olga’s Childrens Hospital, St.Petersburg, Russian 358: 1238; 2001) on improved embryonic implantation in FV-L Federation. carriers. No differences were observed in females with recurrent abortions (I.-II. trimester) in all tested thrombophilic alleles. However, The metabolism of exogenous substances (xenobiotics) via Phase I detoxification enzymes (cytochromes P450) and FII and MTHFR mutations were not different from controls in all Phase II detoxification enzymes (glutathione S-transferases; N- studied diseases, while verification of observed trends requires acetyltransferases) demonstrates substantial individual variability, further analysis. thus predisposing to different multifactorial diseases, such as Supported by IGA MZCR: 6250, 6497, 6464, 6462, 6411(-3); atopy and asthma. Polymorphism analysis of CYP1A1, GSTM1, 00000064203 and MSMT CR: 111300003, LN00A079, ME457. GSTT1, GSTP1 and NAT2 genes in 109 asthmatic patients and 90 control individuals from the Northern-Western Russia was carried P0542. Y-Chromosome biallelic polymorphisms in Afro- out. Individuals with GSTM10/0, GSTT10/0 genotypes were at Brazilian populations approximately 8,5-fold higher risk of developing asthma (OR=8,50; K. Abe-Sandes, W. A. Silva-Jr, M. A. Zago; 95%CI: 3,623-10,956). Proportion of GSTM10/0, GSTT10/0, GSTP1 Universidade de Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil. A/A individuals appeared to be significantly increased in the group The Brazilian population originated by the admixture of European of asthmatics (19,3%) than in the controls (4,4%, p=0.0007), with colonists, mainly Portuguese, African slaves and autochthonous an OR of 5,13 (95%CI: 1,849-14,239). The frequency of the Ile- Amerindians. To evaluate the degree of admixture and genetic Val polymorphism of CYP1A1 gene and the most common NAT2 diversity in Afro-Brazilians, we analyzed nine biallelic markers (M34, polymorphisms was similar in the control group and in asthmatic PN2, SRY2627, SRY8299, SRY1532, 92R7, DYS271, DYS199, patients. Null-genotypes of both genes - GSTM1 and GSTT1, DYS287) in 209 unrelated men, being: 39 from two isolated combined with GSTP1 A/A genotype might be suggested as genetic communities; 88 urban Afro-Brazilians, 32 Japanese and 50 whites. factors predisposing to atopic asthma. We observed that the majority of Afro-Brazilians Y chromosomes are of African origin: 41-77% in the isolated communities and 49-61% P0545. The Concept of Telegentics in India: A Survey in the urban Afro-Brazilians. The frequency of European markers Among Clinicians was 9-29% for the isolated communities and 20-34% for the urban Afro-Brazilians.The DYS199T allele, characteristic of Amerindians, A. Kesari, G. S. Pandey, B. Mittal, S. K. Pal; Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, was observed in only 6% of the urban Afro-Brazilians of the city of India. Salvador. The Alu insertion was present in 59 to 75% of the Afro- Telemedicine is an umbrella term that encompasses any medical Brazilians, in 23% of the Japanese and in 18% of the whites. These 188 Posters - Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 189 activities involving an element of distance. It is described as the family with genetic disease caused by rare unusual mutation of well next frontier in the delivery of health care. Videoconferences and known gene, information about balanced chromosomal translocation databases facilities are effectively utilized for monitoring public of one of the parents etc.Even more tactful information should be health activities. Telemedicine is creating new way for patients to parents who have pregnancy after IVF, waiting a long time for and clinicians to interact and access specialist services which are the future child.Even more difficult is refusing of women, who offers not locally available. Developing countries have acute shortage of donnation of ovum and who for instance balanced translocation or specialist and their services are concentrated in major cities, so genetic unfavorable family history.The genetic counselling should be in such circumstances, telemedicine can play a crucially role in everytimes empathetic, fully informative and non- authoritative. bridging thegap. A survey was conducted to access the concept of Telemedicine and Telegenetics counseling via Internet among P0548. Pronto Ethnix™ - a Population-Based Approach 20 clinicians attending a genetic counseling course, conducted in for Genetic Testing our department. Participants were from various places of India and Y. Furman, N. Navot; most of them were either pediatricians (60%) or gynecologists from Savyon Diagnostics, Ltd, Ashdod, Israel. peripheral hospitals. A questionnaire was designed to know the Genetic diseases are unique in that their prevalence varies general awareness regarding Telemedicine and Telegenetics i.e. the significantly in different ethnic groups or geographical regions. When idea of genetic counseling through Internet in India. Cent-percent designing genetic diagnostic kits, we apply an approach that takes of the participants agreed that Internet could play a major role in into account these unique properties, to increase detection rate and genetic counseling and patient’s management at the peripheral level. decrease cost. Most of clinicians thought that Telegenetics can provide immediate Our first Ethnix™ panel is aimed towards Jews of Eastern European accessibility to experts and will greatly enhance the scope of genetic origin - the Ashkenazim, which are unique in terms of demographic services in our country. More than 95% of the clinicians agreed to history and genetic structure. Emerging from a limited number join Tele-consultant group and emphasized the idea of making an of founders, they have undergone an outstanding expansion of interactive websites so that they could be actively connected via population size and have had the tendency to marry within the net with the tertiary care hospitals after they complete the genetic religion. As a result, Ashkenazi Jews share a very similar genetic counseling course. background. This similarity includes some recessive mutations, which, when homozygous, lead to progressive deterioration of one‘s P0546. A Reliable Quantitative Method For Rapid health, life-long disability and death. Relatively few mutations account Detection Of Serum Phenylalanine: Application in PKU for most of these diseases. screening Our single nucleotide primer extension technology - Pronto™, S. Vallian1, H. Moeini1, E. Barahimi2; provides a user-friendly, rapid and accurate method for mutation 1Isfahan University, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Khatam detection. Using Pronto™, we developed a testing panel for the University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. most common disease-associated SNPs in Ashkenazim. It tests for Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inherited metabolic disease, which mutations which cause Tay-Sachs, CF, Canavan, Gaucher, Fanconi is characterized by increased level of serum phenylalanine (Phe). anemia, Bloom syndrome, Familial Dysautonomia, Neimann-Pick, The quantitative measurement of Phe in the patient’s serum is Mucolipidosis type IV and Glycogen Storage disease type I. We necessary to confirm the disease, and to distinguish PKU from apply the same approach in our cancer-predisposition panel for other forms of hyperphenylalaninemia. In this study, we report a Ashkenazim, which tests for the few cancer-causing mutations in novel method for quantitative measurement of Phe in serum. The Brca1, Brca2 and APC that are prevalent in this population. method was developed using Proteus Rettgeri bacteria, which Another panel targets the CFTR gene with mutations that are produce phenylalanine deaminase (transaminase). These bacteria common throughout Europe as well as mutations that are specific for could convert Phe into phenylpyrovate in the culture medium, which particular regions. can be easily detected by spectrophotometer using ferric chloride Future Ethnix™ panels will target additional populations. reagent. In this method, the standard curve for Phe ranging from 2- 30 mg/dL was linear. This method was applied to 33 PKU samples P0549. Extremely Low Prevalence of Factor V Leiden, (serum and blood spots collected on filter paper), which their serum FII20210A and FXIIIV34L in Chinese Population Phe had already been tested using the Gutheri bacterial inhibition H. Zheng1, C. C. Tzeng2, C. Butt2, E. Randell1,3, Y. G. Xie1,3,4; assay (GBIA) and the HPLC method. The results were essentially 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Memorial University of similar. The advantage of this method over GBIA is its ability to Newfoundland, St. John’s, NF, Canada, 2Department of Pathology, measure the serum Phe quantitatively without the use of expensive Chi-Mei Foundation Medical Centre, Tainan, Taiwan Republic beta-(2-thienyl)-DL-Alanine. This method is now used in our PKU of China, 3Department of Genetics, Memorial University of screening program in parallel with the GBIA and HPLC test. So far, Newfoundland, St. John’s, NF, Canada, 4Department of Pediatrics, no false positive result has been seen using this method, which is Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NF, Canada. occasionally happens with the GBIA. This method provides a fast, The Factor V Leiden (FVL) and prothrombin G20210A (FIIG20210A) simple, cost effective and quantitative assay for PKU screening which are the two most commonly recognized risk factors for venous is amenable to automation. thrombosis. In contrast, a gene variant of factor XIII, FXIIIV34L, has been reported to confer protection against arterial thrombosis. P0547. Ethical,psychological and social aspects of The prevalence of these three variants has been determined for prenatal diagnostics most Caucasian populations, however, distribution of these variants M. Kucerova; in other populations has been poorly studied, especially in Asian Postgraduate Medical Institute, Prague, Czech Republic. populations. To determine the prevalence the three variants in Conteporary state of genetic counselling in Czech Republic is on the the Chinese population we analyzed 500 unrelated and healthy relatively good level.We have sufficient network of genetic centres women from Taiwan area of China. The carrier frequencies, allele (2/1 000 000 inhabitants), number of clinical geneticists -physicians frequencies, and the frequencies for all possible genotypes of (approx.6/1 000 000) and other graduated in clinical geneticists(8/1 FVL, FIIG20210A and FXIIIV34L from these samples are given in 000 000).The level of prenatal diagnoses is on conveniant level: the Table. The corresponding data for 500 healthy and unrelated biochemical screening -Triple Test, age indication (35 years), individuals from the Newfoundland Caucasian population is included ultrasonic examination (3 times during pregnancy, at least).Due to for comparison (Our unpublished data). Our results show that this secondary prevention 60% of children with inborn chromosomal Chinese population has a 9-fold lower prevalence of FIIG20210A, aberrations are not born.Molecular genetics is quickly developing a 24-fold lower prevalence of FVL and more than 250-fold lower the number of possible diagnoses is growing.Nevertheless prenatal prevalence of FXIII34L compared with our Caucasians controls. The diagnoses open many ethical, psychological and social problems: present study demonstrates a significant and highly ethnic-dependent The most problematic are the simplified information about pathologic distribution of the three variants in the Chinese population compared results of biochemical screening, about pathologic karyotype of the with Caucasians. The dramatically lower prevalence of FVL and fetus (describtion of possible clinical signs of the future child), about FIIG20210A in the Chinese population suggests that these two gene possible termination of pathologic pregnancy, about uninformative variants play significantly less role as genetic predisposing factors Posters - Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 190 191 in Chinese with venous thrombosis. Furthermore, the dramatically 3-rd category. The most common mutations of CFTR, PAH and SMN lower prevalence of FXIIIV34L in Chinese also suggests that this genes were screened in 175 unrelated persons. 28 persons have gene variant might not be a useful candidate allele for further study of been determined as heterozygous carriers of following mutations: arterial thrombosis in Chinese. delF508 - 5 persons, R408W and Y414C - 2 persons, exon 7 deletion of cenSMN gene - 21 persons. The genetical consulting, partner Chinese (n = Newfoundlander (n Genotype testing and prenatal diagnosis were recommended for all families at risk. 500) = 500) We have suggested that the such genetic testing programs will V/V 499 (99.8%) 259 (51.8%) be useful for prevention of most common hereditary disorders in FXIIIV34L V/L 1 (0.2%) 209 (41.8%) Ukraine. L/L 0 (0%) 32 (6.4%) Carrier Frequency 0.2% 48.2% P0552. Mutational analyses of potassium channel gene KVLQT1 and identification of a novel long-QT syndrom Allele Frequency of 34L 0.1% 27.3% mutation (T309I) J. Kadlecova1, B. Ravcukova1, I. Valaskova1, R. Gaillyova1, T. Novotny2, B. Semrad2; G/G 499 (99.8%) 494 (98.8%) 1University of Children´s Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Dept. of FIIG20210A G/A 1 (0.2%) 6 (1.2%) Cardiology, Faculty Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic. A/A 0 (0%) 0 (0%) Long-QT Syndrome (LQTS) is a cardiovascular disorder characterized by prolongation of the QT interval on ECG and Carrier Frequency 0.2% 1.2% presence of syncope, seizures, and sudden death. Five genes have Allele Frequency of been implicated in Romano-Ward Syndrome, the autosomal dominant 0.1% 0.6% 20210A form of LQTS: KVLQT1 (11p15.5), HERG (7q35-36), SCN5A (3p21- 24), KCNE1 and KCNE (21q22). Mutations in KVLQT1 and KCNE1 also cause the Jervell and Lang-Nielsen Syndrome, a form of LQTS W/W 499 (99.8%) 476 (95.2%) associated with deafness, a phenotypic abnormality inherited in an FVL W/L 1 (0.2%) 24 (4.8%) autosomal recessive form. L/L 0 (0%) 0 (0%) We used mutational analyses to screen LQTS patients from 23 Carrier Frequency 0.2% 4.8% families for mutations in the KVLQT1 gene, a potasium channel subunits that account for most of RWS cases. In six unrelated Allele Frequency of 0.1% 2.4% LQTS patients, singlestrand conformation polymorphism analyses FVL identified aberrant conformers. DNA sequence analyses identified two missense mutations G325R and T309I, localized in the P0550. Our first experiences with molecular genetic transmembrane domains S6 and pore region. CT substitution diagnosis of malignant hyperthermia in the Czech resulting in a tyrosine to an isoleucine transition at codon 309 (T309I) Republic was novel. We also identified two single nucleotide polymorphisms I. Valaskova, I. Grochova, J. Kadlecova, B. Ravcukova, Z. Lukas; in four unrelated LQTS patients, F484F and Y171Y, which have not University of Children´s hospital, Brno, Czech Republic. been previously reported. Further functional studies will be required Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant, potentially to determine what effect each of these changes may have on letal pharmacogenetic predisposition which is considered to be of KVLQT1 channel function. the main causes of death during anesthesia. Triggering by volatile Genetic screening using mutational analysis can improve anesthetics and depolarizing muscle relaxans in susceptible patients presymptomatic diagnosis. Familial and sporadic cases affected leads to an abnormally high release of intracellular Ca2+ in sceletal muscle. by mutations in all LQT genes can now be genetically screened to In more then 50% of the affected families, MH is caused by mutations identify individuals at risk of the development of the disorder. This in the ryanodine receptor of sceletal muscle( RYR1) encoded by work is supported by the Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of the gene on chromosome 19q12.-13.2. Mutation analysis in human Health in the Czech Republic (IGA MZ 5718-3) RYR1 gene has shown until now about 25 mutations which could be associated with MH predisposition. P0553. Periconceptional use of folic acid in The To date, MH diagnosis has not been provided in the Czech Republic. Netherlands: from science to public health policy We have just started the mutation analysis in RYR1 gene to those M. C. Cornel1, L. T. W. de Jong-van den Berg2, H. E. K. de Walle3; patients who either had a documented hyperthermic crisis or positive 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Social in vitro muscle contracture test ( IVCT). The most aim our programe Pharmacy and Pharmacoepidemiology, Groningen Institute for Drug is to discover MH families members at risk. This work is supported Studies (GIDS), Groningen, Netherlands, 3EUROCAT registration, by grant from the Internal Grant Agency of Ministry of Health in the Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. Czech Republic (IGA MZ ND 6865-3) Introduction: Neural tube defects (NTD) have a multifactorial etiology. Randomized P0551. The pilot genetic testing program in Ukraine controlled trials have shown that one exogenous factor, folic acid, L. A. Livshits1, V. D. Zukin2; reduces the risk of NTD with 50-70%. Dutch health authorities 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine, 2”ISIDA advised in 1993 that women who want to become pregnant should - IVF” clinic, Kiev, Ukraine. take a 0.4-0.5 mg folic acid tablet daily from 4 weeks before We have elaborate the pilot genetic testing program based on the conception till 8 weeks thereafter. A mass media campaign in 1995 information obtained by population screening in different regions of informed the public of this advice. In the Netherlands 80-90% of Ukraine. The program involved three categories of populations: 1) pregnancies are planned. The aim of the campaign was to reach members of families with a high risk monogenic hereditary disorders; at least 70% of women wishing to conceive and that 65% of these 2) patients of IVF centers; 3) persons of fertile age from common women would use it appropriately. populations before marriage or before and during pregnancy. Awareness and use of folic acid: For the first category we have screened the most common mutations At first or second antenatal visit, women filled out a questionnaire. and linkage polymorphisms: 320 CF-families, 129 DMD-families, 100 The survey was performed 5 times. The percentages that used PKU-families and 85 SMA-families. Early prenatal diagnosis was folic acid are mentioned in the table. In 2000, 26% of low educated performed based on CVS testing in high-risk families: CF - 66 cases, vs. 47% of high educated women used folic acid during the entire DMD - 81, PKU - 100, SMA - 85, HD - 2, Fra X - 1, Hemophilia A - 5. advised period. Although an impressive proportion of women 2-nd category. The screening of CFTR gene mutations and long arm complies to the advice, the aim (85%*70%*65%=39% appropriate chromosome Y microdeletions was performed for 105 infertile man folic acid use) has not been attained. Yet the percentage of users is involved in ICSI program. The chromosome Y microdeletions were higher than other figures reported in the literature so far. detected in 5 cases. In two cases we have detected CFTR gene Public health policy: mutation - delF508. Although fortification of foods is obligatory in some, and admitted in 190 Posters - Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 191 most countries, the Dutch Health Council advised in 2001 against P0556. Prospective study on Genetic Testing Services fortification of regular foods. The Dutch minister of Health stated that quality assurance and harmonization in EU the present policy will be continued and attempts to inform women D. Ibarreta, A. Bock, E. Rodriguez-Cerezo; preconception will be intensified. IPTS (JRC, European Commission), Seville, Spain. Percentage of pregnant women that used folic acid The use of clinically meaningful genetic tests for humans -for diagnostic, confirmatory and predictive purposes - is expanding in all Year % any time of advised period % during entire advised period European countries. A few different national regulatory frameworks 1994 7.8 0.4 already exist but there is no harmonization on a European level to 1995 21 4.8 ensure a sufficient level of quality, safety and efficacy of genetic 1996 38 15 testing services in Europe, which is required by society. Genetic 1998 62 36 testing services are not covered by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2309/93 laying down Community procedures for the authorization 2000 61 36 and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use or Directive 98/79/EC on in vitro diagnostic medical devices, which P0554. Towards a general quality standard in genetic applies only to products to be marketed. testing There also seems to be a need to set up a European laboratory E. Dequeker, J. J. Cassiman; network to cover rare diseases. Given that research into genetic KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. mutation is so complex, only a few laboratories are in a position Genetic diagnostic laboratories show a growing interest in the to supply an appropriate test for certain diseases, whereas most systematic application of quality assurance (QA) in genetic diagnostic European countries have at least one laboratory to deal with the more laboratories. Many laboratories now participate in external quality common diseases. To avoid this difficulty, a network of European assessment (EQA) schemes. In order to evaluate the status of QA laboratories, covering the different diseases and genes, could be set implementation in genetic diagnostic laboratories, a survey on QA up. and accreditation was sent to 206 laboratories from 32 European JRC (EC) is currently analyzing the potential need and technical countries and 5 laboratories in Australia and the USA. options for harmonization and quality assurance of Genetic Testing 151 participants responded (73 %) to the survey. In order to minimise Services in the EU, taking in consideration already ongoing activities errors, an appropriate QA system needs to be worked out for the at European level (EQA scheme for HD, Concerted Action for CF, whole procedure of a genetic analysis. Such system is established EMQN, etc). in 110 of the surveyed laboratories (73%): 45 laboratories follow an international standard, 52 a local or national standard, and P0557. Five years experience of biochemical screening in 13 laboratories did not specify which guidelines are being used. Saint-Petersburg. However, only 82 laboratories are officially inspected: 52 are T. K. Kascheeva1, N. V. Vokhmyanina2, I. V. Butomo2, O. inspected by a national body, and 30 Romanenko2, V. S. Baranov1; are accredited by an internationally recognised accreditation body. 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Thus, it is clear that at present there is no harmonisation on QA Federation, 2Diagnostic Centre (medical genetics), Saint-Petersburg, among laboratories. The new ISO 17025 standard, which is accepted Russian Federation. by most national and international accreditation bodies, could Prenatal Down’s syndrome biochemical screening in St.Petersburg is therefore be an important step towards harmonisation of laboratory carried out since 1997, as a double test. Total beta-human chorionic practice. This new standard also includes requirements for reporting gonadotropin (hCG) and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) were studied in the results. The reporting results of the latest CF EQA schemes 123400 pregnancies dated 1997-2001. Proportion of population illustrate that less than 15% of the laboratories include all the items covered is more than 84 % in 2000-2001 . About 7 % of screened required by this new standard. group had a high risk of Down‘s syndrome (DS) which was calculated by homemade software based on likelyhood ratio and age risk. 74 out P0555. Frequency Of Cx26 Mutations In Deaf Newborns of total 191 pregnancies with Down’s fetus were screened . Detection Detected Through A Pilot Universal Neonatal Screening rate in women less 35 was 61 %, in advanced age women - 85 %. In The Piemonte Region According to these findings 15-17 weeks of pregnancy are the most L. Sbaiz1, S. Bosso1, R. Albera2, P. Tavormina3, L. Leone1, G. informative period for DS testing . Repetitive biochemical testing Restagno1; carried out after 15-17 weeks usually reduces detection rate and 1Azienda Ospedaliera O.I.R.M.-S.Anna, Torino, Italy, 2II Clinica ORL, make the decision on invasive karyotyping more ambiguous. These University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 3ORL Service, O.I.R.M., Torino, Italy. initial results also favor Deafness in young infants is commoner than cystic fibrosis, the use of our homemade test -system produced by “Alkor-Bio” galactosaemia or congenital hypothyroidism, affecting one in 1000 (St.Petersburg) supplemented by new software for Down’s syndrome children. Early identification of deaf babies and remedial education screening “MedInformatika” (St.Petersburg). is beneficial, with better expressive and receptive language, speech, and social and emotional development. P0558. Internal Quality Control: Development of new best Pilot screening scheme. The primary screening tool is the practice guidelines for diagnostic molecular genetics measurement of transient evoked otoacustic emissions (TEOAE), laboratories. administered to all newborns before dismissions from the neonatal S. A. R. Stenhouse1, S. Patton2; center. If the TEOAE test is pathological is repeated three times, then 1Northern Molecular Genetics Service, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United the brain-stem auditory evoked response (BAER) will be measured. Kingdom, 2EMQN, Manchester, United Kingdom. When deafness is present, the baby is referred to a specialistic center Internal quality control (IQC) refers to all of the policies and for audiological assessment and for the application of a rehabilitative procedures which a laboratory puts in place to ensure the error-free protocol and molecular test is performed. Molecular analysis. In processing and analysis of all samples. It covers many areas from developed countries, deafness has an important genetic origin, and at staff training to documentation of experiments and reporting and is least 70% of genetic cases are autosomal recessive non-syndromic, vital to the provision of a high quality molecular genetics diagnostic 80% of which due to mutations in the GJB2 gene. In this pilot service. screening genetic counselling is offered to parents of deaf babies. In A best practice meeting on IQC was held in Edinburgh on 3rd April a previous study with direct sequencing of the GJB2 gene, we found 2001 under the auspices of the European Molecular Genetics Quality mutations in 43 of 74 cases (58%) of severe/profound deafness. The Network (EMQN) as a satellite meeting of the UK Clinical Molecular most common mutation is 35delG, accounting for 74% (30/43) of all Genetics Society‘s spring meeting. From discussion at this event a deafness alleles. The mutations V95M and E47X were detected four draft set of best practice guidelines has been developed. The general and two times, with a relative frequency of 4.6 and 2.3% respectively. principles of effective IQC (including the associated problems)will be Other mutations (L90P, 290-291insA, 333delAA, W24X, E119del, discussed and illustrated with reference to the draft guidelines. M34T, Q80P) were detected once. We also found four variants of unknown significance (V37I, F83L, R127H, V153I) and the novel alleles M162V, K224Q and R184Q .Posters - Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 192 193 P0559. Screening for heterozygosity of C283Y mutation mutations was verified in ten cell lines after five 10-fold expansions in Bulgarian Gypsy minority in culture. Each cell line was sent to 5-6 outside MGT laboratories. B. Georgieva1, A. Todorova1, I. Tournev2, A. Ashikov1, V. Mitev3, I. All mutations were correctly identified by several methods, indicating Kremensky1; that samples of this type are likely to be suitable for use as PE/QA 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Hospital of Obstetrics and material. (Funded by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) Gynecology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Alexandrovska Hospital, Clinic of Neurology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, P0561. Genetic screening of Familial Mediterranean Fever 3Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, mutations in the Greek population Sofia, Bulgaria. B. Gkretsi1, C. Maratheftis1, M. Vasilakou1, G. Arlapanos1, K. Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2C (LGMD2C), a subgroup Groutidis1, C. Deltas2, C. Yapijakis3, K. Lamnissou1, K. Groutidis1; of sarcoglycanopathies, is caused by mutations in the gamma- 1Dept of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Dept of sarcoglycan gene, localized on 13q12. Among the described Molecular Genetics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, mutations, causing an autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy, a Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Dept of Neurology, University of Athens, Medical “private” Gipsy mutation C283Y (transition G→A in codon 283) is School, Athens, Greece. detected. Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive The extensive field work in 300 Gypsy living places in Bulgaria disease that primarily affects populations surrounding the revealed about 40 Gypsy patients clinically diagnosed as LGMD. Mediterranean basin e.g. Armenian, Jewish, Arab and Turkish Considering the fact that the Gypsy minority is populations. FMF is characterised by recurrent episodes of fever an isolated population with high percent of consanguinity and having accompanied by abdominal pain, pleuritis and arthritis. The most in mind the autosomal recessive type of inheritance of LGMD2C, a dangerous complication of FMF is amyloidosis that can lead to raised carrier frequency of C283Y mutation was expected. end-stage renal failure. The gene for FMF (MEFV) was cloned and Several screenings for determining the percentage of heterozygosity missense mutations were found to be responsible for the disease. of C283Y mutation among Gypsy minority were performed. The About 20 mutations have been identified so far, some of them being applied method was direct amplification on dry blood spots from very freequent. The aim of this study was to investigate the carrier Guthrie cards followed by SSCP. Heterozygotes were confirmed by rates of the common MEFV mutations among 250 healthy members RsaI restriction digestion. of the Greek population. The studied group was consistent only of Screening on 400 Gypsy newborns from Northeast Bulgaria Greeks whose parents were also of the same ethnicity. Two FMF showed high percentage of heterozygosity- 2.25%. Screening on mutations, V726A and M694V, were considered to be the most 300 volunteers of a reproductive age from Sliven showed very high common in Greek patients from earlier studies. Our results indicated percentage of heterozygosity - 7.7%. Investigation on 126 volunteers that none of the studied healthy individuals was carrier of any of of a reproductive age from Senovo (Northeast Bulgaria) showed that these two mutations. We may conclude that the frequency of FMF 22 of them were heterozygotes (17.46%). Screening on 50 Gypsy mutations is extremely low in Greeks. It is possible that the previously newborns from Stara Zagora region (Middle Bulgaria) showed no identified few FMF Greek patients from others were of different origin. heterozygotes. The above data show that the disease seemed to be geographically P0562. DHPLC mutation analysis of Phenylketonuria localized to Eastern Bulgaria. It is important to construct a precise S. Bräutigam1, A. Kujat1, P. Kirst1, J. Seidel2, Ü. Lüleyap3, U. G. map of the regions with high carrier and/or disease frequency. Such Froster1; regions should be with priority in the Bulgarian healthcare system. 1University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 2University of Jena, Jena, Germany, 3University of Cukurova, Adana, Turkey. P0560. Stable EBV transformed B lymphocyte cell Phenylketonuria (PKU, OMIM S 261600; McKusick 1986) is one lines derived from residual clinical blood for PE/QA of of the most common autosomal recessive disorders in Europe molecular genetic testing and related to mutations in the PAH gene. The frequency of J. C. Beck1, S. H. Bernacki2, K. Snow3, V. M. Pratt4, K. Monaghan5, heterozygotes in Europe is 1:50. The basic defect in PKU is A. K. Stankovic6, L. O. Williams6, K. Matteson7, F. V. Schaefer8, phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. The disease is characterised M. Friez9, A. E. Shrimpton10, D. H. Farkas11, T. W. Prior12, L. by an accumulation of phenylalanine in blood and nervous system, Wasserman13, E. C. Cole14, T. T. Stenzel2; which leeds to mental retardation. A diagnosis early after birth is 1Coriell Institute for Medical Research, Camden, NJ, 2Duke University very important because the disorder is effectibly treatable by an Medical Center, Durham, NC, 3Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, adequat diet. A disease positiv neonatal screening requires molecular 4LabCorp, Raleigh, NC, 5Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, 6Centers investigations to provide a solid basis for genetic councelling. This is for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, 7University of particularly important for adult patients with PKU who are planning Tennesse Medical Center, Knoxville, TN, 8H.A. Chapman Institute their own family. This group of individuums is interested in a rapid and of Medical Genetics, Tulsa, OK, 9Greenwood Genetic Center, reliable molecular diagnosis of their individual mutation status and the Greenwood, SC, 10SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, exclusion of a heterozygous mutation in their partners. 11Motorola Life Sciences, Pasadena, CA, 12Ohio State University, Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) is a Columbus, OH, 13University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, fast and sensitive method for mutation screening which has been 14DynCorp Health Research Services, Durham, NC. applied for mutation detection in various disease related genes. Positive control material for performance evaluation and quality This method has not been previously applied to PKU. Therefore assurance (PE/QA) of diagnostic molecular genetic testing (MGT) we established DHPLC for PKU mutation screening followd by is difficult to obtain for many genetic diseases. To determine automated sequencing to analyse rapidly the complete coding whether control material could be derived from residual blood sequence of the PAH gene in a total of 125 PKU patients from collected for routine clinical MGT, 51 bloods were collected for EBV Saxonia and Turkey. We identified 40 different mutations and transformation. Eleven cell lines representing 5 genetic disorders polymorphisms in a total of 250 PAH-allels. The mutation detection were successfully cryopreserved. Results from a logistic regression rate with DHPLC was approximatly 98%. DHPLC has proved to be a model indicate that sample age and anti-coagulant (ACD or EDTA) fast and reliable method for mutation screening in PKU. were statistically significant predictors of transformation success; age and sex of the patient were not (p<0.05; samples collected in ACD P0563. Screening for Cys 282Tyr and His 63Asp and stored for fewer days were more likely to transform). Sample mutations of HFE gene in populations of Volga-Ural volume, hemolysis, whether or not the tube had been opened and region of Russia prior storage temperature were included in the model. Successful R. I. Fatkhlislamova, L. Berdina, E. Khusnutdinova; transformation was achieved in samples up to 13 (EDTA) or 14 (ACD) Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. days old and/or with as little as 1 ml blood from both opened and Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive disease unopened tubes. Acceptable storage conditions were ambient or 4°C affecting iron metabolism commonly found in whites. Populations of for samples <7 days old and 4°C only for samples 8-14 days old. northern European origin show the highest frequency of HH, with 1 in Average time to transformation was 44.0 ±2.5 (SEM) days for ACD 300 individuals affected. Two sites of point mutations in the HFE gene samples and 61.3 ±10.8 (SEM) days for EDTA samples. Stability of - Cys282Tyr and His63Asp - are associated with greater than 90% of 192 Posters - Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 193 HH cases. In presence no information is available on the frequency P0566. Role of Certified Reference Materials and the of HH in Volga-Ural region. To define a carrier frequency we screened Standardisation System in In Vitro Diagnostics for Cys282Tyr and His 63Asp mutations of HFE gene in 6 populations C. L. Klein, F. Franchini, H. Schimmel; of Volga-Ural region of Russia: Udmurts, Mordvins, Tatars, Bashkirs, EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Geel, Belgium. Chuvashis and Russian from Bashkortostan. The frequency of the The In Vitro Diagnostica- Medical Device (IVD-MD) directive Cys282Tyr mutation is highest in Udmurts and Russians - 13,1% (Directive 98/79/EC) requires traceability of calibrators and control and 10,6% respectively, that corresponds to northwestern European materials to reference measurement procedures and/or reference populations. In Mordvins, Chuvashis and Tatars heterozygosity for material of higher order. According to the VIM [1] traceability is Cys282Tyr is 7,3%, 7,14% and 6,3% respectively and is absent defined as “property of the result of a measurement or the value of in Bashkirs. Heterozygosity for His63Asp ranges from 17,7% in a standard whereby it can be related to stated references, usually Tatars to 31,7% in Mordvins and 31,9% in Russians. The His63Asp national or international standards, through an unbroken chain of mutation is less frequent (occurring in 20,8%-24,6%) in Bashkirs, comparisons all having stated uncertainties”. Hence standards Chuvashis and Udmurts. A small percentage (0%-3,6%) was found to reference materials to support the traceability chain and well be homozygous for His63Asp and 12,2% in population of Mordvins. understood measurement procedures play an important role in We revealed one case of compound heterozigoty for both mutations achieving traceability. in Chuvashis population. Taking into account high frequency for It is evident that in the field of clinical chemistry complexities of heterozygous Cys282Tyr and His63Asp mutations, we propose that measurands, the biological variability and commutability have to frequency of HH in populations of Volga-Ural region corresponds to be taken into account. Otherwise the effect of reference methods European populations, so there is need of screening of subgroups at and materials on standardization will be limited. Nevertheless the risk to promote early diagnosis and therapy of this disease. IVD-MD directive is a call to improve comparability of measurement results through more structured and understood approaches for P0564. Genetic counselling for familial fatal insomnia standardization. H. S. Stewart, F. Haydon; In this lecture, the traceability chain will be explained and two Department of Clinical Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United approaches towards standardisation using a CRM are discussed Kingdom. and will be compared. The certification process including definition of Familial fatal insomnia (FFI) is a rare, autosomal dominant uncertainty values for both, homogeneity and stability as well as the progressive prion disease. It is characterised by neuronal contribution of characterisation will be presented. degeneration of selected thalamic nuclei and progressive insomnia. [1] International Vocabulary of Basic and General Terms in Metrology, Onset ranges from 37-61 years and the average duration of the ISO, 1993 disease is 13 months. It is associated with a asp178-to-asn mutation of the prion protein gene (PRNP), when the amino acid at position P0567. Variations in termination rates in pregnancies 129 is methionine. diagnosed with Klinefelter syndrome: Data from a cross We present the case of a family, in which the father was diagnosed European study (DADA) with FFI at the age of 50 years and died 2 years later. Two sons in I. Nippert1, B. Eiben2, P. Miny3, J. Horst4, F. Louwen1, T. Marteau5, C. their second decades attended for genetic counselling, unaware of Mansfield5, M. Reid6, D. Kirwan7, S. Walkinshaw7, M. van Diem8, C. their father’s diagnosis. The wife of one son was 19 weeks pregnant. Verschuuren-Bemelmans8, S. Garcia-Minaur9, C. de Vigan10; Issues surrounding possible predictive and prenatal diagnosis were 1Frauengesundheitsforschung, Muenster, Germany, 2Institut fuer discussed as for other late-onset neuro-degenerative disorders. Klinische Genetik Nordrhein, Oberhausen, Germany, 3Universitaetski We discuss the issues relating to the possible transmissible nature of nderklinik, Basel, Switzerland, 4Insitut fuer Humangenetik, Muenster, this prion disease and the obstetric management of our patient, with Germany, 5Guy’s Campus, Kings College, London, United Kingdom, reference to the public health implications of prion diseases. 6University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 7Liverpool Women’s Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 8Rijksuniversiteit P0565. Screening for Down’s Syndrome in Estonia 1995-2001. Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 9Clinica Materno-Infantil, M. Sitska1, T. Ilus1, P. Ilisson1, K. Kuuse1, P. Tammur1, T. Reimand1, A. Barakaldo, Spain, 10INSERM, Paris, France. Ehrenberg2; Introduction: Klinefelter syndrome (KS) occurs approximately in 1Medical Genetic Center of the Clinicum of the University of Tartu, 1 per 800 male live births. 10%-20% are identified by prenatal Tartu, Estonia, 2Women’s Clinic of the Clinicum of the University of diagnosis (PD). Most cases are detected incidentially when PD has Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. been performed because of an increased risk for Down syndrome. Basic statistics. Area: 45214 km2. Population: 1,46 million. Because KS is likely to be unfamiliar to the general population, Birth rate in 2000: 13 119 newborns. Maternal age at delivery information given about KS may be of crucial importance for parents’ &#61502; 35….9.5 % (1227 women). Currently about 7% decisions about whether or not to continue with the pregnancy. pregnancies undergo invasive prenatal diagnosis (mostly Methods: A systematic review of the case notes of all KS diagnosed amniocentesis) in Estonia. Incidence of Down Syndrome (SD) before up to 24 weeks of gestation in 8 European regions in 5 European prenatal screening was started (1990-1994) was 1: 700. countries (France, Germany, The Netherlands, Spain and the UK) Screening .Chromosome anomalies are screened for advanced was conducted. The variables documented included maternal age, maternal age (&#61502; 35) since 1995. In 2001 , 48% of women parity, gestational age at diagnosis, speciality of health professional &#61502; 35 had fetal karyotypes. providing information before and after PD. During the period when prenatal diagnosis has been used (1995- Results: Details of 111 pregnancies and their outcome were obtained. 2001) 29 cases (52%) SD of advanced maternal age risk group have Mean maternal age was 36.9 (±4.6) years, 44.1% pregnancies were been diagnosed prenatally. During the last three years 72% of the SD terminated. Across the 8 European regions termination rates varied cases have been detected prenatally. between 76.9% and 0%. Using multivariable logistic regression Maternal serum screening (double test) is not widely used in Estonia: analysis, the only significant predictor of continuation of the it is routinely offered since autumn 1998 in Tartu, since 2000 in pregnancy was the speciality of the health professionals conducting southern Estonia and since 2001 in Tallinn and other part of Estonia. post diagnosis counseling: the affected pregnancy was more likely In 2001, 31% pregnant women in Estonia were monitored. In period to continue when post diagnosis counseling involved only a genetics of 1998 - 2001 altogether 6500 screening tests were done. Positive specialist (RR 2.42 (95% CI 1.14 to 5.92)). serum screening was indication for amniocentesis (fetal karyotyping) Discussion: There is an association between whether or not a woman in 411 (6,4%) cases. Chromosomal abnormalties were detected in 7 terminates a pregnancy affected by an unfamiliar fetal anomaly and (1:59 ) cases, SD in 3 cases. the professional background of the health professional providing post- Conclusion. Incidence of Down Syndrome in Estonia since prenatal diagnostic counseling. The causal nature of this association remains screening was started in 1995 is 1: 942. In order to reduce the rate to be determined. even further, a greater percentage of pregnancies in age group &#61500; 35 have to be monitored by maternal serum screening. In the future first trimester screening is currently under development in Estonia .Posters - Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 194 195 P0568. Reduced Folate Carrier Polymorphism (A80G) and genetic centres and in several small private clinics. Amniocentesis is Neural Tube Defects (NTD) done in many gynaecological departments with the experience in fetal P. De Marco, M. Calevo, A. Moroni, A. Raso, E. Merello, A. Cama, V. medicine. All these investigations are fully paid by Health Insurance. Capra; Main principles of our screening policy are: (1) general availability G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy. and (2) voluntarity. Biochemical screening applies the following Impairment of folate metabolism have been observed in families with policies: (3) multimarker screening with computer evaluation including Neural Tube defects (NTD). The thermolabile 677CT and 1298AC nuchal translucency and (4) cut-off for positivity 1:250 – 1:300. polymorphisms in MTHFR (methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase) In 2000 nearly 60,000 specialised sonographical investigations (0,6 gene have been implicated in the pathogenesis of NTDs, but these % efficiency), 8,000 chromosomal investigations (3 % efficiency) mutations can explain only in part the protective effect of folate on and 1,200 DNA analysis (12 % efficiency) were performed, two last NTD. Therefore, other defects in folate metabolism such defective investigations in selected patients only. When we compare effectivity carriers could be involved in the ethiology of NTD. Recently, of these three prenatal programs for detection of chromosomal the human folate carrier (RFC-1) gene has been isolated and aberration, then only maternal age reasons indicated 1.4 % of them, characterized. A common polymorphism A80G, changing a histidine biochemical screening 4.6 % and specialised ultrasonography 11.6 with an arginine, in the exon 2, has been reported. In this population- %. Selectivity for Down’s syndrome was 78 % at FP of 5 % and RT 1: based study, we examined the impact of the RFC-1 A80G variant on 50. These numbers differ in individual departments. NTD risk and the potential interaction between this polymorphism Altogether 425 foetuses with severe types of chromosomal and MTHFR A1298C mutation. We report that the RFC-1 A80G aberrations and congenital defects were found by methods of variant is common in the Italian population (0.47). Nevertheless, the prenatal diagnosis in 2000. allelic frequency was higher among NTD cases and their parents. Heterozygous patients and mothers have OR of 1.72 (95% CI 0.96- P0571. Community Genetics in the Netherlands: past and 3.11) and 1.86 (95% CI 0.68-5.27), respectively. More sensitive risk future was calculated for the 80GG genotype of cases (OR=2.35; 95% H. E. K. de Walle1, L. Henneman2, J. B. G. M. Verheij3, F. A. Beemer4, CI 1.21-4.58). On the contrary, the heterozygous genotype of the J. J. S. Broertjes5, C. P. Springer6, L. P. ten Kate7; mothers and both heterozygous and homozygous genotypes of 1EUROCAT, Rijksuniversiteit, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Vrije the fathers did not seem to be significant risk factors. According to Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Dept of Medical Genetics, multifactorial basis of NTDs, we found that combined genotypes RUG, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Dept Medical Genetics, Utrecht, for MTHFR A1298C and RFC-1 A80G polymorphisms of cases Netherlands, 5Centre for Beta Didactics, RUU, Utrecht, Netherlands, (1298AC/80GG and 1298CC/80AG) results in greater NTD risk than 6LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 7AZVU, Amsterdam, Netherlands. heterozygosity and homozygosity for RFC-1 A80G variant alone. In 1995, a small group of people in the Netherlands formed the “Initiative Group Community Genetics’. Community Genetics P0569. “Screening for PAX6 gene mutations : a five years concerns the application of medical genetics to the benefit of as experience” many people as possible and plays an active role in going out to the M. Vincent1, A. Pujol2, D. Olivier1, P. Calvas2; community. Community genetics involves a wide scope of activities, 1Hôpital Purpan, CHU, Toulouse, France, 2Service de Génétique including genetic education, genetics in primary care, genetic Médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU, Toulouse, France. screening, and registration of genetic anomalies and genetics for PAX6, a paired box transcriptor factor, is considered as the master disadvantaged groups. gene control for morphogenesis of the eye. Human PAX6 mutations Very recently, as a logical consequence, The Dutch Association are associated with a range of ocular abnormalities, including aniridia, of Community Genetics (NACG) was founded (2001). Its aim is to various anterior segment defects and foveal hypoplasia. stimulate responsible applications of medical genetics in society. We carried out a mutational analysis of the PAX 6 gene in 54 Promoting scientific research, encouraging public education and unrelated patients with aniridia or one of various closely related discussion, and organising conferences and workshops pursues this goal. syndromes. Despite an association of several methods a deleterious At this moment the NACG has about 80 members and includes a variation was evidenced in only 30 patients : twenty four different variety of professions and disciplines, involving both research and mutations, 16 of which are novel, were found. application. General practitioners, clinical geneticists, health care The spectrum of PAX 6 mutations in our population is highly workers, midwives, medical psychologists, and epidemiologists are homogenous with 96% of all mutations leading to premature only a few examples. truncation of the protein (8 nonsense and 4 splice site mutations, 11 The NACG just had its first yearly meeting and the intended policy for insertions and deletions) and only one missense mutation (4%). the nearby future was discussed and approved. A leaflet has been Examination of the phenotype did not allow to recognise significant developed, a newsletter (2 times a year) and website are planned. differences whatever the protein was deprived of one or another of This is done to increase familiarity with community genetics, the its functionnal domains. We present 22 mutations in association with NACG and its ideas, and to support the development of community common recognisable aniridia phenotypes and 2 in association with genetic centres at academic universities. Furthermore, the NACG atypical phenotypes : a missense mutation (R19P) in an individual promotes public education and will be programming scientific with an unusual microphtalmia-sclerocornea phenotype and a splice meetings every year, as they did the last five years. site mutation (IVS4+5G&gt;C) in a family presenting a panocular defect associated with a congenital nystagmus. P0572. An empiric survey on biobanking in human Our observations support the concept of dosage effects of the PAX genetics in six EU countries 6 mutations as well as presenting evidence for variable expressivity. A. Cambon-Thomsen1, I. Hirtzlin2, C. Dubreuil1, N. Préaubert3, J. Genotype-phenotype correlation in ocular defects related to PAX 6 Duchier1; mutations remains difficult despite the increase of observations. 1Inserm U 558, Toulouse, France, 2Inserm SC11 and U 357, Paris, France, 3Inserm U 357, Paris, France. P0570. Efficiency of the prenatal screening programs in Biobanks correspond to different situations: research and the Czech Republic technological development, medical diagnosis, therapeutic activities. J. Santavy1, V. Gregor2, A. Santava3; Their status is not clearly defined. The aim of the work was: 1) to 1Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Dept. of Medical make a typology of the different situations encountered and 2) to Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Palacky University Hospital, investigate the way ethical implications were dealt with in various Olomouc, Czech Republic. contexts. Data from a survey in 6 EU countries (France, Germany, In our republic, biochemical screening for NTD, AWD, Down’s Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, UK) have been collected in the syndrome and trisomy 18 in the 2nd (AFP, hCG, µE3) or the 1st framework of a European Research Project (EUROGENBANK). A (AFP, PAPP, free ßhCG) trimester of gravidity is available to pregnant total of 147 structures with biobanking activity were explored through women. All of them are examined using specialised ultrasound three questionnaire and interviews. Results: most of investigated structures times during pregnancy. Women over 37 years are offered fetal belong to public or private non for profit sector, that have a key role karyotyping by cultivation of amniotic or chorionic cells, by FISH or by for biobanking. This activity is increasing in all countries because capillary electrophoresis. Prenatal diagnosis is established in 12 large few samples are discarded and genetic activity is growing. The size 194 Posters - Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 195 of collections is variable: lots of small collections, few very large model for genetic services offers a series of advantages. The same ones; purposes of collections are often research or research and infrastructure, communications and genetic register are used for the healthcare mostly in the context of disease studies. Specific budget different screening programs with the same analytic technologies for is very rarely allocated to biobanking and costs not often evaluated; most of the cases. samples are usually provided free of charges; gift and exchanges are the common rule. Good practice guidelines are generally followed P0575. Pentaplex X polimorphisms to determine parental and quality controls performed but quality procedures are not origin of X chromosomes in Turner patients. always clearly explained. Associated data are usually computerised L. Caenazzo1, E. Ponzano1, S. Pelotti2, G. Ferri2, C. Bini2, S. (samples traceable or identified). Biobankers generally do not Ceccardi2, C. Colalongo2, L. Artifoni3, N. A. Greggio3; favour centralisation of samples, rather that of data. A European 1Department of Medicine and Public Health University of Padua, legal and ethical harmonisation is considered likely to facilitate Padua, Italy, 2Department of Medicine and Public Health University international collaborations. A series of recommendations from the of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Paediatric University of EUROGENBANK project have been issued. Padua, Padua, Italy. It have been reported that 40-60% of patients with Turner syndrome P0573. Population Screening, Diagnosis and Care of (TS) are monosomic for the X chromosome, the remaining cases Mentally Retarded Children with Community Genetic have a structurally abnormal X or Y or are mosaics with a second Approach : Indian Experience. cell line with a normal or abnormal sex chromosome. Experimental L. N. Mehta, U. P. Dave, N. T. Shetty; evidence has demonstrated that 70-80% of 45,X patients retain the Centre for Research in Mental Retardation (CREMERE), Mumbai, maternal X chromosome, while X isochromosomes can be either India. paternally or maternally derived. Approach of detection, diagnosis, management and care of the We studied fifthy females with Turner’s syndrome, (age ranging from mentally retarded (MR) children in India differs from that of the 5 to 32 years) karyotyped and opportunely treated in the Pediatric industrialized countries due to its varied socio-economic, religious, center twenty-seven out of 50 were mosaics while the other twenty- cultural and family structures. The rural, slum and semi-urban three were 45,X monosomy. population with genetic diversity make the situation more complex The 27 females with mosaic pattern were characterised by a large by consanguinity. A community-based approach was therefore used variety of X chromosome with structural abnormalities and different for creating awareness about genetic components, and care of the phenotypes. MR children by establishing a “Referral System” with networking of Furthermore the molecular search for Y chromosomal material on the primary health centres. mosaicism confirmed the cytogenetic findings. During 3 years’ study, screening of 5.5 lakhs of population was Parental origin of X chromosomes was determined in genomic DNA conducted using the existing Primary Health Post infrastructure. by PCR using a pentaplex with the five loci amplified dye-labelled in Training of medical, paramedical and community health volunteers sets of two primer pairs detected in the following size ranges: NED- (N>800), and door-step care by this trained field staff, followed by AME (103-109bp) FAM-DXS101 (179 -233 bp); JOE-DXS10011 (137 detection and referral of the MR children to the tertiary Genetic -257 bp); FAM-HUMARA (255 -327 bp) and TAMRA-DXS6807 (251 - Centre - CREMERE, were the important features. The nature of the 265 bp). PCR was performed using a Trio-termoblock (Biometra), and disability, causes and recurrence risk were explained through genetic separation of the fragments was achieved by capillary electrophoresis counseling, emphasizing consanguinity and hereditary factors to the using an Applied Biosystems Prism 310 running GENESCAN 2.1 parents. Pregnancy monitoring and prevention was stressed in young software. couples. We were able to determine that the parental origin of the single X The causative factors in total 511 MR children are discussed in chromosome was maternal in 90% of the monosomies. view of the present health scenario, genetic expertise and limited laboratory infrastructure in India. Emphasis is given on prevention, P0576. European Molecular Genetics Quality Network when therapy is yet a distant hope. The significant point indicated (EMQN)– Developing external quality assessment for for health policy planners was the 49% preventable factors (birth molecular genetics in Europe asphyxia, infections and low birth weight) and 36% genetic etiology R. Elles1, S. Patton1, D. Barton2, J. Cassiman3, C. Mueller4, B. contributing to mental retardation. Integration of genetic health care Bakker5, M. Goossens6, S. Stenhouse7; at the grass root level is functionally demonstrated in this community 1European Molecular Genetics Quality Network, Manchester, United study. Kingdom, 2National Centre for Medical Genetics and University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 3University of Leuven, Leuven, P0574. Genetic Service For Prenatal Diagnosis In Belgium, 4University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 5Leiden Bulgaria University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 6Hôpital Henri I. M. Kremensky1, E. K. Michaylova1, A. Savov1, S. Andonova1, B. Mondor, Creteil, France, 7Northern Molecular Genetics Diagnostic Georgieva1, A. Jordanova1, V. Dimitrova2, T. Chernev2, A. Dimitrov2, Service, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom. R. Petkova1, L. Kalayjieva1; Genetic testing laboratories must answer to the individuals and 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Fetal Medicine families who seek their services for the quality and validity of the Department, Sofia, Bulgaria. services they provide. In order to maintain public confidence, it Objective: To assess a centralised model for genetic service. is essential that the highest technical standards are met in public Methodology: All activities related to prenatal screening, diagnosis and private sector laboratories; that different standards between and prophylactics of inherited disorders are concentrated in a single European centres are levelled out and that pressure exists to Centre for Maternal Fetal Medicine in Sofia. The Centre performs: 1) maintain current standards and improve them over time. The mass neonatal screening for PKU ; 2) selective postnatal biochemical European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN), set up in and molecular genetic screening; 3) second and first trimester Down October 1998 with funding for the European Commission’s framework syndrome (DS) screening; 4) prenatal enzyme and DNA diagnosis IV programme, aims to address these issues by raising the standards of the common monogenic disorders and DS . The Centre provides of quality in molecular genetic testing. The EMQN organises external qualified genetic counselling , DNA bank and a genetic register of quality assessment (EQA) schemes and promotes best practice high-risk families. Results: For 10 years period a total of 1109 families through the organisation of disease-specific workshops. Since with clinically diagnosed monogenic disorders and DS were referred 1999, EMQN has provided 28 EQA schemes in ten disease-specific to the Centre. Prenatal DNA diagnosis were performed in 388 of areas and organised 14 disease-specific best practice workshops. them - Cystic Fibrosis-94 (24 affected fetuses, 46 carriers), SMA - 31 The results and guidelines from these schemes and workshops (5affected fetuses, 18 carriers), ß-thalassemia-39 (9 affected fetuses, are available on the EMQN website (www.emqn.org). Funding of 20 carriers), PKU-6 (1 affected fetus, 2 carriers), DMD/BMD -24 (4 EMQN by the European Commission finished at the end of March affected fetuses, 3 carriers), Haemophilia A-13 (2 affected fetuses, 4 2002. EMQN is continuing as a not-for-profit organisation linking carriers), CMT-1 (unaffected), Down syndrome-180 (6 affected fetuses). expert centres in Europe and supported by the subscription of the In 80% of the cases CVS and in 20% - amniocentesis were performed. laboratories for which it provides quality assurance services. Its Conclusion: For small countries with limited resources the centralised advisory board will include EQA providers and expert centres.Posters - Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 196 197 P0577. Legal and Ethical Environment of the Estonian medullary thyroid carcinomas (MTC). Early detection of mutations Genome Project is mandatory for genetic counselling and risk assessment in family Y. Krikmann1, M. Dmitriev1, A. Tikk1, A. Metspalu2; members allowing presymptomatic testing and improvement of the 1Estonian Genome Project Foundation, Tartu, Estonia, 2Chair of disease management. The majority of the activating RET mutations Biotechnology Insitute and Molecular Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia. affect exons 10, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16 and are currently detected by The aim of the Estonian Genome Project is to create a SSCP and restriction enzyme analysis. In order to improve sensitivity, comprehensive database containing the health data and genetic time and cost of the RET mutation analysis, we have developed a information. This database would be invaluable tool for finding Denaturing High Performance Chromatography (DHPLC)-based associations between disease phenotypes and particular LD map protocol. In this system mutations can be determined on the basis structures. The database will be established and maintained by the of the melting behaviour of heteroduplexes, which elute from the Estonian Genome Project Foundation that has been founded by the column by a combination of temperature and acetonitrile gradient. Republic of Estonia. The Ethics Committee of the Estonian Genome We performed DHPLC in 141 MTC patients with previously Project observes all the procedures. characterized mutations and 35 relatives. Heteroduplex peaks were The Human Gene Research Act regulates main aspects of the detected for each mutation tested which produced a distinct and Estonian Genome Project. In addition to that supportive legal highly reproducible DHPLC elution profile. These results indicated documents (informed consent, material destruction protocols etc.) will that DHPLC methodology: a) displays a high level of sensitivity, be enacted by the Government. The Act is the most comprehensive approaching 100% for mutations in the RET proto-oncogene; b) is legal documents in the world regulating population based genome suitable for rapid genetic testing of members of the MEN2 affected studies. The Act stipulates the rights and duties of gene donors, data families; c) provides a relatively simple and accurate screening protection requirements and other guarantees for the protection of technique by exhibiting advantages over conventional mutation gene donors as well as liability. The Act states administrative and methods, including semi-automated analysis of 96 PCR samples in criminal charges for violation of the rights of a gene donor. Every less than 12 hours and low cost . gene donor if she/he has decided to participate have to sign the informed consent form, then description of state of health is prepared P0580. French CF-Network of molecular genetics by filling the questionnaire together with the family physician and a laboratories tissue sample is taken. People can opt out at any moment and they E. Girodon1, C. Férec2, M. Audrézet2, M. Claustres3, M. Desgeorges3, have right to know (if they wish) their own health data and LD map. T. Bienvenu4, M. Goossens1; All research projects on the basis of this database can be performed 1Service de Biochimie et de Génétique, AP-HP and INSERM U468, after the project has been approved by one of the Human Research hopital Henri-Mondor, Créteil, France, 2Laboratoire de Biologie Ethics Committees. Moléculaire et d’Histocompatibilité, CHU Morvan, Brest, France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut Universitaire de P0578. Introduction of Iranian patients`cell bank in Recherche Clinique, Montpellier, France, 4Laboratoire de Biochimie- National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Génétique, Hopital Cochin, AP-HP, Paris, France. Biotechnology Thirty five French molecular genetics laboratories carry out CFTR studies. Each year, around 8300 postnatal studies and 240 classical M. M. Banoei, F. Hormozian, M. Houshmand, M. H. Sanati; prenatal diagnoses (risk: 1⁄4) are performed. Almost 50% of the National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and studies concern carrier screening in CF relatives and their partners; Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 18%, monosymptomatic forms in adults; 17%, atypical forms in In Iran and many countries in MiddleEast the consanguinous children; 12%, suspicion of CF in fetuses displaying echogenic marriage is one of main reason for high prevalance for genetic anomalies. Most laboratories screen for the most frequent mutations disorders. In our center we are able to detect someof genetic dieases as a first step and, if necessary, turn to more specialized laboratories such as Cystic fibrosis, Galactosaemia,a-1 Antitrypsin deficiency, to complete CFTR studies. The French CF-network, officially Myotonic Dystrophy(MD), Huntington disease(HD), Kenedy, Prader- recognized by the Ministry of Health, is composed of three kinds willi, Angel-Man, LHON, MERRF, MELAS, NARP, CPEO, IBM, Leigh of laboratories, depending on their level of molecular expertise Syndroms, Fragile X, Deafness, Acondroplasia, NDT, SMA 1. and their implication in the management of the network and in We are going to set up molecular methods for other rare genetic CF research. Those who offer complete CFTR gene analysis are disorders.In the other hand,any disorders are very severe and directly funded by the Ministry of Health. The French network works affected individuals die at the first days or month of birth therefore in collaboration with the European CF-Network (coordinated by J.J. research studies such as DNA analysis of them need more DNA.So Cassiman and E. Dequeker), participating every year in the external we decide to build up cell bank in our center. This bank is a good quality assessment scheme for CF. Three workshops have been repository for human cell lines, representing the unique and large organized in France: at Creteil (April 1997), Lyon (May 1998) and samples of rare genetic diseases and ethnic variation of the Iranian Creteil (December 2001). This workshop, which convened molecular population.We concentrate on collecting cells from individuals and geneticists, clinical geneticists and specialists in charge of CF family affected by autosomal recessive disorders or other rare patients, provided the opportunity to discuss about best practices diseases. for CFTR molecular studies, taking into account the European At present we have restored some cell lines(LCL) from diseases recommendations (Eur J Hum Genet 2000, vol 8, supp 2). The main as following:CPEO,Deafness,CAH,Achondroplasia, Huntington`s conclusions of this workshop will be presented. disease,Cystic Fibrosis,Myotonic Dystrophy,LOHN,MERRF,MELAS, cytogenetic abnormalities and etc. P0581. The Italian national project for standardisation P0579. Rapid scanning of the RET proto-oncogene by and quality assurance of genetic testing. denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (D- D. Taruscio, V. Falbo, G. Floridia, C. Marongiu, C. Pescucci, M. Salvatore; HPLC): implications for genetic counselling Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. I. Torrente1, A. De Luca1, C. Conte2, E. Flex1, E. Chiefari3, F. Arturi3, Genetic services in Italy are characterised by a large number of S. Filetti3,4, G. Novelli2, B. Dallapiccola1,5; Laboratories, some performing at outstanding level; however, major 1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Dept. of Biopathology and problems are lack of homogeneous quality standards as well as of a Imaging Diagnostic, University “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 3Dept. widespread quality assurance system. of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Catanzaro, During 1999-2000 the Italian government adopted the National Catanzaro, Italy, 4Dept. of Clinical Science, University “La Sapienza”, Guidelines on Genetic Testing (http://www.malattierare.iss.it); priority Rome, Italy, 5Dept. of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, topics include quality standardisation and implementation at both University “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy. intra- and interlaboratory level. Accordingly, the first national Project Germline activating mutations of the RET proto-oncogene cause for standardisation and quality assurance of genetic tests has been three different dominantly inherited cancer syndromes, including launched on 2000-2002. The project, financially supported by the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A), type 2B (MEN National Health System, is co-ordinated by D. Taruscio from the 2B), and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). Mutations, Istituto Superiore di Sanità. The main activities of the Project are involving the somatic cell lineage, are found in about 30% of sporadic 196 Posters - Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 197 quality control trials on : Down people), or collaborative (epidemiological study on folate 1) cytogenetics (prenatal, postnatal including oncological) enzyme polymorphism; epidemiological study of solid tumor in DS; 2) molecular genetics (cystic fibrosis, beta-thalassemia, X-fragile relation between cataracts, oxidative metabolism and IQ in DS). Our syndrome, APC gene). experience exhibits that families are ready to participate to research Eighty Laboratories have been enrolled, covering all Italian Regions; studies even without direct individual benefice. The therapeutic trial there are 6 inter-regional Working Units (WU). Decisions are protocols are the most asked by families, but can take place only discussed by the Steering Committee, including the WU co-ordinators if the criteria of judgments are very rigorous. The validation of the and reference experts. Laboratories participate anonymously, psychometric or neuropsychological evaluations is possible with the identified by a code number. number of subjects of our population and the narrow links existing Preliminary results either in cytogenetics and molecular genetics between the research and the clinical follow-up. trials indicate an overall rate of diagnostic errors approximating 10%. Non-standard nomenclature is used by approximately 15% of P0584. Enabling the Translation of Genetic Research Into Laboratories. The main factors explaining inaccuracies are under Diagnostic Service: A Comparison of Three Cases. evaluation. C. S. Albott, L. Van Maldergem; Expected results and deliverables include: a) improving quality and Institut de Pathologie et Génétique, Loverval, Belgium. homogeneity of Italian genetic services, through, e.g.: reduction of Access and availability of diagnosis of very rare inherited diseases interregional differences; b) improving dissemination of knowledge (1 in 10 000) presents a real problem to the patient as well as to the and quality standards among health operators; c) contributing to health-care provider. Much discussion has occurred concerning the harmonisation of protocols; d) elaborating recommendations for a multifarious applications of genetic research and the consequent permanent programme on quality assurance. changes that must occur in basic definitions of treatment, prevention and diagnosis, not to mention etiology. There is, however, a decided P0582. Spinal Muscular Atrophy - A Common Inherited lack of clinical evidence concerning the impact of information Disorder In Bulgarian Gypsies services which function as intermediaries between centers engaged A. K. Jordanova1, V. Karcagi2, I. Kremensky1, I. Litvinenko3, M. in research into very rare inherited disorders and the clinicians Uzunova3, I. Tournev4, B. Ishpekova4, A. Herzegfalvi5, I. Simeonova1, and patients seeking DNA-based diagnostic analyses. We present L. Kalaydjieva6; here three cases of patients or families in need of diagnosis 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2National Centre of a putative genetic disorder. Each case presents a vignette for Public Health, Budapest, Hungary, 3Clinic of Child Neurology, epitomizing a common problem faced in the diagnosis of very Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Neurology, rare inherited diseases. In addition, each vignette shows how the Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Department of Neurology, problem was overcome through information available on the internet Budapest, Hungary, 6Centre for Human Genetics, Edith Cowan (www.eddnal.com) to researchers and health care professionals. University, Perth, Australia. This is the first clinical presentation of the efficacy of a web-based A number of private genetic disorders in Gypsy population have health information service enabling access to DNA-based diagnostic been described and characterized in the recent years. So far, Spinal services. Muscular Atrophy (SMA) has not been considered specific to Gypsy population. We have studied the molecular characteristics of a total P0585. A novel method for human blood DNA purification of 38 SMA families - 30 from Bulgaria and 8 from Hungary. The using automated magnetic particle processor Gypsy SMA patients in Bulgaria represent 35% from all patients A. E. Lamberg1, M. Mehto1, V. Kymäläinen1, I. Manger2, E. Finne2; analyzed. Our data point to a non-random distribution of the disease 1Thermo Labsystems, Helsinki, Finland, 2Dynal Biotech ASA, Oslo, in the Roma in Bulgaria. The disease is confined to the Xoroxane Norway. Roma, clustered in the South-Eastern part of the country, where KingFisher Blood DNA kit is developed for the purification of genomic an ancestral SMA allele accounts for 98% of SMA chromosomes. DNA from human blood using paramagnetic particles and KingFisher We found that this SMA allele has diverged in three closely related mL™ magnetic particle processor. The kit is based on two-step conserved haplotypes, carrying different types of SMN gene deletions process where three different kind of magnetic particles are utilized. and conversions. Their combinations determine the varying severity In the first step white blood cells are captured from whole blood using of SMA disease. By contrast, the same ancestral allele is rare in leukocyte specific magnetic particles thus leaving behind e.g. red Hungary. It occurs in only 50% of Hungarian SMA chromosomes and blood cells and serum proteins. In the second step white blood cells is not confined to any specific Romani group. still attached to beads are lysed in lysis/binding buffer and released The high prevalence of SMA in Bulgarian Gypsies, and the existence DNA is isolated using DNA binding magnetic particles. Finally the of a founder SMA allele, raise the question of prevention among purified DNA is released into elution buffer and is ready for the direct the target Xoroxane groups. However, the lack of an inexpensive, use in PCR or other enzymatic reactions. Fresh human blood (stored reliable, high-throughput method for the detection of deletion carriers maximally 3-4 days at +4ºC) is strongly recommended as starting makes population-based carrier testing programs unrealistic at this material. EDTA is recommended as an anticoagulant. Maximal stage. Prenatal diagnosis in known high-risk families still remains the sample volume is 200 µl, which typically gives 4-10 µg of high quality most feasible approach to disease prevention. DNA. The approximate processing time for 15 samples is 50 minutes. The KingFisher Blood DNA kit provides a timesaving and convenient P0583. 4 year experiment of the Centre Médical Jérôme way to purify genomic DNA from human blood samples. The Lejeune to increase the link between clinical medicine purification process requires no phenol/chloroform extraction or and clinical research into genetic intellectual disabilities. alcohol precipitation, and involves very little handling. As a result, A. Ravel, C. Mircher, H. Blehaut, M. Conte, M. O. Rethore; DNA with high quality and yield is obtained for further applications, Centre Médical Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France. such as amplifications, digestion with restriction endonucleases and The CMJL is opened since 1997, and offers an annual or biannual Southern blotting. follow-up for patients of all age presenting an intellectual disability of genetic origin. These consultations allow a medical, psychological, P0586. Mutation Screening in Lysosomal Enzyme speech therapy and social follow-up as well as the realization of a Genes by Real-time Monitoring of Melting Behavior in biologic checkup, to detect and handle the complications connected Oligosaccharides labeled with SYBR Green to every type of pathology. Since the opening, more than 2000 E. Paschke1, M. Czapka1, K. Paul1, W. Erwa2; patients from 0 to 60 years old came regularly in consultation.The 1Univ.klinik für Kinder- und Jugendheilkunde, Abteilung für diseases are in descending order: Down syndromes (trisomy 21, 75 angeborene Stoffwechselerkrankungen, Stoffwechsellabor, Graz, %), unexplained intellectual disabilities (15 %), other chromosomal Austria, 2Klinisches Institut für Medizinische und Chemische abnormalities (4p-, 5p-, 18q-, tri 9p, Willi-Prader, microdeletion; 5 %), Laboratoriumsdiagnostik, Universität Graz, Graz, Austria. and monogenic diseases (fragile X, Rett’s syndrome, phenylketonury; Lysosomal storage disorders comprise approximately 40 recessive 5 %). This important patient cohort of all age allows introducing enzyme deficiencies leading to markedly reduced life span and research programs. The initiative of them is or internal (double severe deterioration of multiple organ functions. Promising recent blind control clinical trial of folinic acid versus placebo in toddler results of novel intravenous infusion therapies with recombinant Posters - Genomics and Bioinformatics 198 199 enzyme preparations markedly increase the impact of a complete to isolate chimpanzee BACs, which in turn cover the inversion elucidation of the genotype in affected families. Due to the high breakpoints. Sequence analysis of the junction and the respective number of rare or unknown mutations this includes laborious normal sequences revealed that the inversion took place in 5-7kb electrophoretic methods of mutation screening like Single Strand spanning regions rich of repetitive elements and that nonhomologous Conformation Polymorphism (SSCP) or Denaturing Gradient Gel recombination between Alu elements has been involved. We Electrophoresis (DGGE). specified the sequence environment flanking the breakpoints, We evaluated the possibility of using real-time PCR to monitor the identified the genes next to the breakpoints on either site, and melting behavior of fluorescently labeled oligonucleotides for mutation addressed the contribution of this inversion to the structure of these screening. PCR replicons of 100 bp - fragments, overlapping at a genes. length of 12 bp were labeled with the unspecific fluorescent dye SYBR Green and the differences to wild type melting temperature P0589. Human data in SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL were assesed in a ROCHE Light Cycler. Compared to SSCP the Y. Karavidopoulou, S. Contrino, P. Kersey, M. Magrane, A. Williams, results could be obtained with a considerably shorter time (1,5 vs 8 R. Apweiler; hours) at a comparable specificity. The increased number of PCR European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), Cambridge, United Kingdom. reactions necessary could be reduced by the efficient optimization TrEMBL was created as a supplement to the SWISS-PROT Protein in real-time PCR. Within two years we were thus able to identify Knowledgebase. Whereas SWISS-PROT is a non-redundant, 80-90 % of the affected alleles in 108 patients with 4 rare lysosomal manually curated protein sequence database, TrEMBL is a computer- genenzyme deficiencies. 33 (55%) of 60 mutations found were so annotated database containing the translations of all coding far unknown. Therefore this approach may be useful for the routine sequences present in the EMBL-Bank nucleotide sequence database genotyping of patients with rare genetic disorders. that are not present in SWISS-PROT. SWISS-PROT contains 7,652 annotated human sequences. 31,673 P 11. Genomics and Bioinformatics exist in TrEMBL awaiting annotation and/or merging. We aim to fully annotate and describe these human protein sequences and distribute P0587. Comparative mapping of human chromosome 22 them to the scientific community as soon as possible, thus enriching A. Aleyasin1, W. Barendse2; the biological knowledge of the human genome. More about the 1National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and ‘Human Proteomics Initiative’ (HPI) at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/swissprot/ Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2TAG, CSIRO, hpi/ . Brisbane, Qld, Australia. A human SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL non-redundant proteome set was Human chromosome 22 is one of the smallest autosomes involved built, consisting of 24,049 entries (from a total of 39,325 human in many human genetic disease. Comparative mapping of entries). Proteome analysis was performed, offering statistical, human chromosome 22 has not been very well described in most structural, functional and comparative analyses, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ unrelated species. This work was to choose homologous genes proteome/ . from human chromosome 22 (HSA22) and map them in cattle to As all human coding sequences are not yet in the nucleotide understand the homology between human chromosome 22 and sequence database, the SWISS-PROT and Ensembl teams jointly cattle chromosomes. In this way polymorphisms for six genes constructed a draft complete non-redundant proteome, comprising (ADSL, BZRP, CYP2D, CRYBA4, DIA1 & PDGFB) that showed 23,377 SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL non-redundant entries and additional strong sequence homology with their human counterparts and their 9,136 Ensembl predictions. locations are well known in human have been developed in cattle. Gene sets for the human chromosomes were constructed, Polymorphisms were developed for introns or 3’UTRs of those genes. providing a comprehensive reference of the human data in SWISS- Those polymorphisms have been genotyped and genetically mapped PROT/TrEMBL. Each set is an alphabetic listing of the genes in cattle using International Bovine Reference panel containing with the HUGO approved gene symbol (or the NCBI LocusLink individuals related to three generations. Those genes have been provisional symbol) encoded on that chromosome, together with mapped by genetic linkage analysis in the frame work provided by the chromosome position, the protein it encodes and useful links to International cattle genome mapping facility in CSIRO, Brisbane other databases, such as GeneCards, OMIM, Ensembl, InterPro and Australia. They have been mapped on cattle chromosome 5 and CluSTr. 17 and developed understandings of conservation between human Currently, 14,932 gene mappings have been made, 8,427 of which chromosome 22 and cattle chromosome 5 and 17. with an official HUGO gene name. P0588. Molecular characterisation of pericentric P0590. Biomax PEDANT™ Human Genome Database inversion breakpoints on chimpanzee chromosome 19 - Automatic and Manual Functional Annotation of the compared to human Human Genome H. Kehrer-Sawatzki1, S. Tänzer2, M. Platzer2, H. Hameister1; A. Fritz1, B. Geier1, V. Solovyev2, M. Firsov3, C. M. E. Schüller1; 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Germany, 1Biomax Informatics AG, Martinsried, Germany, 2Softberry Inc., Mount 2Department of Genome Analysis, Institute for Molecular Kisco, NY, 3Petrogen Ltd., St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. Biotechnology, Jena, Germany. Public and private efforts have begun to extract valuable information Structural differences of the primate chromosomes include from the wealth of human genome data. Biomax Informatics heterochromatin variability, inversions, and the telomeric fusion systematically analyzed data for all human genes (both known and of two ancestral chromosomes, which resulted in the generation unknown) in a consistent manner to determine (possible) protein of human chromosome 2. Since genetic disparities are assumed function and, when necessary, refined the annotation manually . All to be responsible for phenotypic differences between hominoid information has been stored in a relational database, which can be species, molecular characterisation of the genomic regions accessed via a Web-based user interface. harbouring evolutionary breakpoints is important. These analyses Using the publicly available working draft assembly of the human will help to understand the mechanisms involved in chromosome genome, we identified the location of known and putative genes with evolution. Additionally, the molecular definition of evolutionary the exclusive Fgenesh++ software from Softberry, Inc. The Pedant- breakpoints will reveal whether they overlap with human genomic Pro™ Sequence Analysis Suite from Biomax was used to perform regions susceptible to constitutional or somatic rearrangements systematic, comprehensive and consistent analysis for in-depth and whether owing to intrinsic sequence features these breakpoints functional and structural characterization of the predicted proteome. have been utilised more than once during evolution. So far, only the This characterization includes functional class assignments according fusion event, which gave rise to human chromosome 2 has been to a functional catalogue (with more than 1500 functional categories) characterized on the molecular level. Currently, we are investigating and assignment of EC numbers, PROSITE patterns, Pfam domains the pericentric inversion of the chimpanzee (PTR) chromosome and SCOP classifications. 19, orthologous to human chromosome 17. Human BAC clones The PEDANT™ Human Genome Database based on the 12 from 17p13 and 17q21.3 were identified, which span the inversion December 2000 working draft assembly of the human genome and breakpoints. FISH with these BACs resulted in split hybridization contains 44,403 gene models. Using sequence similarity to manually signals on PTR19. Subfragments of these human BACs were used annotated proteomes, proteins have been assigned to functional 198 Posters - Genomics and Bioinformatics 199 categories. In addition, the Pedant-Pro software performed further genetic disorders (tumors, malformations, etc.) and the LINKAGE functional and structural analyses including similarity searches, directory includes 28.000 pairs At the moment, GENATLAS TM annotation of functional domains, and assignment of keywords, contains more than 12.000 genes, and 2.600 diseases are EC numbers and transmembrane domains. Report pages display instantiated. all important automatic and manual annotations for each protein Querying GENATLAS The strategies to query GENATLAS TM TM and hyperlinks to the corresponding databases. The easy-to-use implement multicriterion approaches according to the core sections graphical user interface provides search tools as well as DNA and (GENE, VARIANT/PATHOLOGY, RNA, PROTEIN, EXPRESSION) or protein viewers. particular fields within these sections. Actually, criterion combinatory querying constitutes one of main features of GENATLAS ; more TM P0591. The dynamic process of gene discovery: than one hundred criterions can be used to query for gene structure, characterization of 19 novel transcripts from human function and diseases. GENATLAS would be accessible at : http://www.dsi.univ-paris5.fr/ chromosome 21 TM genatlas S. Deutsch1, A. Camargo2, A. Reymond1, B. J. Stevenson3, R. B. Parmigiani2, C. Ucla1, F. Bettoni2, C. Iseli3, V. Jongeneel4, P. Bucher3, A. J. G. Simpson2, S. E. Antonarakis1; P0593. In man trinucleotide repeats are underrepresented 1Division of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva Medical School, but some motifs are overexpanded: a novel signature for Geneva, Switzerland, 2Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, eukaryotic genomes? Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Epalinges, P. Astolfi1, D. Bellizzi2, V. Sgaramella2,3; Switzerland, 4Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Epalinges, 1Dept. Genetics and Microbiology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, Switzerland. 2Dept. Cell Biology, University of Calabria, Cosenza, Italy, 3Centro The identification of all human chromosome 21 (HC21) genes is Linceo Interdisciplinare, Rome, Italy. a necessary step in understanding the molecular pathogenesis of Aiming at assessing whether the reported shortage in trinucleotide trisomy 21 (Down syndrome). The first analysis of the sequence of repeats could be ascribed to specific motifs, such as those found 21q included 127 previously characterized genes, and predicted dynamically mutable in man, we used the Tandem Repeat Finder an additional 98 novel anonymous genes. Recently we evaluated program and detected approximate di-, tri- and tetra-repeats in the quality of this annotation by characterizing a set of C21orfs and human chromosomes 21 and 22 and in five organisms (M. musculus, PREDs, identified by mapping spliced ESTs to the genome and only D. melanogaster, C. elegans, A. thaliana, S. cerevisiae). Di-repeats by in silico analysis, respectively. This study underscored the limit are always the most represented, tetra-repeats are more represented of in silico-only gene prediction, as many PREDs were incorrectly in mammals than in the other organisms, whereas tri-repeats are predicted. To refine the HC21 annotation, we have developed a consistently scarce. In man tri-repeat representation is less than 1⁄4 reliable algorithm to extract and stringently map sequences that of tetra-; their frequency is 6.4 repeat/Mb and their coverage 473 contain bona fide 3’ transcript ends (3’-tags) to the genome. We then b/Mb. Motifs such as ACG, ACT, CCG are scarce, while the others created a specific 21q Acedb that incorporates new ESTs as well as present taxa-specific variations. Motif representation seems related features such as CpG islands, repeats and gene predictions. Using to base sequence rather than content, with AA contributing positively these tools we identified 27 new putative genes. To validate these, and CG negatively. In man ACG is the least represented, ATC has we sequenced previously cloned cDNAs, performed RT-PCR, 5’ and the highest coverage, AAT the most frequent. Tri-repeat coverage 3’RACE procedures and comparative mapping. These approaches generally increases linearly with frequency, except for AAG, ACC, substantiated 19 new transcripts, thus increasing the HC21 gene AGG, ATC in man, and AAG, AGG in mouse: these repeats tend count by 9.5%. These transcripts were not previously identified to expand in the former more than in the latter and occasionally, probably because they are small and encode small proteins. We but never in exons, exceed copy number of 40, the observed limit also identified 4 transcriptional units that are spliced but contain for tri-repeat pathological expansions. Tri-repeat scarcity seems a no obvious open reading frame. The HC21 data presented here feature of mammals and the variable representation of their motifs further emphasize that current gene predictions algorithms miss a may constitute a novel signature for eukaryotic genomes: since substantial number of transcripts that nevertheless can be identified both probably result from a structural control on DNA synthesis, the using a combination of experimental approaches and multiple refined aberrant elongations found in dynamic mutations may be due to the algorithms. derangement of one or more control elements. P0592. GENATLASThird Millenium: a database dedicated P0594. DNA-Protein Interaction DataBaseProject: to gene and disease annotation Bioinformatic DataBase of Third Genertion. C. Mugnier1, M. Chauvet2, K. Tanin2, F. Barbet2, A. Munich3, M. Roux- S. A. Vasil’ev1, A. V. Alexeevski1, S. A. Spirin1, V. N. Tashlitski2, A. S. Rouquie4, J. Frezal5; Karyagina-Zhulina3, Y. Kalaidzidis1; 1Université de Paris V, Paris, France, 2Université de Paris V - 1Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, MSU, Moscow, Génopole Ile de France, Paris, France, 3U393 INSERM - Université Russian Federation, 2Chemical department, MSU, Moscow, Russian de PARIS V - Génopole Ile de France, Paris, France, 4Institut Federation, 3Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology RAAS, Moscow, PASTEUR, Paris, France, 5Hôpital Necker - Université de Paris V Russian Federation. - Génopole Ile de France, Paris, France. Increasing significance of theoretical modeling in the field of We designed a new conceptual model to improve data storage and molecular medicine and molecular biology makes databases (DB) retrieval in GENATLAS for three-dimensional (3D) structures of biological macromolecules Data structure in GENATLAS : The new relational GENATLAS, particularly important. Currently available DB for 3D structures of TM noted GENATLAS , was developed with ORACLE and contains five biological macromolecules can be divided by three generations. TM major sections which consist in the GENATLAS core. The section First generation (G1) is DB-depositories. To the moment Protein TM GENE stores information on DNA type, arrangement and structure Data Bank (PDB) is the most successful and actively developing G1 for a specific gene or DNA sequence. The section RNA contains DB. Second generation (G2) is specially designed DB. Nucleic Acid data on the major gene transcript type and isoforms as well as tissue Database (NDB) is an example of G2 bioinformatics DB (BDB). Along expression or associated pathologies (stored in the special section with information stored in PDB this type of DB allows linking to other VARIANT/PATHOLOGY). Protein products are categorized according biological DB (PFAM; GenBank, etc.). Third generation (G3) is highly to their structures: secondary structure, structure motifs/domains, specialized informational systems (IS). This type is presented by structure homology, etc., and their activity categories in the PROTEIN classified IS like Protein-DNA Interaction and PDBSum projects that section. In addition, the protein EXPRESSION section displays provide both detailed classification and analysis of the information ontologies about cellular localization (extra- and subcellular), tissue stored in PDB and NDB. Currently we develop G3 BDB-DNA-Protein type, stage, etc. Interaction DataBase (DPIDB) version 3.0.1. based on Pluk (object The GENATLAS core is linked to three distinct directories which are oriented) technology. TM the CITATION directory (containing more than 40.000 occurrences DPIDB contains complete information on structure of DNA-protein linked to Medline abstracts), the PHENOTYPE directory gathering complexes (derived from PDB and NDB) in both usual and specially information of mendelian disorders, susceptibility genes, somatic designed by us data format. Our data format allowed revealing Posters - Genomics and Bioinformatics 200 201 specific features of DNA-protein interaction in complexes. The up to the nuclear envelope. A large clinical intra- and inter-family variability date classification of DNA-protein complexes is used for DPIDB. The is associated to both emerinopathy and laminopathy. In addition, up Internet site of DPIDB v 3.0.1 (http://www.dpidb.belozersky.msu.ru) to five different clinical entities are associated to LMNA mutations. is now under construction. It will include DPIDB as well as the results To handle and exploit the numerous data collected by the “French of our own researches, for example, the statistical analysis of DNA- Clinical and Research network for Emery-Dreifuss muscular protein interactions. To the moment a review regarding two DNA- dystrophies and other nucleopathies” connected to “EUROMEN” binding protein groups are presented on the site. network on emerinopathy and laminopathy (a subsidiary of the “Myo- Cluster” EC initiative), we developed a Locus Specific DataBase P0595. Aggregation of post-transcriptionally coregulated (LSDB). It was adapted from the Universal Mutation Database mRNAs in cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein particles (UMD) package previously used for many LSDB’s such as p53, APC, A. Totaro, M. D’Apolito, A. Notarangelo, L. Zelante, A. Quattrone; FBN1, LDLR, VHL, MEN1, ATP7B... The specific features of the IRCCS CSS, S. Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. present software are: (i) access to the various routines via internet; A cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) infrastructure works in the (ii) inclusion of multi-parametric analytic tools allowing optimized cell as an interface between the transcriptome and the proteome, searching of correlations. This requires a full implementation of being responsible for transcript transport, localization, turnover and relevant clinical, para-clinical and biological features. We have translational control. This complex is composed by aggregates of developed a specific module to display phenotype-genotype and distinct subsets of mRNAs with regulatory RNA binding proteins, genotype-phenotype correlations. To date the UMD-STA database which finally interact with ribosomes and the cytoskeletal apparatus contains 130 records and the UMD-LMNA database 250 records. to allow protein synthesis. It has been proposed that the clusters This work was supported by the AFM/INSERM French Network of monocistronic mRNAs composing individual mRNPs function “Clinical and research network for Emery–Dreifuss muscular like poycistronic mRNAs transcribed from operons in procariotic dystrophies and other nucleopathies” and the European “Myo- organisms, adding with their combinatorial nature a further level of Cluster/EUROMEN” Network. regulative complexity. If these mRNPs are really regulative units, the bound mRNAs should be endowed with uniform turnover and P0598. HC Forum(r): a generic bioinformatic platform translation rate. Here we show that a clusterization of human primary dedicated to medical genetics fibroblast mRNAs based on their individual half life (measured by O. Cohen; an high density microarray approach) produces groups of mRNAs Universite Joseph Fourier, Medical school of Grenoble, France. which can be demonstrated to be colocalized, and probably belong HC Forum® is the first secure and generic informatic platform to the same mRNP type. The understanding of this new level of cell dedicated to medical genetics, in which information is structured organization has profound implications for the pathogenesis of those according to pedigrees and the different components of medical mendelian diseases, like myotonic dystrophy and X fragile syndrome, genetics. It includes a database accessible from a Web site. User- in which a single alteration in a mRNP component results in a friendly interfaces require no specialised computer skills, but complex clinical phenotype. only an access with a simple Web navigator. Graphic tools allow inputting and search for information in the database. A high level of P0596. A Web-based SNP search tool security includes authentication with smart cards, certified high level T. M. Strom1,2, C. Glöckner1,2, T. Meitinger1,2; encryption (128 bits), medical data coding to avoid any patronymic 1Institute of Human Genetics, GSF National Research Center, names, and digital tattooing of images. Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der HC Forum® is approved by the French “Informatics and Freedom Isar, Technical University, Munich, Germany. Commission “ and by security audits, a medical ethics laboratory (Pr We constructed a database using dbSNP and the GoldenPath data C. HERVE, Paris) and by specialized lawyer. which can be accessed via a Web-browser (http://ihg.gsf.de). The HC Forum® offers geneticists private working spaces dedicated search tool allows to retrieve SNPs in the genomic region of RefSeq to cytogenetics, monogenic diseases and dysmorphological and Ensembl transcripts and to download the genomic sequence syndromes, including LDDB thesaurus (R. WINTER) and international around each SNP as given by the GoldenPath. SNPs were masked nomenclatures. It allows the inputting of genetic records with by an ‘N’ in the genomic sequence in order to avoid primers to be pedigree and a standardised textual description of diseases, positioned across SNPs. enriched with images from the different clinical and paraclinical The database contains all entries of dbSNP mapped to the investigations. GoldenPath by the NCBI. Entries are only displayed when they hit Furthermore, HC Forum® allows collaborative working: (i) shared a single chromosome, a single contig and maximally twice within a records allow several doctors to work on the same record, (ii) certain contig. The proportion of repeat sequence within the region thematic networks allow professionals to share data related to a -100 bp to +100 bp was calculated for each SNP. The number of same disease. exons for each gene is derived from the GoldenPath annotation. HC Forum® establishes a link between medical genetics The database can be searched by i) chromosome coordinates, ii) departments, research laboratories and teaching centres. HC RefSeq or Ensembl accession numbers, or iii) rsSNP IDs. A non- Forum® is academic, free of charge and available to the international redundant dataset of RefSeq and Ensembl transcripts is used for scientific and medical communities. the chromosome search. All SNPs up to 10,000 bp upstream and URL: https://HCForum.imag.fr downstream of the transcripts are displayed. Transcripts without SNPs are indicated. The search can be narrowed by the proportion of P0599. Genomic Assays Project: Building an SNP- repeats and the average estimated heterozygosity. Based Linkage Disequilibrium Map and Ready-to-Use 5’ The tool allows seven features to be downloaded: i) rsSNP ID, ii) Nuclease Assays for 200,000 SNPs RefSeq or Ensembl accession number, iii) chromosome position on P. Dong, F. de la Vega, E. Spier, J. Stevens, K. Guegler, D. Dailey, G. the GoldenPath, iv) average estimated heterozygosity, v) proportion Nunn, L. Wogan, J. Ziegle, M. Rhodes, D. Madden, D. Gilbert; of repeats, vi) observed polymorphism (dbSNP) and vii) sequence Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA. around the SNPs either as given in dbSNP or in the GoldenPath. The human genome project has identified the 3 billion base human genome sequence in the past decade. SNPs in the human genome, P0597. UMD-STA and UMD-LMNA: Locus Specific encoding the human variance, are expected to become a powerful DataBases for emerinopathy and laminopathy tool in deciphering complex traits such as disease susceptibilities and C. Beroud1, R. Ben Yaou2, A. Helbling-Leclerc2, S. Llense1, J. C. drug responses. Kaplan1, F. Leturcq1, D. Recan1, G. Bonne2; We describe the project to create a ready-to-use solution for 1Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France, 2INSERM association studies in the process of gene discovery. We are building U523 - Institut de Myologie, Paris, France. a genome wide linkage disequilbrium (LD) map based on data from About 75 neuro-muscular disease genes have been identified so both the Celera and the public sequencing efforts. The SNPs selected far. Among them, Emery-Dreifuss syndrome is due to defects in for the LD map are validated in regards to both assay performance the emerin gene (STA on chromosome X), or in the lamin A/C gene and allelic frequencies in at least two populations. During the project, (LMNA on chromosome 1), both coding for proteins associated to we will make available 200,000 SNP ready-to-use assays named 200 Posters - Globins 201 Assays-On-DemandTM. (genetic heterogeneity, incomplete penetrance of the C282Y mutation All SNP assays created in this project will be of high information of the HFE1 gene.) content, quality and performance, based on the process we have introduced. These SNP assays will be easily accessible via a simple P0602. The use of multiple algorithms and a novel interface, enabling researchers to assemble the list of SNP assays quality metric system for high throughput and accurate tailored for their individual projects. microsatellite- and SNP-based genotyping We will be presenting details of the genomic assays project including D. C. Siu, D. Bishop, T. Hatch, C. Frantz, Y. Lou, M. Rhodes, C. SNP selection , assay validation and LD map creation. The ultimate Brown; goal of this project is make genetic studies faster and more efficient. Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA. With the advent of automated fluorescent genotyping using medium- P0600. Comparative functional genomics of an entire to-high throughput systems such as the ABI PRISM® 3700 and chromosome: coding and regulatory annotation of HC21 3100 Genetic Analyzers, a fast and accurate genotyping software using the mouse genome tool is needed to perform accurate allele calling with minimal human E. T. Dermitzakis1, A. Reymond1, S. Deutch1, B. J. Stevenson2, C. interventions. Iseli2, P. Bucher2, V. Jongeneel2, S. E. Antonarakis1; The ABI PRISM® GeneMapper™ software, containing a multiple 1Division of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva, Geneva, algorithm module and a novel quality metric system, was developed Switzerland, 2Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne, to meet the requirements of these automated, microsatellite- and Switzerland. SNP-based genotyping processes. In GeneMapper™ software, Chromosome 21 (HC21) is the smallest human chromosome. an algorithm module containing multiple allele calling algorithms Several diseases are associated with genes or genomic regions - size calling, binning, allele calling, has been developed to optimize of HC21 including Down syndrome, the most common cause of the accuracy of final genotype assignments. Coupled with a novel mental retardation. The availability of the mouse genomic sequence Process Based Quality Value (PQV) system, which contains over gives the opportunity to combine whole chromosome homologous 20 quality metrics to pinpoint the origins of genotyping failures, sequence comparisons with experimental assays to reveal novel GeneMapper software enables users to choose to manually examine functional regions that correspond either to putative genes or only allele calls with low quality scores. For projects that require regulatory regions. We used PipMaker to perform long genomic frequent modifications of markers, a novel panel management feature alignments of the entire human chromosome 21q sequence with the has been developed to allow on-the-fly editing of bins within markers. homologous sequences from mouse chromosomes 16, 17 and 10 A collection of genotyping data has been processed using obtained from the Celera mouse genome assembly. 3896 blocks of GeneScan® software, Genotyper™ software and GeneMapper™ >100bps in length and >70% sequence identity were extracted and software, and analysis results were compared. Allele calling accuracy fragments corresponding to known HC21 exons were excluded. From and time required for complete analysis and data editing will be the remaining 2383 unassigned conserved blocks, 10% correspond presented. to deposited usually singly represented human ESTs, 37% contain significant ORFs and several have strong similarity to deposited P0603. Genomic Assays To Enable High Throughput coding sequences. These suggest that many of the conserved blocks Genomics are unknown exons of known or unknown genes that were neither M. D. Rhodes, S. Eddins, A. Dodge, K. Rogers, D. Dailey, P. Dong, experimentally identified nor predicted by the sequence analysis D. Madden, D. Gilbert; of HC21, probably due to short length and restricted spatial and Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA. temporal expression. Conserved blocks corresponding to putative The draft of the human genome enables scientific discoveries exons or regulatory regions are currently being tested experimentally in many fields including gene expression and genotyping. The for their functional role. Additionally, coding and intergenic sequences challenge is to make this wealth of genome information available to are being analyzed in order to reveal their evolutionary properties. the laboratory. Applied Biosystems has launched two complementary We will present a combination of comprehensive computational and product offerings that together provide a complete solution for ready experimental analysis in an effort to improve and expand the coding to use assays for quantification of gene expression and genotyping and regulatory annotation of HC21 and study its evolutionary history. via SNPs These assays use the 5‘ nuclease assay with Taqman® MGB probes. All assays are provided in an easy to use single tube P0601. Transcriptome variations in Caco-2 cells during format. Experimental setup is simple consisting of addition of two their differentiation : a model for studying intestinal iron reagents (assay mix and universal master mix) to the Target DNA. absorption ? The Assays-by-DesignSM service, will allow customers to submit a H. Ferran Bédrine1, I. Gicquel1, M. Lecunff2, I. Guisle2, N. Soriano1, target sequence of interest. Applied Biosystems uses proprietary P. Fergelot1, J. Y. Le Gall1, J. Leger2, J. Mosser1; algorithms to design an assay for each target. Following synthesis 1UMR 6061CNRS, Rennes, France, 2INSERM U533, Nantes, France. and formulation, the assay will be analytically tested for integrity Iron homeostasis is controlled by intestinal absorption. Many factors before shipping to the customer. The second offering, the Assays-on- implicated in this absorption have been recently characterized without DemandTM products, will provide ready-to-use assays to pre-defined explaining its adaptation to the iron store of the whole organism. This targets which customers may select by, SNP or transcript ID, gene adapted absorption is probably due to an unknown sensibilization name or attribute. Genomic assays provided by both Both Assays- of intestinal crypts undifferentiated cells. These cells differentiate by-DesignSM and Assays-on-DemandTM are provided in an easy to during their migration along the crypt-villosity axis and would become use single tube format. Experimental setup is minimized consisting of fully differentiated enterocytes with an appropriate iron absorption addition of two reagents (assay mix and universal master mix) to the capacity. Caco-2 cells, a colon adenocarcinoma cell line, seem to be Target DNA. The process is highly automatable and signal detection a good model for studying iron effects on gene expression during the can be carried out unattended using the ABI Prism® 7900HT with enterocytic differentiation. robotic accessories A transcriptomic approach has been implemented to identify genes Details on the design, production and testing of these assays will be involved in the regulation of iron absorption in the intestine : 1536 presented. cDNA were selected by subtractive suppressive hybridization ( SSH ) and spotted on micro arrays. Their sequences reveal that each array P 12. Globins represents 700 genes, half of them with an unknown function. mRNA from Caco-2 cells at different stages of differentiation were hybridised P0604. Postnatal and prenatal diagnosis of β-thalassemia to the microarrays. These experiments show that 400 out of the by DHPLC 700 genes can be classified in seven distinct expression profiles A. Colosimo1,2, V. Guida1, A. De Luca1, G. Palka2, M. Cappabianca3, that seem to correlate with functional role, most of iron metabolism I. Bianco3, B. Dallapiccola1,4; genes being indeed overexpressed in differentiated cells. The effects 1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2University of Chieti, Department of intracellular iron concentration on the expression of those genes of Biomedical Sciences, Chieti, Italy, 3Associazione Nazionale are currently being studied. These observations should enable us to Microcitemie in Italia, Rome, Italy, 4University of Rome, Department of better understand the mechanisms underlying primary iron overload. Experimental Medicine and Pathology, Rome, Italy.Posters - Globins 202 203 ß-Thalassemia, one of the most common hereditary disease F / F-cell = 17.7pg while one patient with the same mutations and a worldwide, results from a reduced or absent ß-globin chain synthesis, hybrid haplotype resulting in cis – at the XMNI site (XMN I genotype due to over 200 identified mutations in the ß-globin locus. The high = --) had lower values; Hb F = 13%, Gg = 0.37, F-cells = 0.12 x prevalence of ß-thalassemic carriers in Mediterranean countries 1012/l, Hb F / F-cell = 11.4pg. The main effect appears to be on the presses for the development of genetic counseling and postnatal/ decreased level of F-cell numbers. prenatal molecular diagnosis programs. The major goal of this study Hydroxyurea increased F cell number with constant HbF/Fcell was to develop a feasible protocol for the postnatal and prenatal resulting in elevated HbF (% and g/dl) and total Hb (g/dl) among b+ diagnosis of ß-thalassemia in the Italian population, based on a IVS-I,6C homozygotes with XMNI -- Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC) The data suggested independent control of cellular commitment and assay. First of all, empirical optimization of DHPLC parameters was expression of g and b globin genes subject to the XMNI genotype in set up in a total of 40 Italian heterozygous carriers, whose 26 different adults but not in neonates. ß-globin mutations had been previously identified by ARMS-PCR. A group of 30 normal individuals was used as control. Secondly, P0607. A Step toward the finding the origin of ß- the DHPLC optimized parameters were successfully applied to Thalassemia Mutation in IRAN the mutational analysis of ß-thalassemic patients, both compound T. Parsa1, S. Teimourian2, M. Neishaboury1, M. Neishaboury1, heterozygotes (12 subjects) and homozygous patients (4 subjects). In A. Moritz3, C. Oberkanins3, W. klukelberg3, W. Krugluger3, H. addition,12 chorionic villi samples were subjected to DHPLC analysis Najmabadi1,2; upon molecular characterization of each parental ß-globin alleles. 1Genetics Research Center the Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Two other mutation detection methods (i.e. ARMS-PCR and allele- University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Karimi-Nejad Pathology specific reverse dot-blot) plus direct sequence analysis were used in and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Institute of parallel to the DHPLC method, showing an accuracy rate of 100%. Clinical Chemistry, Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Vienna, Austria. No misdiagnosis occurred. In summary, DHPLC has been shown A study of molecular lesions of beta-thalassemia in Iran showed a to be a reliable, sensitive and rapid screening method to perform highly heterogenous spectrum of mutations. postnatal and prenatal diagnosis of ß-thalassemia in the Italian More than 100 beta-globin alleles from 50 unrelated thalassemia population, within 2-3 days of sampling. patients were analyzed for mutations by amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) or a reverse-hybridization Strip Assay P0605. New Beta-thalassemia mutations in Iranian (Vienna lab). population Haplotype analysis using 5 restriction sites was performed on the F. Sahebjam1, C. Oberkenins2, A. Tabarroki3, M. Neishabouri1, A. following 5 mutations: cd 44 (-C), cd 22 (7bp del), IVSI-1 (G-A), cd Moritz4, S. Taimourian3, M. K. Javan1, H. Najmabadi1,3; 36-37 (-T), IVS II-1 (G-A). 1University of Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran Iran, Using DNA sequencing 6 different polymorphisms in 9 frameworks Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Vienna Lab, Vienna Austria, Viena, were detected in the beta-globin gene of these samples. Austria, 3Karimi-nejad Pathology and Genetic Center, Tehran Iran, Comparison of these frameworks and haplotypes with Mediterranean Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Vienna Lab, Vienna Austria, Vienna, types reveals several findings: (1) the same polymorphisms are Austria. associated with more frameworks in the Iranian thalassemic Beta-thalassemia is a major health problem in Iran and it is estimated population than in the Mediterranean, suggesting that the Iranian that more than two million carriers of beta thalassemia live in Iran. thalassemic population is more ancient than the Mediterranean; (2) Although currently the battery of 22 mutations in form of Beta strip the haplotype associated with the IVS II-1 mutation is in a different assay (Vienna Lab) are used for mutation detection and prenatal framework than the Mediterranean IVS II-1 mutation, indicating the diagnosis, the mutations of more than 20 percent of DNA samples probability of different origins for the IVS II-I mutation. still remain unknown by these probes. We have selected 72 samples of unidentified beta thalassemia cases, representing different ethnical P0608. Testing for HFE-mutations in Hungarian patients and geographical areas of Iran. Samples were sequenced for beta with beta thalassemia minor globin gene. Results revealed one new mutation of Codon 95(A-T). A. Tordai, H. Andrikovics, V. Homolya, N. Erdei, L. Kalmár, A. Bors; We found three east-Asian mutations of IVS II-654 (C-T), Codon National Medical Center, Institute of Hematology and Immunology, 24/25 (-GGT), and IVS II-850 (G-T) and also one individual with an Budapest, Hungary. unusual mutation of IVS I-2 (T-C), which have not been reported Hereditary haemochromatosis (HH) characterised by iron overload in non-black population. We also found other rare mutations of is thought to be caused by mutations (C282Y or H63D) of the HFE IVS I-130 (G-C), cd 82/83 (-G), cd 16 (-C), -88 (C-A), cd 15 (G-A), gene. HH was shown to be of Celtic origin and HFE mutations 5’UTR+22(G-A), Cap+1 (A-C), IVS II-2, 3 (+11, -2), cd 67 (T-G), spread remarkably in the Caucasian population. Beta thalassemia cd 42/43 (+T), which are reported previously in European and minor (BTM), a mild form of anaemia, also shows a characteristic Mediterranean populations. In nine carrier of beta thalassemia no geographical distribution with high prevalence in the Mediterranian mutations where found in beta globin gene , this may be result of region. Due to ineffective erythropoesis, BTM is associated with iron very large deletions in beta or deletion in LCR region. These findings overload. The goal of the current study was to examine the potential indicate that Iranian population shows a wide variety of thalassemia interaction between these two genetic disorders, both with significant allelic distribution and also helps prenatal diagnosis program in Iran. prevalence in Hungary. 97 unrelated, consecutive patients (males/ females:47/50, average age:33.5 years) with altered laboratory tests P0606. Differential Effects of the XMNI Site in cis to characteristic to BTM were examined for the presence of C282Y and the Gg Globin Genes between Newborn Hb F Malta H63D mutations of the HFE gene by PCR-RFLP. For the laboratory I Heterozygotes and Anaemic Adult Thalassaemia detection of the BTM phenotype, we used haemoglobin F (HbF), Homozygotes. haemoglobin A2 (HbA2) and permeability tests. Each patient showed A. E. Felice; elevated HbA2 and either elevated HbF or altered permeability. University of Malta, Msida, Malta. The HFE genotyping showed 5 (5.2%) C282Y-heterozygous and The differential effects of the “regulatory” XMNI site 5’ to the 30 (30.9%) H63D heterozygous patients, two of them compound Gg globin gene were studied among newborn Hb-F-Malta-I heterozygous. The C282Y allele frequency (2.6%) was lower than heterozygotes and adult thalassaemia homozygotes. the reference value for Hungary (3.8%), the difference was not Hb F Malta I was quantified among 135 heterozygote newborn significant. The H63D allele frequency (15%) was similar to the (= 26% +/- 3.0). Genotyping of the “regulatory” XMNI site in reference value (14%). We are currently collecting additional clinical trans excluded marked effects on the neonatal globin phenotype data to assess the iron homeostasis of BTM-patients with different irrespective of gender: -- = 26.0%(n=116); -+ = 24.0% (n=19). HFE-gentoypes. Our data indicate a tendency towards decreased Quantification of Hb F parameters among 7 adult anaemic allele frequency of the C282Y variant among patients with BTM, thalassaemia homozygotes / double heterozygotes showed tight suggesting a possible negative interaction between the two genetic dependence on the XMNI genotype. Patients with b+IVS-I,6C in disorders. association with the b+ IVS-II,1A mutations and -+ at the XMNI site had high values; Hb F = 54%, Gg = 0.71, F-cells = 3.0 x 1012/l, Hb 202 Posters - Globins 203 P0609. Prevention of hemoglobinopathies in immigrant Patients with Beta-Thalassemia major have severe clinical populations:The Netherlands. symptoms including hepatosplenomegaly, anemia and deformability P. C. Giordano, C. L. Harteveld; predominantly in cranial and facial bones. Osteoporosis is emerging Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. as a major cause of morbidity in patients with Beta-Thalassemia Hemoglobinopathy (HbP) prevention, achieved at high level in major. Polymorphism at the sp1-binding site of the COLIA1 gene is several Mediterranean countries, remains a neglected issue thought to be an important factor in the development of osteoporosis. in many immigration areas of Northern Europe. The causes of We amplified the region including the intronic polymorphism of such a shortcoming are related to the following factors. Lack of COLIA1 gene to investigate sp1 gene polymorphism in Beta- awareness by the majority of the population at risk and by the first Thalassemia major patients with osteoporosis. Amplified gene (G.P.’s and midwives) and second line of healthcare (obstetricians, products were then digested by Bal1 restriction enzyme to detect the neonatologists paediatricians). Moreover, know-how and technology base substitution (G-A) in the sp1 binding site. 12 patients out of 15 for carrier diagnostics is not always available in the laboratory. studied were found to have an SS genotype, while an Ss genotype Carriers, whenever diagnosed, are not sufficiently informed about was observed in the other 3. The distribution of the genotypes was genetic risk and prevention and not referred for counselling. proportionately similar to those reported by others, although no Finally, requests for financial support to the Dutch prevention ss genotype was observed in our study, which is the unfavorable foundation, for the implementation of a national prevention strategy, genotype, possibly due to low number of subjects studied. Although are systematically rejected. In order to offer better healthcare there are findings to suggest a possible link between the COLIA1 to the population at risk, we have created Hemoglobinopathies polymorphism with increased rates of osteoporotic fracture, our Work Groups intended to deal with these problems from different results, to be extended, suggest careful interpretation of the effect of angles. We are trying to improve specific genetic education in the the ss genotype on bone fractures. public by spreading leaflets and providing websites. The problem of professional information is tackled by symposia, seminars, P0612. Molecular pathology of the delta-globin gene in publications in professional editiorials, frequent training sessions the Portuguese population and patient discussion. We are organizing a nework of labs capable A. Morgado, I. Picanço, A. Miranda, T. Seixas, J. Lavinha, L. Romão, of producing a diagnosis for the 6 basic traits (HbS, E, C, D, b- and P. Faustino; a-thalassemia) and to ad trait related genetic information to positive Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal. carrier diagnoses. Our aim is to implement carrier diagnostics at the The classical phenotype of heterozygous beta-thalassemia (beta- pre-marital or pre-parental stage by intervention of GP or specialist; thal) can be modified by a number of environmental and genetic in early pregnancy, by intervention of midwives and obstetricians and interacting factors eg, the cotransmission of a delta-thalassemia at the neonatal level (newborn screening). Preliminary results are determinant reducing the typical increased hemoglobin (Hb) A2 to presented. normal or borderline values. In this study, we have defined by molecular analysis, the beta- and P0610. Thalassemia Control by Carrier Screening: Indian delta-globin genotypes in a group of 44 individuals with beta-thal-like Case Study red cell indices but normal or borderline Hb A2 levels (2.3-3.5%), A. Saxena1, S. R. Phadke2; who were detected in a beta-thal carrier screening program in the 1Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Portuguese population. They were tested by ARMS for common Lucknow, India, 2Sanjay Gandhi PGIMS, Lucknow, India. Portuguese beta-thal mutations. Delta-globin gene mutations were Cyprus and Greece have shown that by mass screening of general identified by a PCR-SSCP scanning method followed by sequencing. population birth of thalassemic children can be prevented. In India We detected a beta-thal mutation in all subjects: 26 were carriers thalassemia is a serious public health problem. Since India is a of the beta+IVS-I-6T>C mutation, 7 beta0Cd39C>T, 6 beta0IVS- large country, therefore screening of general population for carrier I-1G>A, and 5 beta+IVS-I-110G>A. Two individuals were double status is not feasible. Hence, screening has to be restricted to high heterozygotes for beta0Cd39C>T in trans with delta+27G>T, and risk groups. Extended family screening (EFS) means screening other two individuals were double heterozygotes for beta0IVS-I-1G>A relatives of the affected child for carrier status. Objective: To explore or beta+IVS-I-110G>A and delta+27G>T, respectively. Futhermore, if EFS for carrier detection was feasible in India, if not, then what one novel base substitution within the delta-gene promoter region, are the barriers to its acceptance. Methods: Hundred couples -80G>A, whose functional consequence is under investigation, was with a thalassaemic child were interviewed using a predesigned also detected in cis with the delta+27G>T, in one individual with the questionnaires. Parents of affected child were given information beta0Cd39C>T. on disease and its transmission and asked if they had conveyed Another result of this study was the molecular characterization to their relatives the possibility of their giving birth to a similarly of three putative delta-chain hemoglobin variants detected by affected child. Results: 96 couples had no reservation in sharing isoelectrofocusing or low-pressure ion exchange chromatography: information about their thalassaemic child with relatives. Relatives i) delta-Cd16,GGC>CGC(Gly>Arg) - Hb B2 - was identified of 62 couples accepted risk of being carriers but only 14 families got in heterozygosity in two microcytic and hypochromic themselves tested. Another 34 families were willing to get tested but individuals presenting also the -alfa3.7kb deletion; ii) delta- because of non - availability of screening facility in near by town, Cd136,GGT>GAT(Gly>Asp) - Hb A2-Babinga - was identified in cost of test and lack of sufficient motivation did not get themselves heterozygosity in a hematologically normal individual. tested. Conclusion: Majority of parents have no reservations in sharing information about the affected child. Communication needs P0613. Screening of beta-globin gene mutations causing to be improved for all families at risk to accept the risk of having beta-thalassemia in Romanian population a thalassaemic child. Screening should be more readily available R. Talmaci, L. Gavrila, L. Dan; and high risk groups should be motivated through awareness University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania. programmes. Beta-thalassemia is a group of inherited recessive disorder in with a defect in synthesis of beta-globin polypeptide chain of hemoglobin is P0611. sp1 Gene Polymorphism in Patients with Beta- present. From people in all over the world, more than 200 different Thalassemia Major thalassemia mutations in beta-globin gene have been reported. The A. D. Toraman1, O. G. Kayisli1, I. Keser1, R. Cosan2, D. Canatan2, G. aim of our research is to search for distribution of beta-thalassemia Luleci1; mutations in Romanian population. Beta-thalassemia is a frequent 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical genetic disorder in Romania. Therefore, the molecular diagnosis is Biology and Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Antalya State Hospital, at present a primary goal for heterozygotes screening and diagnostic Thalassemia Center, Antalya, Turkey. confirmation. As being the only center in Romania, having such task, Beta-Thalassemia, an autosomal recessive disease, is characterized we started mutation screening and molecular diagnosis of beta- by defects in beta-globin chain production. thalassemia in Romanian patients. Using direct detection by PCR Nearly 200 different mutations affecting various different processes based methods like ARMS-PCR and RFLP-PCR we have found in globin gene expression, have been reported as the cause of out that the most frequent gene mutations in Romania are IVS1- Beta-Thalassemia, which is a serious health problem in Turkey. 6, IVS1-1, IVS2-745, cd 39, IVS1-110, cd 6 and IVS2-1(in order Posters - Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Biochemical Genetics 204 205 to decreased frequencies). Our data indicated that the mutations in Antalya, Turkey, is an autosomal recessive disease. Mostly, point identified in Romanian population are of the Mediterranean type. mutations on beta-globin gene causes beta-thalassaemia, only in Furthermore, these data will be used in future prenatal diagnosis of rare cases a deletion or an insertion is resposible for the disease. beta-thalassemia and for current screening of specific mutations in Reverse Dot Blot Hybridization (RDBH) method is used for screening Romania. of common mutations and sequence analysis and silver staining were performed to detect any uncommon mutation. Here, we report P0614. Identification of two novel beta thalassemia a rare variant -intervening sequence 2 (IVS2) 849 A→G- in a Turkish mutations and a novel compound heterozygosity in family. While, proband’s mother has IVS2.849 A→G, father has IVS1.1 genotype. The first child of the family has a IVS2.849 A→G/ Antalya population: Hb Antalya, Cod 3 (+T)/ IVS1.110, Hb IVS1.1 genotype, with beta-Thalassaemia major phenotype. Prenatal Tyne/Hb S diagnosis was performed for the second gestation and genotype O. G. Kayisli1, A. D. Toraman1, I. Keser1, A. Yesilipek2, D. Canatan3, of the fetus was found as IVS2.849 A→G/Normal and parents G. Luleci1; decided for the continiuation of the pregnancy. Clinical findings were 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical compared with the previous reports . This first report of IVS2.849 A→ Biology and Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty G mutation in Turkish population, shows that there are many more of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Heamatology and Oncology, mutations contributing the heterogeniety of mutation spectrum of Antalya, Turkey, 3Antalya State Hospital, Thalassemia Center, beta-globin gene in Turkish population. Antalya, Turkey. Beta-Thalassemia, an autosomal recessive disease, is characterized P0617. Prenatal Diagnosis of Beta-Thalassemia in Iran, by reduced synthesis of beta globin gene. Until now nearly 200 different mutations, affecting many different processes in globin eleven years study gene expression, have been reported. b-Thalassemia and Sickle H. Najmabadi1,2, R. Karimi-Nejad2, S. Teimourian2, F. Sahebjam2, M. cell anemia create a serious health problem in Antalya, southern H. Karimi-Nejad2; part of Turkey. In this investigation, three patients who were clinically 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and diagnosed as b-Thalassemia minor, intermedia, and Sickle cell Rehabilitation, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Karimi-Nejad anemia/b-Thalassemia, were firstly screened to detect the known Pathology and Genetic Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. common beta globin gene mutations in Mediterranean Region, Thalassemia is the most common genetic disorder in Iran, with over using reverse dot blot hybridization (RDBH), and the amplification 2 million carriers of beta- thalassemia. As a first center in Iran, we refractory system (ARMS). However, no common mutations were established in 1990 a prenatal diagnosis for beta-thalassemia. During observed in the b globin gene of these patients by the above this period we have diagnosed total of 478 cases (225 amnion and mentioned methods. For this reason, DNA sequence analyses were 253 CVS samples). Two strategies direct and indirect (RFLPs) were performed to detect the sequence changes in b globin gene. We used for diagnosis. In direct method Arms and beta globin strip assay found two novel mutations; Hb Antalya, a partial frameshift mutation (Vienna Lab) using 22 common beta globin gene mutation panels in codon3-5 of b globin gene leading to unstable globin chains in a specific for Iranian population were performed. Using both techniques patient with b-Thalassemia minor; a frameshift mutation in Codon we were able to provide a reliable prenatal diagnosis for over 96% of 3 (+T) in compound heterozygosity with IVSI.110 in a patient with the pregnancies. Out of these samples 21.9% normal for beta globin b-Thalassemia intermedia, and also found a novel compound gene mutation, 46.8% trait, and 27.4 % were affected. heterozygosity for Hb Tyne/Hb S in a patient with b-Thalassemia/ In 3.9 % of the cases we could not determine any mutation or Sickle cell anemia. We belive that such cases may be considered establishing any informative RFLP system. Our data shows very to be important examples for understanding both the molecular close Mendelian distributions. mechanisms of genetic heterogeneity and genotype-phenotype interaction in b-Thalassemia. P 13. Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Biochemical Genetics P0615. Hb Zürich – Altstetten (α2 142 TAA → CAT): A new P0618. Phenylketonuria In Iran, The First Report From hemoglobin variant with elongated α - chain analogous to The Historical City Of Isfahan Hb Constant Spring detected in a Thai woman S. Vallian1, E. Barahimi2, M. Shamoradgoli1, M. Hosseini3, H. Moeini1; 1Isfahan University, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Khatam F. Dutly, H. Frischknecht; University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3NRCGEB, Tehran, IMD Institute for Medical and Molecular Diagnostics Ltd., Zürich, Islamic Republic of Iran. Switzerland. Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a metabolic genetic disease, in which the During routine hemoglobin screening by ion exchange HPLC phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene is mutated, resulting in the we detected a fraction eluting shortly after Hb A2 . The relative elevation of blood phenylalanine (Phe). The disease is associated concentration was 2 % of total hemoglobin. A 30 year old Thai female with a severe irreversible mental retardation. However, early resident in Switzerland showed slight anemia, no microcytosis and detection of the disease and the elimination of Phe from diet could only minimal hypochromia. The patient was clinically healthy and prevent the PKU symptoms. In a screening program to analyze showed no additional hematological abnormalities. the PKU mutations in Isfahan, we examined 1611 institutionalized To identify the mutant hemoglobin, we sequenced the alpha globin mentally retarded patients, ranging from 7-27 years old. Of the genes. The alpha 2 gene showed two transitions in codon 142: patients examined, 36 (2%) were positive using the Guthrie bacterial the first being the common T→C Hb Constant Spring mutation. inhibition assay (GBIA). Quantitative measurement of the serum Phe Additionally we detected a A→T transition in the third base of codon showed that among the patients tested, 33 had increased level of 142, leading to a His instead of Gln and the additional 30 amino Phe (above 10 mg/dL). Preliminary studies on the PAH mutations in acids as in Hb Constant Spring. First attempts to analyze the mutant these patients resulted in the detection of several mutations including hemoglobin by mass spectrometry were not successful. This most the delL364, R261X, K341T, G272X and S273F. The delL364 likely reflects the instability of the mutant molecule. mutation is, so far, the predominant one (about 3%). Furthermore, The second transition most likely occurred on the background of our analysis showed that 66% of the patient are the results of the Hb Constant Spring mutation and thus should exhibit the same consanguineous marriages, in which the parents were first cousin, properties with regard to combinations with alpha thalassemia(s). indicating the role of this kind of marriages in the prevalence of the disease in Isfahan. P0616. A Rare Mutation of Beta-Globin Gene (IVS 2-849 A→G) at Exon 2-Intron 2 Splice Site in a Turkish Patient P0619. Congenital Disorder of Glycosilation type Ia in a with Beta-Thalassaemia Major patient with Jouber syndrome and arachnodactyly C. F. Sargin1, A. E. Manguoglu Aydemir1, N. Nal1, I. Keser1, A. B. Cser1, É. Morava1, J. Karteszi1, K. Huyben2, L. Szonyi3, R. Yesilipek2, G. Luleci1; Wevers2, G. Kosztolanyi1; 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 1Dep.Med.Genetics and Child Development, PTE, Pécs, Hungary, Biology an Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University,Faculty of 2Lab.of Pediatrics and Neurology, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Dep.of Medicine,Department of Pediatric Haematology, Antalya, Turkey. Pediatrics I., Budapest, Hungary. Beta-Thalassaemia, among the most common hemoglobinopathies 204 Posters - Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Biochemical Genetics 205 Many forms of CDG are currently known. Serum transferrin a powerful tool for studying the correlations of genotype and isofocusing is the method of choice for screening however, most phenotype, for understanding the cases of dominant transmission, metabolic laboratories do not routinely use this technique. The and for elucidating the role of alkaline phosphatase in bone method should be specifically requested in any child with an mineralization. For that, we used a panel of methodologies such as undefined multi-system disorder. As part of the EUROGLYCAN site-directed mutagenesis, 3D modeling and monoclonal antibodies project we started a systemic screening for CDG in hypotonic directed against the protein. Our results allowed us to distinguish patients. In the first hundred individuals studied we found one severe and moderate alleles, to discriminate recessive and dominant positive case. The two year-old patient was examined with mental mutations, to show that the dominant effect of some mutations result retardation, profound hypotonia, random eye movements, ptosis, from an inhibitory mechanism and to identify major functional regions flat face, arachnodactyly, generalised joint hyperflexibility and of the enzyme, a result of significant importance in understanding lipid hepatopathy. Dysmorphic facial features, mental retardation, the role of this enzyme in bone mineralization. These results have hypotonia, ophthalmic symptoms and cerebellar vermis hypoplasia been immediately used to improve genetic counseling and molecular suggested Joubert syndrome. Karyotype analysis was normal. diagnosis of the disease and in the long term, could help to discover Persistent hepatomegaly and increased hepatic enzymes raised drugs for treatment of the disease. the possibility of a metabolic disease. Serum transferrin isoelectric focusing and leukocyte enzyme studies established the diagnosis P0622. Peroxisomal Disorders In Slovakia of CDG Ia (Congenital Disorder of Glycosylation). Characteristic R. Petrovic1, J. Chandoga1, J. Futas1, L. Dvorakova2, M. Hrebicek2; features of CDG Ia include severe muscle hypotonia, mental 1Centre of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, retardation, ataxia, ophthalmologic involvement, failure to thrive, 2Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Prague, Czech Republic. abnormal fat distribution, cerebellar atrophy and hepatopathy. Our Introduction: Up to now about twenty inherited peroxisomal diseases patient had normal growth, normal fat distribution and no inverted has been described. Except of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy nipples or strabismus, however, arachnodactyly and joint hyperlaxity (X-ALD), all diseases are based on autosomal recessive type of were pronounced. Our case who is the first patient diagnosed with inheritance. This defect is based on peroxisome biogenesis or CDG-Ia in Hungary contributes to the phenotypic spectrum of this deficiency in individual peroxisomal protein. recently identifiable metabolic disorder. Methods: Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS) analysis of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA), phytanic acid, P0620. Necrosis-like cell death in Prolidase Deficiency pipecolic acid and urinary organic acids were used for diagnostics (PD) fibroblasts: molecular, biochemical and of peroxisomal diseases with defect in ß-oxidation route, primary morphological characterization of five new PD cases. hyperoxaluria I and mevalonic aciduria. In some cases digitonin A. Forlino1, A. Lupi1, P. Vaghi2, A. Icaro Cornaglia3, E. Campari1, A. permeabilisation of cultured fibroblasts was realised. For X-ALD Calligaro3, G. Cetta1; mutations analysis cDNA sequencing was used. 1Dipartimento di Biochimica, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Centro Results: One case of the peroxisome biogenesis disorder and three Grandi Strumenti, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Dipartimento di cases of single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies with fatal course Medicina Sperimentale, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. to 3 year were diagnosed. X-ALD with variable phenotypes was Prolidase Deficiency (PD) is a rare recessive disorder caused by found in five male patients. In two patients (brothers) of age about 30 mutations in the prolidase gene. It is characterized mainly by skin this disease was presented as adrenomyeloneuropathy associated lesions, mental retardation and recurrent infectious. We identified with adrenal insufficiency and Addison crises. In the other sibling the molecular defect in five PD patients. Direct sequencing of PCR X-ALD as childhood cerebral form and until now asymptomatic form amplified genomic DNA showed a G to A transversion in two siblings was manifested. Among the X-ALD patients there is also a 12-year leading to a G448R substitution. A G+1 to C transition in one allele old boy with 5 year continual therapy with Lorenzo’s oil. He has a of intron 11, causing the skipping of exon 11, was detected in a slow progression of disease and nearly physiological VLCFA serum third proband and this is the first report of a mutation in a splicing values. One case of primary hyperoxaluria I with kidney stones at 4 donor site of the prolidase gene. A G-1 to A transversion in intron year and mevalonic aciduria were also diagnosed. 7 was identified in two unrelated probands and shown to cause Conclusions: During the last five year inherited disease of multiple alternative spliced transcripts. Long term cultured fibroblasts peroxisomal compartment has been definitively proved for 11 from these PD patients were used to investigate the biochemical, patients. Two novel mutations of ALD gene were identified microscopical and ultrastructural changes in affected cells. Light and c.1898G>T (S6331I) and c.1979G>C (R660P). electron microscopy revealed that patients’ cells were more round and branched than controls. We also detected increased cytosolic P0623. Rapid Genetic Testing for Gaucher Disease: From vacuolization, plasma membrane interruptions, mitochondria swelling Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) to and mitochondrial matrix and cristae modifications. JC-1 labelling Reverse-Hybridization showed decreased mitochondrial membrane potential. An intracellular G. Kriegshäuser1, D. Halsall2, A. Moritz1, F. Kury1, C. Oberkanins1; accumulation of the Gly-Pro dipeptide was revealed by capillary 1ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Dept. Clinical electrophoresis analysis. The composite data provide new insights Biochemistry, Addenbrook´s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom. into PD physiopathology, suggesting the activation in skin fibroblasts Gaucher disease (GD), the most frequent lysosomal storage of a necrosis-like cellular death, which could be responsible for the disorder, is an autosomal recessive disease characterized typical skin lesions in this disease. by deficiency of glucocerebrosidase (GBA). Mutations in the GBA gene cause the disease and enzyme deficiency results P0621. Five years of molecular diagnosis of in accumulation of glucocerebroside, mainly within cells of the hypophosphatasia : benefits for genetic counseling and monocyte/ macrophage lineage, which may lead to splenomegaly, for understanding the molecular basis of the disease hepatomegaly, thrombocytopenia, bone marrow suppression, E. Mornet; and bone lesions. The disease is panethnic and has been divided Laboratoire SESEP, Université de Versailles-Saint Quentin en into three major types on the basis of the absence (type 1) or the Yvelines, Versailles, France. presence and severity of neurologic manifestations (type 2 and Hypophosphatasia is an inherited disorder caused by a deficiency of type 3). The most common variant of the disease is type 1, which bone alkaline phosphatase due to mutations in the tissue-nonspecific is particularly frequent in the Ashkenazi Jewish population with alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) gene. The disease results in low an estimated disease frequency of 1 in 850 and a carrier rate to or nil bone and dental mineralization. It is highly variable in its approximate 1 in 15. We have developed a reverse-hybridization clinical expression, due to the strong allelic heterogeneity in the assay (Gaucher Disease StripAssay) for the simultaneous detection TNSALP gene. Since 1997, we studied 127 patients or families of of eight point mutations (84GG, IVS2(+1), 1226G, 1297T, 1342C, patients from European, North-American and Australian origins and 1448C, 1504T and 1604A) and two multiply mutated alleles derived identified by sequencing 101 mutations among which 91 were not from rearrangements between the structural gene and the 16-kb previously described. Twenty-six molecular prenatal diagnoses were downstream pseudogene (RecNciI, RecTL). The test is based on a performed in 22 families affected by the lethal form of the disease. single, multiplex DNA amplification reaction and ready-to-use test The great number of mutations collected by our laboratory constituted strips presenting a parallel array of oligonucleotide probes for each Posters - Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Biochemical Genetics 206 207 wild-type and mutated allele. The Gaucher Disease StripAssay was markers (ie metabolites or enzymes), and is a particular issue for used to screen a cohort of 91 English Gaucher Disease patients consanguineous families. Prenatal diagnosis by biochemical methods previously genotyped by RFLP. Data obtained with both assays will may also be problematic for some families. be presented and discussed with respect to specificity, sensitivity, The FAA gene maps to 15q23-25, has 14 exons, and more than design and throughput. 34 different mutations have been reported. There are four common mutations associated with this disorder, most of the remainder are P0624. Oculocutaneous albinism in Germany: Spectrum private mutations. Of the 37 patients (from 35 families) at Birmingham of mutations in the TYR and P gene Children’s Hospital, 62% of disease alleles were accounted for by S. Opitz1, M. Kaufmann1, E. Schwinger1, C. Zühlke1, B. Käsmann- these four mutations. 27% were G192T, 27% IVS12+5 G to A, 6.8% Kellner2; IVS6-1 G to T, and 1.4% G1009A. 68% of these patients are of Asian 1Institut für Humangenetik, UKL, Lübeck, Germany, 2Augenklinik d. origin: within this group G192T is exclusive, and IVS12+5 G to A is Universitätskliniken des Saarlandes, Homburg/ Saar, Germany. more common than in the whole group. Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is an autosomal recessive Mutation screening by single-stranded conformational polymorphism disorder with heterogeneous genetic background. After extended (SSCP) analysis was developed to identify the remaining disease- clinical investigations of 176 unrelated patients [BKK; standardised causing mutations. 8 patients had further testing (14 untyped alleles). examination protocol] with albinism we extracted DNA from blood From this group of patients, 9 additional mutations were identified of samples for molecular genetic analyses of the genes responsible for which 6 were novel, and together accounted for 13 of the 14 disease- OCA1 and OCA2. OCA1 is caused by mutations in the tyrosinase causing alleles. Five of the mutations were mis-sense mutations gene (TYR) encoding the key enzyme in melanin biosynthesis. We (S23P, H133R, P156Q, T325M and S352R) and one splice site investigated the 5 exons of the TYR gene by PCR and SSCP and mutation (IVS9-2 A to G). These findings have led to an improved found variations in 66 individuals (1 conformational polymorphism approach to diagnosis of tyrosinaemia type I for clinical practice. in 46 patients, 2 in 17 patients, and 3 in 3 patients). OCA2 resulting from mutations in the human homologue of the mouse pink eye P0627. Tetrahydrobiopterin Deficiencies in the Maltese gene is the most common type of albinism world-wide. Analysing Population exons 3 to 20 of the P gene (consisting of 25 exons) by PCR and R. Farrugia1, R. Naudi1, S. Attard Montalto2, R. Parascandolo2, C. A. SSCP aberrant signals could be detected in 22 persons (preliminary Scerri1, C. Bartolo3, A. E. Felice1; results: for 21 patients 1 difference to the normal allele was 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics University of Malta, Msida, Malta, found, one patient showed abnormalities in 2 exons). In 8 patients 2Department of Paediatrics St Luke’s Hospital, G’Mangia, Malta, conformational deviations were detected by SSCP in both the TYR 3Synergene Technologies Ltd, Attard, Malta. and the P gene. In our sample of German origin about 37% of the A higher than usual frequency of hyperphenylalaninaemia due to patients show SSCP changes in the TYR gene and 12.5% in the tetrahydrobiopterin (BH) deficiencies, specifically Dihydropteridine 4 P gene (exons 3-20) suggesting that mutations at this locus are Reductase (DHPR) deficiency, is present in the Maltese population. possibly underrepresented in Caucasians. Classical Phenylketonuria due to Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Here, we present SSCP data of the complete TYR and P gene. deficiency has not been identified to date. Differentiation between polymorphisms and relevant mutations was Molecular analysis of the DHPR gene in 3 families (4 probands born carried out using sequence analysis. to unrelated parents over a span of 4 years) has identified the G23D mutation, a previously identified mutation in 2 Italian and 1 other P0625. An Automated Screening Test for Multiple Maltese patient. This glycine to aspartic acid change at the 23rd amino Mutations Associated with Hereditary Iron Overload acid in the protein alters a highly conserved amino acid in the NADH A. Moritz, G. Kriegshäuser, F. Kury, C. Oberkanins; binding domain of the DHPR gene. Viennalab Labordiagnostika, Vienna, Austria. Population studies have shown this mutation to be abnormally Inherited iron overload is a heterogenous disorder, including “classic” frequent in the Maltese population. A heterozygote carrier rate of 2% autosomal recessive hereditary haemochromatosis (HH), as well as has been established in a cohort of 400 random Maltese neonatal juvenile and autosomal dominant forms of the disease. The most DNA samples. This mutation is of Mediterranean origin and is a clear prevalent variant among Caucasians is autosomal recessive HH due example of a founder effect. to mutations in the HFE and transferrin receptor-2 (TFR2) genes. A neutral polymorphism, L132L, in the DHPR gene had previously More recently, mutations in the genes for ferroportin (FPN1/SLC11A3/ been identified in a patient carrying the G23D mutation. This IREG1) and ferritin heavy chain (FTH1) were found to be associated polymorphism was not present in our DHPR patients, however with autosomal dominant iron overload. In most cases therapeutic 6 out of 7 patients manifesting clinical symptoms typical of Dopa phlebotomy provides an effective and inexpensive lifelong treatment. Responsive Dystonia (DRD) also had the L132L polymorphism in DNA testing is now routinely used to support the diagnosis in patients either homozygosity or heterozygosity. DRD in these 7 patients, from with abnormal iron parameters, for the presymptomatic identification 4 unrelated families, is believed to be due to GTP Cyclohydrolase of individuals at risk, and its potential for population screening I deficiency - the first enzyme in the biosynthesis pathway of BH4. programs is currently under discussion. Molecular and biochemical analysis are currently being carried out to We have developed a reverse-hybridization assay identify the causative mutation in these patients. (Haemochromatosis StripAssay) for the rapid and simultaneous detection of 18 known mutations in the HFE, TFR2, FPN1 and FTH1 P0628. Detection of two novel large mutations in SLC7A9 genes. The test is based on multiplex DNA amplification and ready- by semi-quantitative fluorescent multiplex PCR to-use test strips containing oligonucleotide probes for each wild-type M. Font-Llitjós1, M. Palacín2, V. Nunes1; and mutated allele immobilized as parallel lines. The entire procedure 1Institut de Recerca Oncològica, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, from blood sampling to the identification of mutations requires 2Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. less than 6 hours, and may be carried out manually or essentially Cystinuria is an autosomal recessive aminoaciduria in which automated using existing instrumentation (e.g. TECAN profiBlot). two clinical types have been described: I and nonI. Mutations in (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at) the cystine and dibasic amino acid transporter cause cystinuria: mutations in the heavy subunit, rBAT, coded by SLC3A1 gene, cause P0626. Mutation Screening For Tyrosinaemia Type I type I cystinuria while mutations in the light subunit bo,+AT, coded S. K. Heath1, G. Gray1, A. Harper1, P. J. McKiernan2, M. Preece1, A. by SLC7A9 gene, cause non-type I cystinuria. Using multiplex semi- Green1; quantitative fluorescent PCR we have amplified the 13 exons of 1W. Midlands Regional Laboratory for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, SLC7A9 together with exon 5 of DSCR1 (located on chromosome Birmingham Children’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Liver 21) as a double dose control gene. The PCR products were loaded Unit, Birmingham Children’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. in a 48 well acrylamide gel together with an external fluorescent size Tyrosinaemia Type I is caused by a deficiency of the enzyme standard and run in an ABI PRISM 377 DNA sequencer. The results fumarylacetoacetase (FAA), the last enzyme in the catabolic were processed by GENESCAN™ software. With this technique we pathway of tyrosine. As with most other inborn errors of metabolism, have detected two novel large mutations in 2 Spanish families: a 5kb carrier status cannot be reliably excluded using biochemical deletion and a 5kb duplication, both affecting exon 12, originated 206 Posters - Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Biochemical Genetics 207 by the crossing over of two 195 bp sequences, which difer by 1 of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Dept. of nucleotide, separated by 4778 bp. This method is able to detect size Pediatrics, University in Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria. differences from a single base to whole exons missing, which makes Alpers progressive infantile poliodystrophy, a neurodegenerative it useful for scaning genes with a small to medium number of exons. disease with liver dysfunction may be associated with impairment of This technique requires 40-60 times less DNA than Southern blot, is function of mitochondrial enzymes and/or depletion of mitochondrial reproducible and can be very useful to rapidly scan a large number of DNA (mtDNA). MtDNA depletion is a quantitative disturbance of samples. mtDNA, characterised by tissue-specific reductions in mtDNA copy number. We describe two infants with liver impairment and P0629. Three Novel Mutations In The Cyp21 Gene In progressive neuromuscular disease characterised by hypotonia, Patients With The Classical Form Of Congenital 21- visual disturbances, refractory epilepsy, psychomotor retardation and profound brain atrophy. Progressive course of the disease with hydroxylase Deficiency increased level of lactate in blood and cerebrospinal fluid suggested M. P. De Mello1, O. V. Carvalho-Netto1, F. C. Soardi1, S. H. V. Lemos- a disturbance in mitochondrial energy generating systems. In both Marini2, G. Guerra-Junior2, M. T. M. Baptista3; patients, the analysis of hepatocyte ultrastructure revealed enormous 1Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Universidade multiplication of mitochondria of various size and microvesicular Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil, 2Dept. de Pediatria, steatosis, histochemical investigations demonstrated cytochrome Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Estadual de c oxidase deficiency. Southern blot analyses revealed markedly Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil, 3Dept. de Clínica Médica, Disciplina reduced content of mtDNA in liver (11% and 10% of the mean values de Endocrinologia, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade in controls), brain cortex (15% and 30% of the mean values in Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil. controls) in both patients and in cultured fibroblasts (25% of the mean Deficiency of 21-hidroxilase is the most frequent cause of congenital values in controls) of one patient. MtDNA content in muscle and heart adrenal hyperplasia. Usually, CYP21 affected genes bear one of was normal. The activities and protein amount of respiratory chain the eight mutations also present in the pseudogene CYP21P. The complexes were mildly decreased in isolated liver mitochondria in objective of this work was to determine new mutations in alleles comparison with controls but they were normal in muscle and heart that did not present pseudogene-originated mutations and in alleles mitochondria and in fibroblasts. In one patient, mild decrease of of a patient with phenotype-genotype conflicting clinical form. The mtDNA polymerase gamma activity was found, but its ratio to citrate occurrence of three new mutant alleles is described. A mutation synthase was normal. resulting from the insertion of an adenine between nucleotide 992 Supported by IGA-MZ NE 6555-3. and 993 in the exon 4 was found in two heterozygous siblings. It was inherited from the father whereas the maternal allele bears the R356W. The reading frameshift changes the Lysine170 to a Serine; P0632. A novel approach for reliable identification from this point on every amino acid changes and it creates a stop of cytochrome P450 alleles by multiplex assays on codon at the position 394. Correct segregation was confirmed by Pyrosequencing™ digestion with Pst I. A guanine to a adenine change in the nucleotide S. Eriksson1, M. Wadelius2, G. Frenne2, A. Alderborn1; 166 caused G56R mutation. It is inherited from the mother and 1Pyrosequencing AB, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Dept. of Clinical the paternal allele bears the IVS2AS,A/C-G,-12 microconversion. Pharmacology, Uppsala, Sweden. Segregation was confirmed by digestion with Apa I. A salt-losing The P450 cytochromes are important metabolisers of a large number patient was previously genotyped as having I172N from father and of pharmaceutical substances. Polymorphic variation in these genes V281L from the mother, a genotype compatible with the non-classical defines different alleles, often associated with decreased catalytic form. CYP21 sequencing reveled that the maternal allele also bears a activity of the gene product. The aim of this study was to set up rapid novel mutation. It is a G to A change at the position 391 within intron and reliable assays to identify alleles of CYP2D6, CYP2C9 and 2 splice donor consensus sequence. It is at +4 nucleotides from the CYP2C19 by Pyrosequencing™. GT splice donor site. An in silico analysis reveled that it completely Pyrosequencing™, or real-time sequencing, is a fast and suppressed the splice site. accurate method for SNP analysis. Pyrosequencing AB (Sweden) manufactures the PSQÔ 96 System for analysis of up to 96 SNP P0630. Somatic and germinal mosaicism for the steroid assays in 10 min, and the PTP system for high throughput SNP sulfatase gene in an X-linked ichthyosis carrier scoring. Dedicated softwares automatically delivers genotype S. Cuevas, L. Gonzalez, A. Jimenez, M. Rivera, S. Kofman; and quality assessment for each sample. A major advantage with Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico. Pyrosequencing is its combination of accuracy, speed and ease-of- Steroid sulfatase (STS) deficiency results in X-linked ichthyosis (XLI). use. It is characterized by dark, adhesive and regular skin scales and has Pyrosequencing assays for determination of four single nucleotide a similar frequency in different geographic areas. A large majority polymorphisms (SNPs) and two deletion polymorphisms were of XLI patients present complete deletion of the STS gene which is developed to identify the functional allele *2 and five of the non- located on Xp22.3. Mosaicism for the STS gene has not yet been functional CYP2D6 alleles (*3, *4, *6, *7 and *8). The establishing reported in XLI. In the present study, we describe an XLI patient with of a multiplex genotyping procedure enabled simultaneous scoring complete deletion of the STS gene and his mother who harbored of these polymorphisms in only two Pyrosequencing reactions. somatic and germinal mosaicism for this molecular defect. The family 130 patient samples were analysed and the results compared to (XLI patient, grandmother, mother and sister) was analyzed through genotyping by RFLP. Pyrosequencing correctly identified 100% of STS enzyme assay and PCR, DNA markers analysis and FISH of the alleles identified by RFLP and, in addition, scored two alleles the STS gene. STS activity was undetectable in the XLI patient, very that had not been assessed in the RFLP method. Furthermore, low in the mother and normal in the grandmother and sister. PCR multiplex assays for identification of the alleles CYP2C9*2 and *3 and analysis of the XLI patient showed a deletion from regions DXS1139 CYP2C19 alleles *2, *3 and *4 were successfully set up and verified. to DXF22S1 including the STS gene. FISH analysis performed in In summary, the Pyrosequencing approach enables reliable, cost maternal oral cells and leukocytes showed one copy of the STS gene efficient, and non-labour-intensive identification of CYP alleles. in 80% of the cells and two copies in the rest. The grandmother and sister showed two copies of the STS gene. DNA markers analysis P0633. Mapping of the gene for multiple sulfatase allowed to identify that the origin of the X chromosome with the deficiency (MSD) by functional complementation using deletion of the STS gene corresponded to the grandfather. We report microcell-mediated chromosome transfer the first case in which the XLI is caused by the presence of a somatic M. P. Cosma1, S. Pepe1, G. Parenti2, A. Belli1, A. Mankad3, M. and germinal mosacism of the STS gene Grompe3, D. A. Trott4, R. F. Newbold4, A. Ballabio1,5; 1TIGEM Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, P0631. Tissue specific depletion of mitochondrial DNA in 2Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy, two boys with Alpers syndrome 3Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health M. Tesarova1, J. A. Mayr2, L. Wenchich1, H. Hansikova1, M. Eleder1, Sciences University, Portland, OR, 4Department of Biological K. Blahova1, W. Sperl2, J. Zeman1; Sciences, Brunel University, Uxbridge, United Kingdom, 5Medical 1Dept. of Pediatrics and Center for Integrated Genomics, Faculty Genetics, II University of Naples, Naples, Italy.Posters - Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Biochemical Genetics 208 209 Multiple sulfatase disease (MSD) is a rare autosomal recessive polymorphism -allele frequency 35.3%). Results are summarised disorder characterized by the deficiency of all lysosomal sulfatases. in the table below. The chi squared statistical analysis (genotype This causes a severe phenotype resulting from the association of frequencies) revealed statistical significance for the FV Leiden features of all single sulfatase deficiencies. Cloning of the MSD mutation in groups G (P<0.001), H (P<0.001), and I (P<0.01); for the gene has been hampered by absence of familial cases suitable for prothrombin mutation in groups D (P=0.01), and H (P<0.001); and for linkage mapping. A recent study demonstrated that the biochemical the MTHFR polymorphism in groups B (P=0.01), H (P<0.05), and I basis of this disease is a defect of a post-translational modification, (P<0.001). Our data suggest that pregnancy related thromboembolic which appears necessary for sulfatase catalytic function. complications (pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis either However, no information is available on the protein performing prepartum or postpartum) are exacerbated by thrombophilic such modification, and consequently of the gene mutated in this mutations such as FV Leiden and prothrombin, because pregnancy disease. We have used microcell mediated chromosome transfer itself is an additional thrombotic factor for these women. to clone by complementation the gene associated with multiple Patient group N (number of patients) sulfatase deficiency (MSD). Briefly, a panel of human/mouse A (1 miscarriage) 76 monochromosomal hybrids containing single human chromosomes tagged with a selectable marker was used as a source of normal B (>2 miscarriages) 169 human donor chromosomes. All 22 autosomes human chromosomes C (stillbirth) 18 were serially transferred from the hybrids into an MSD cell line by D (pre-eclampsia) 16 microcell-mediated chromosome transfer. After selection, we have E (increased resistance of uterine veins) 12 isolated resistant clones and measured ARSA, ARSB, and ARSC F (unsuccessful IVF attempts) 21 activities. The results obtained so far clearly indicate functional complementation for all three sulfatases tested in the presence of G (placental abruption) 4 a specific human chromosome derived from the donor cells. These H (thromboembolism) 24 results will be presented at the meeting together with submapping I (>1 complications) 66 data which are being obtained by cytogenetic techniques and TOTAL 406 microsatellite analysis on hybrids containing radiation-fragmented chromosomes. Ultimately, we hope to identify the MSD gene P0636. Early White Matter Lesions in Menkes Disease by testing candidate genes from the smallest complementing R. Gjergja1, I. Barisic1, O. Jadresin1, K. Fumic2; chromosomal region. 1Children’s University Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Clinical Hospital Center Rebro, Zagreb, Croatia. P0634. Metabolite analysis for diagnosis of peroxisomal Menkes disease is an X-linked recessive disorder affecting the disorders: a flowchart. metabolism of copper. The Menkes gene product (MNK) is a U. Caruso, M. C. Schiaffino, G. Migliaccio, D. Campanella, R. Lorini; transmembrane copper-transporting P-type ATP-ase considered University Department of Pediatrics, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, to be the main efflux protein in human tissues. Although many Italy. patients have a severe clinical course characterised by progressive Peroxisomal disorders are an extremely heterogeneous group of neurodegeneration, connective tissue disturbances, distinctive facial genetic disorders without strict correlation between clinical picture appearance, hair abnormalities, and poor outcome, variable allelic and biochemical abnormalities. The definitive diagnosis is a complex forms presenting as mild Menkes disease or occipital horn syndrome procedure which includes metabolite analysis and enzymatic, can be distinguished. Neuroimaging usually shows cortical cerebral molecular and genetic studies. VLCFA in plasma has been largely and cerebellar atrophy as a result of progressive and extensive indicated as the first screening test. However the information allowed degeneration of grey matter, secondary demyelination, subdural by this assay is limited to the VLCFA ß-oxidation and in many cases accumulation of fluid, or multifocal areas of ischemic infraction. it is unsuitable to indicate the right diagnosis. We propose to use We report two infants with remarkable early diffuse white matter a diagnostic flowchart based on two simultaneous investigations: involvement on neuroimaging suggesting at first Krabbe disease. VLCFA, pristanic and phytanic acids in plasma [1] and plasmalogens Diagnostic evaluation yielded low levels of serum copper and in erythrocytes [2]. These analyses can be carried out at the same ceruloplasmin, high 64CU uptake in fibroblasts and DNA analysis time on the same EDTA blood sample by GC-MS and stable isotope ultimately confirmed the diagnosis of Menkes disease. It is concluded dilution in less of 24 hours. By the combination of the results that Menkes disease should be considered in any male infant who (VLCFA profile, pristanic/phytanic ratio, plasmalogen concentration) presents with white matter changes, even in the absence of other it is possible to propose a differential diagnosis among almost all distinctive features of the Menkes disease spectrum. As early peroxisomal disorders: generalised defects, ß-oxidation defects diagnosis and treatment can significantly improve the outcome, (bifunctional protein or thiolase), X-ALD, acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency, Menkes disease should be included in the differential diagnosis of Refsum disease, classical RCDP, DHAP-AT or alkyl-DHAP synthase leukoencephalopathies. deficiency. This procedure can be easily applied by a laboratory with experience in metabolite analysis without any special facility (but a P0637. Molecular-genetic analysis of lysosomal storage GC-MS) and it has been successfully used in our laboratory from five diseases in Russia. years leading to 19 new diagnosis, all confirmed by enzymatic and E. Y. Voskoboeva, T. M. Boukina, A. M. Boukina, E. Y. Zakharova, V. molecular studies. S. Akhunov; [1] U. Caruso et al.: J Inher Metab Dis 19 (Suppl 1):83, 1996. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. [2] U. Caruso: Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry 10: A special programme for the diagnosis and prevention of inherited 1283-85, 1996. metabolic diseases was developed in Russia. During 20 years more than 600 patients with different types of lysosomal storage diseases P0635. Genetic contribution of thrombophilic mutations (LSD) were diagnosed in our Department. Since 1993 year the to pregnancy complications: Fact or fiction? DNA-diagnostic for some LSD has been started. The molecular C. Makatsoris1, T. Hatzis2, A. Hatzaki1, T. Antoniadi1, M. B. Petersen1; and mutation analysis has been performed in a total of 37 MPS II 1Genetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, “MITERA” Maternity patients, 8 MPS VI patients, 35 MPS I patients, 8 patients with α- and Surgical Centre, Athens, Greece, 2Haematology Department, mannosidosis, 42 patients with Gaucher disease, 8 patients with NCL “MITERA” Maternity and Surgical Centre, Athens, Greece. type 2, 1 patient with NCL type 3, 1 patient with Tay-Sachs disease Over a period of 3.5 years, 406 patients (in the majority of the and 1 patient with Wolman disease. The results are shown on the cases pregnant women) have been referred to our laboratory Table. Based on the results obtained 4 prenatal diagnostic and 5 setting. All women were tested for the Factor V Leiden G1691A carrier detection have been performed. mutation, prothrombin G20210A mutation, and the MTHFR C677T polymorphism. We have categorised the patients into 9 groups to facilitate the statistical analysis, and compared them with a control group of 160 blood donors (FV Leiden mutation-allele frequency 2.5%, prothrombin mutation-allele frequency 2.2%, and MTHFR 208 Posters - Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Biochemical Genetics 209 Tabl. Point Structural Affecting Disease Del\ins Frequent mutations Novel mutations mutations alterations splicing Gaucher N370S 36 alleles (42,9%), 56 1 - - A384N disease L444P 16 alleles (19%) α- 16 - - - R750W 16 alleles (100%) - mannosidosis MPSI 37 2 - - Q70X 26 alleles (37%) Q63X, A75P, P533L, Y343X, W487R DelT72,delT305,A79E,Y54D,L102R, H159P, D198G ,G224E,G340D,C432Y,D478Y,R443X, int1/ex2 a→g, MPSII 25 3 3 6 - ex4/int4 g→a, ex6/int6 g→a, complete IDS deletion, ex5-6 deletion. L98P, del 7 bp 238-243, del T245, R152W MPSVI 14 2 - - R152W 6 alleles (37,5%) Q160R,Q160X,R315X, L360P, Y513X NCL type 2 13 - - - R208X 12 alleles (69%) R206H NCL type 3 - 2 - - - FsA349 Tay-Sachs - 2 - - - - disease Wolman 1 1 - - - - disease P0638. New mutations in Russian patients with X-linked D409H, N370S, L444P, N188S+E326K and E326K+L444P mutations, expression studies revealed an activity lower than 30% of the wild- adrenoleukodistrophy. type values. Mutations N188S and E326K expressed separately E. Z. Lomonosova1, A. M. Boukina1, O. V. Shehter1, F. K. Lagkueva2, show an activity greater than 30% of the wild-type values. In contrast, G. E. Rudenskaya1, E. L. Dadaly1; P182L, R257X, Y313H, P391L and N392I mutant alleles present no 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian significant activities. Some kinetic properties were also analysed and Federation, 2Republic hospital for children, Alania, Vladikavkas, western blots were carried out. Russian Federation. X-linked adrenoleukodistrophy (X-ALD: McKusick 300100) is severe P0640. Mucopolysaccharidosis Type I in Taiwan neurological disease associated with elevated levels of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) resulting from a deficiency in peroxisomal S. P. Lin1, G. J. Lee-Chen2, C. K. Chuang1, W. L. Hwu3, M. T. Kuo1, C. Yang4; VLCFA b-oxidation. X-ALD gene has been mapped to Xq28. The 1MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, gene encodes a peroxisomal membrane transporter protein of 2National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, unknown function. More than 360 different mutations of the gene 3National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of have been reported and most of them are unique. China, 4Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of Eleven patients were diagnosed by using VLCFA analysis. The China. mutation analysis has been performed in 8 Russian patients with Mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I) is a rare autosomal recessive childhood cerebral form X-ALD. 6 different mutations have been disorder caused by deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme, a-L- identified using such methods as PCR-SSCP analysis and direct iduronidase. It represents the prototype of all MPS. The spectrum nonradioactive sequencing. Three of them (R152L, Y296C, and of its phenotypes ranges from severe (IH) to intermediate (IH/S) S606L) have previously been reported. Three mutations detected to mild (IS). We have identified 9 MPS I patients, 6 males and 3 were novels ones: fs164 (c494delG), L138del or L139del in exon females with age from 5 to 37 years old, and 6 of them are IH/S and 1 and D555N in exon 7 . In one family with two affected boys the 3 are IH. The diagnosis is achieved by physical examination and 3 mutation fs164 (c494delG) was found in both sibs. But the c494delG sequential laboratory tests, which are the quantitative detection of has not been detected in DNA sample extracted from leukocytes of excessive excretion of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) in the urine, urine the mother. We suggest that the mother has germline mosaicism. The GAG qualitative 2-D electrophoresis, and finally demonstration of same situation was previously described for other X-linked disease the specific enzyme defect in leukocytes and/or cultured fibroblasts. but not for X-ALD (J. G. Gleeson, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67:574-581, Molecular investigation was also performed on 7 patients. And 11 2000). mutations, Ml1 (G to A transition in the initiation codon ATG), A79V, Y343X, L346R, T364M, Q584X, R619G, 388-3c→g, 1447del 27 P0639. Expression and characterization of several and 1474ins15, were detected from 14 alleles. Mutation detection of glucocerebrosidase mutations causing Gaucher disease the 2 newly diagnosed patients from one family is to be done later. in Spanish patients. Bone marrow transplantation has been suggested, but none of these M. Montfort1, L. Vilageliu1, A. Chabás2, D. Grinberg1; patients received the treatment. The clinical findings of the 9 MPS I 1Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, patients in detail will be presented in the meeting. Spain, 2Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Corporació Sanitària, Barcelona, Spain. P0641. Generation of a knock out model for non type I Gaucher disease is a lysosomal storage disorder characterized cystinuria by the accumulation of glucosylceramide. This accumulation L. Feliubadaló1, M. Arbonès1, M. Palacín2, V. Nunes1; is a consequence of the reduced activity of the lysosomal 1Institut de Recerca Oncològica-IRO, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, enzyme glucocerebrosidase. Several different mutations in the Spain, 2Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. glucocerebrosidase gene were identified in the Spanish Gaucher Cystinuria (OMIM 220100) is an autosomal recessive disease with disease patients, some of which were new. In order to characterize an average prevalence of 1/7000. It is due to an impairment in the the resulting enzyme, these mutant alleles were expressed in an renal and intestinal absorption of cystine and dibasic amino acids. improved baculovirus system. This novel gene expression system Mutations in SLC3A1 cause type I cystinuria, whereas mutations in allows rapid and efficient generation of recombinant baculovirus SLC7A9 cause non-type I cystinuria. DNAs by site-specific transposition in E. Coli. In particular cDNAs Here we describe the identification of the murine ortholog of SLC7A9 corresponding to the following mutated alleles were studied: P182L, and the generation of a knock out model for non-type I cystinuria. N188S, R257X, Y313H, E326K, N370S, P391L, N392I, I402T, The complete open reading frame of the mouse Slc7a9 was D409H, L444P, N188S+E326K and E326K+L444P. obtained with overlapping IMAGE clones. After screening a genomic Expression of wild type cDNA results in an overexpression of acid b- library from the 129 murine strain, a clone with a15.7 Kb insert glucosidase activity (mesured with 4MU-b-glucoside as substrate) of was identified, containing the first 11 exons (out of 13) of Slc7a9. 6 to 10-fold the value of control fibroblasts. In the case of I402T, Posters - Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Biochemical Genetics 210 211 Homologous recombination was performed in E14.1 ES cells as patients with fish-like malodour under carnitine treatment. In (derived from 129 embryos) and two clones were isolated, which summary, mutations in the FMO3 gene cause a broad spectrum were heterozygous for a mutation in Slc7a9. The mutation substitutes of phenotypes ranging from severe fish odour syndrome to mild exons 3 to 9 for the neomycin resistance gene. The resulting enzyme deficiency that is common in the general population gene encodes a protein that is truncated before the first of the 12 but only intermittently associated with malodour. In view of the predicted transmembrane segments. The recombinant cells where important metabolic functions of FMO3, its mild deficiency may play microinjected into C57BL/6 blastocysts, and several chimeric mice a role as susceptibility factor in various pharmacological and other were obtained. They were mated to C57BL/6 mice, and the resulting pathophysiological conditions. heterozygotes were intercrossed to give a F2 with the expected mendelian genetic ratios. Mice homozygous for the mutation are P0644. Mitochondrial DNA mutations in Russian patients fertile and do not present any apparent external problem at leastuntil with different forms of mitochondrial diseases their current age (11 weeks). The biochemical and morphological E. Y. Zakharova, E. Y. Voskoboeva; characterization of this mouse model is in progress. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. During last 4 years 34 patients with mitochondrial diseases were P0642. Novel mutation of human OCTN2 carnitine investigated in our Department. Based on clinical data the patients transporter in a patient with severe ischaemic heart were divided on four different groups: 10 patients with MELAS disease syndrome; 11 patients with KSS; 4 patients with MERRF syndrome; 8 J. Bene, K. Komlósi, V. Havasi, B. Melegh; patients with LHON. Dept. of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Molecular-genetic analysis revealed that the patients with MELAS Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. have A3243G mutations (n= 6), del 4977 (n=2) and other deletions Novel mutation of human OCTN2 carnitine transporter in a patient mtDNA (n=2). In group of patients with MERRF syndrome mutations with severe ischaemic heart disease A8344G (n=1), del 4977 (n=2) and other deletions mtDNA(n=2 ) Primary carnitine deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder were found. In group of patients with LHON mutations G3460A (n=1), of fatty acid oxidation resulting from defect of the tissue carnitine G11778A (n=6), T14484C (n=1) were found. Different size deletions transport. Impaired carnitine transport can be caused by mutations of mtDNA were detected in patients with KSS (n=5), 6 patients with of the carnitine transporter gene SLC22A5 encoding the organic deletions detected had “common deletion” 4977bp. In two patients cation transporter (OCTN2), a Na+ dependent carnitine transporter. from this group the point mutation A3243G was also found. It has been already recognized that the OCTN2 mutations are The phenotypes of 8 patients did not correspond to the genotypes associated with different phenotypic presentations, and differences detected: 3 patients with MELAS and 3 patients with MERRF had can be observed even in patients with identical mutations. However, different deletions, 2 patients with KSS had point mutation A3243G. cardiac symptoms are always present in the affected individuals, and there are indications that certain mutations can also be associated P0645. Determination of DL-pipecolic acid in body fluids with heart problems even in heterozygotes. In a female patient with by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry moderate cardiomyopathy myocardial infarction developed at the J. Futas, R. Petrovic, J. Chandoga; age of 45, and due to the persisting coronary insufficiency, later Centre of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia. an artery bypass grafting was necessary by open-heart surgery. At Background: Pipecolic acid (PIPA) is a metabolite of lysine the age of 70 myocardial infarction developed again. Examination degradative route. PIPA pathway accompanies the major of the SLC22A5 gene revealed a C-T transition at the 15 np of the saccharopine pathway of L-lysine degradation, being prominent only exon V (in a heterozygote form) which is associated with serine in brain, while it is obligate for D-lysine. Hyperpipecolatemia is found phenylalanine replacement at the amino acid position 280, which as an overflow effect in familial hyperlysinemia. PIPA accumulates in has not been reported elsewhere. This amino acid exchange means body fluids in some disorders of peroxisome biogenesis leading to a replacement of an aminoacid with potential functional residue. deficient activity of L-pipecolic acid oxidase, too. Whether this mutation plays a role in or contributes to the pathology Objective: Simple quantification of PIPA in body fluids as a tool for or can be at least regarded as a mutation which generates an biochemical diagnostics of inherited metabolic diseases. additional susceptibility, remains to be elucidated. Methods: Gas chromatography- mass spectrometry determination of PIPA as a N-ethoxycarbonyl ethyl ester prepared by reaction with P0643. Flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 deficiency ethylchloroformate in the presence of ethanol and pyridine. Reaction – genotypes and phenotypes was performed in the matrix of deproteinized (acetonitrile-ethanol) J. Zschocke1,2, P. Guldberg3, R. A. Wevers4, R. Santer5, J. V. biologic sample after extraction of neutral lipids (hexane) without Leonard6, G. F. Hoffmann2, D. Kohlmüller2, E. Mayatepek2; preliminary isolation of amino acids. A capillary column with non-chiral 1Inst. of Human Genetics, Univ. of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, phase was used. 2Div. of Metabolic and Endocrine Diseases, Dept. of Pediatrics, Results: N-ethoxycarbonyl ethyl ester of PIPA was easily noticeable Heidelberg, Germany, 3Dept. of Tumor Cell Biology, Inst. of Cancer in the vacant area of chromatogram. Detection limit for L-pipecolic Biology, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Lab. of Neurology, Univ. Hospital acid standard solution was 0,1 µmol.l-1 under used conditions. Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Univ. Children’s Hospital, Kiel, Physiological values for PIPA concentration in serum and urine of Germany, 6Inst. of Child Health, London, Germany. patients without peroxisomal disorder were determined. In a male Flavin-containing mono-oxygenase 3 (FMO3) is required for N- child (6 months) suspected for generalised peroxisomal disorder the oxidation and detoxification of many endogenous and exogenous serum PIPA level reached 101 µmol.l-1, with urine PIPA level of 55,1 compounds including biogenic amines and several common drugs. mmol/mol creatinine. Individuals with severe FMO3 deficiency have a constant fish-like Conclusion: A simple and reliable method for determination of DL- body odour (fish odour syndrome) due to insufficient N-oxidation pipecolic acid in body fluids is presented. It has the advantage of of trimethylamine (trimethylaminuria), whilst mild deficiency is simultaneous analysis with other amino acids in one run and so it associated with transient or intermittent malodour. So far, seventeen may be a component of a screening program. mutations or amino acid variants of FMO3 have been identified. A common FMO3 gene allele [E158K,E308G] (homozygous in 4 P0646. Mitochondrial DNA deletions in Iranian patients. % of the German population) was shown to be associated with A. Tabasi1, F. Sharifpanah2, D. Fathi3, M. Meftahpour3, A. Latifi-Sofi3, reduced FMO3 function. We now report the result of more extensive M. Houshmand2; biochemical and molecular studies, using a DGGE mutation scanning 1Farabi hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Research method, in individuals with constant or intermittent malodour. Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Malodour in two patients was related to carnitine treatment, a well- Republic of Iran, 3Shariati Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. known but previously unexplained side effect. Nine novel mutations We report herein on 9 Iranian patients with mitochondrial DNA in the FMO3 gene were identified; all but one are missense mutations (mtDNA) deletions, found among 11 patients with chronic progressive that may leave residual enzyme activity. Mild mutations were external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO). Of the 11 patients, who reffered identified in combination with severe mutations, or in homozygous to our lab, 6 had CPEO, one had Kearns-Sayre syndrome and 3 state, in patients with mild variants of trimethylaminuria as well had IBM and one reffered for mitochondrial myopathy. The authors 210 Posters - Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Biochemical Genetics 211 investigated DNA extraction from blood samples for occurrence hepatocardiomuscular infantile/neonatal form. This phenotypic of mtDNA deletions by multiplex PCR analyses. Four patients had heterogeneity remains poorly understood. We therefore undertook multiple deletions. Five patients showed single deletions, 7 or 5 kb the analysis of twenty CPT2-deficient patients (“adult form”: n=13, deletions; 3 of them had the same ‘common deletion’ of 4977 bp. “infantile form”: n=7) on a molecular, enzymatic and functional There was no correlation between clinical severity, and the size point of view. Analysis of the CPT2 gene by DGGE and/or direct of the mutated mtDNA, suggesting that there are still unknown sequencing enabled us to detect thirteen mutations including five factors influencing the disease phenotype.An etiologic association novel ones: 371G>A (R124Q), 437A>C (N146T), 481C>T (R161W), between the somatic multiple mtDNA deletions in CPEO and 983A>G (D328G), and 1823G>C (D608H). Taking into account our clinical manifestations other than the myopathy has so far not been results and the literature data (33 mutations) it appears that: 1/the demonstrated. For more investigation muscle biopsy took from combinations of allelic mutations identified in the muscular form have patient’s. Because of the mtDNA deletions reported mostly in the never been detected in the hepatocardiomuscular one, 2/ in adult patient’s muscles than blood samples, we are going to analyses CPT2-deficient patients, at least one of the two mutations constantly muscle biopsy from patients by more sensetive methods such as lies in exons 1-3, while 3/ all “severe” missense mutations observed southern blot and expand long PCR. in the infantile form of the disease are constantly located in exons 4-5 of the CPT2 gene. P0647. Statistical Evaluation of the Aminoacidopathies Moreover, it appears that the difference in severity between the Diagnosed in the Laboratory of Human Genetics of Cluj adult and the infantile phenotypes is clearly related to a difference in their respective levels of mitochondrial LCFA oxidation, and in a County Hospital, Integrated in the Department of Cell less extent, to their residual CPT2 activity in lymphocytes and/or and Molecular Biology of “Iuliu Hatieganu” University fibroblasts. Understanding the relationship between the type of CPT2 of Medicine and Pharmacy from Cluj-Napoca, Romania, mutation, the residual CPT2 activity, and the resulting LCFA oxidation Between 1981-2001 level remains the key point for unravelling the genotype-phenotype R. C. Vulturar1, V. Pascu2, E. Opris2, L. Budisan2, I. Benga3, G. correlation. Benga4; 1Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, “Iuliu Hatieganu” P0649. Identification Of 14 Novel Mutations In The Slc3a1 University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, Gene In Spanish Cystinuria Patients And Functional 2Laboratory of Human Genetics of Cluj County Hospital, Cluj- Analysis Of The Mutation L89p Napoca, Romania, 3Neuro-Psychiatry Clinic of Cluj Children Hospital, M. Jiménez-Vidal1,2, M. Palacín2, V. Nunes1; Department of Paediatric Neurology, “Iuliu Hatieganu” University of 1Institut de Recerca Oncològica, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 4Department of Cell (Barcelona), Spain, 2Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular. and Molecular Biology of “Iuliu Hatieganu” University of Medicine and Facultat de Biologia. Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Pharmacy, Laboratory of Human Genetics of Cluj County Hospital, Cystinuria is a heritable disorder of amino acid transport Cluj-Napoca, Romania. characterized by the defective transport of cystine and the dibasic The exact incidence of many inborn errors of metabolic diseases amino acids through the brush border epithelial cells of the renal (IEMD) are unknown in many parts of the world. The normal tubule and intestine tract. Initially, three types of cystinuria (I, II, and pathways of amino acids could be affected by deficiences of III) were described based on the urinary excretion of cystine and enzymes with accumulation of toxic substances or by the deficiences dibasic amino acids in obligate heterozygotes. The SLC3A1 gene in transport systems, because several specific transport systems -coding for a high subunit of the heteromeric amino acid transporters ensure virtually complete (re-)absorbtion of amino acids in gut and (HATs), rBAT- is responsible for type I cystinuria, whereas the kidney. These defects of transport systems are often detected only SLC7A9 gene -coding for a light subunit of the HATs, b0,+AT- is through elevation of the respective amino acids in urine with normal involved in determining non type I (before types II and III) cystinuria. (or low) values in plasma. In the Laboratory of Human Genetics of We have screened the entire coding sequence and the intron/exon Cluj County Hospital were performed plasma and/or urine amino acid boundaries of the SLC3A1 gene in 50 spanish cystinuria patients by analyses by two-dimensional thin layer chromatography procedure means of single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and DNA (Wadman & al. 1981) in children suspected for having perturbances sequencing. of amino acid metabolism. Thus, a number of over 1800 samples We identified 14 new mutations in SLC3A1 that increases the from patients reffered by the Neuro- Psychiatry Clinic and other number of mutated alleles so far characterized in this gene to 88, and Paediatric Services from Cluj-Napoca were analysed between 1980- accounts for 83% of the type I chromosomes studied. 2001. Most of the samples (74.2%) were reffered by the Department Functional analysis of the mutation L89P -located at the unique of Paediatric Neurology of Cluj County Hospital. Out of the total putative transmembrane domain of rBAT and affecting a conserved samples, 56 cases were diagnosed as hyperphenylalaninemias/ amino acid residue- in Xenopus oocytes and after coexpression with phenylketonurias, one case of oculocerebrorenal Lowe syndrome, b0,+AT in HeLa cells, revealed significant residual transport activity 4 cases of cystinurias, 28 cases of unspecified generalized and impaired maturation and transport to the plasma membrane, hyperaminoacidurias. We also include a case of sarcosinemia, two suggesting a trafficking defect. cases of histidinuria without histidinemia, rare and still controversial genetic disorders concerning neurologic abnormalities determination. In our statistic over 26% of total samples had presented alteration P0650. The clinical and genetic characteristics of of the normal pattern of amino acids chromatograms, without congenital plasma dopamine beta-hydroxylase significance of aminoacidopathies; besides, 8.33% of total urinary deficiency: a severe orthostatic syndrome samples shows excretion of beta-aminoisobutyric acid. R. A. Wevers1, J. Deinum2, G. C. H. Steenbergen-Spanjers1, J. Lenders1,2, M. Jansen1, L. P. W. J. van den Heuvel1, F. Boomsma2; P0648. Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase 2 Deficiency: 1University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Erasmus Attempt at Correlation between Genotype and Clinical Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Introduction: Dopamine ß-hydroxylase (DßH) catalyses the presentation conversion of dopamine into norepinephrine. Plasma DßH deficiency L. Thuillier1, H. Rostane2, S. Gobin1, F. Demaugre3, M. Brivet4, C. has been associated with a severe congenital orthostatic syndrome Prip-Buus5, J. M. Saudubray6, J. P. Bonnefont1; with absent plasma (nor)epinephrine. Low plasma DßH, however, 1INSERM U393, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie, also occurs in 5% of normal subjects having normal (nor)epinephrine. Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3INSERM U370, The genetic basis of symptomatic DßH deficiency has never been Paris, France, 4Service de Biochimie, CHU Bicètre, Le Kremlin investigated. Bicètre, France, 5CNRS UPR 1524, CHU Cochin, Paris, France, Methods: We sequenced the DßH gene in two unrelated patients with 6Département de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, DßH deficiency and an orthostatic syndrome. We determined plasma France. DßH in 49 healthy blood donors to identify asymptomatic individuals Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase 2 (CPT2) deficiency, a common with low plasma DßH activity to sequence their DßH gene. autosomal recessive disease of the mitochondrial long-chain Results: Two mutations uniquely associated with plasma DßH fatty acid (LCFA) oxidation, may result in distinct clinical deficiency and absent plasma (nor)epinephrine were found in the phenotypes, namely a mild adult muscular form, and a severe Posters - Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Biochemical Genetics 212 213 patients with the orthostatic syndrome. One patient was homozygous the ATG codon. for a splice site mutation (IVS1+2 T>C), and the other was compound The newly available HLCS genomic characterization allowed us to heterozygote for this splice site variant and a deletion of base 575. identify of 4 known and 2 new genetic lesions in four patients with In blood donors with low plasma DßH activity we found a mutation HLCS deficiency. The known G581S mutation was reconfirmed with at -1021, immediately upstream of the transcription initiation site. new intronic primers since an undetected intron was contained in the Individuals homozygous for fragment amplified by published exonic primers which were wrongly -1021T had almost absent plasma DßH activity. used for enzymatic analysis at genomic level. Conclusions: Our study is the first to describe pathogenic mutations in the DßH gene. It defines the genetic basis of DßH deficiency with P0653. Mutation detection of Galactose-1 phosphate absent plasma (nor)epinephrine leading to an orthostatic syndrome. uridyltransferase(GALT) gene in Iranian Galactosemia It also explains the genetic background of asymptomatic DßH patients. deficiency. The concurrence of homozygosity for the DßH -1021 N. Naghibzadeh Tabatabai1, F. Mirzajani2, S. Zare Karizi1, S. T-allele with low plasma DßH in healthy individuals suggests that Ghandili2, M. Falahian3, J. Jalali4, M. Nakhaie4, M. Houshmand2; the -1021-locus determines secretion of DßH into the blood without 1Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Research interfering with normal catecholamine synthesis. Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic P0651. Genetic Screening for Simultaneous Diagnosis of Iran, 4Iran Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of 101 Inborn Errors of Metabolism (IEM) in Critical Galactosemia is a clinically sever and heterogenous autosomal Neonates by Gas Chromography / Mass Spectrometry recessiv disorder caused by deficiency of galactose-1-phosphate (GC/MS). uridyltransferase (GALT)activity.The numerous point mutations have U. P. Dave1, I. Matsumoto2, C. Zhang2; been identified in the GALT gene and the prevalence of the mutations 1Centre for Research in Mental Retardation (CREMERE), Mumbai, in some ethnic groups have been reported indicating the differences India, 2Matsumoto Institute of Life Science (MILS), Kanazawa, Japan. in the frequency of the mutations amongst patients belonging to the Newborn screening, recommended by WHO, is a preventive public different ethnic groups. Eleven unrelated Galactosemia families ( 27 health strategy to decrease morbidity and mortality in infants. India DNA lags behind in introducing such health programs due to different samples ) were tested for the presence or absence of the two national health priorities, and genetic screening is also perceived as common mutations of GALT gene i.e. Q188R and K285N mutant expensive and concerns rare disorders. alleles, using PCR-RFLP protocol. The frequency of the mutated GC/MS was first applied in 1966 worldwide in the diagnosis of IEM alleles were found to be 36% and 9 % respectively. More study is because of its accuracy, sensitivity and power of analyzing multiple being under taken on one patient with confirmed Galactosemia who compounds simultaneously, but was introduced in India through the is heterozygote for K285N mutation and most probably demonstrating present study in 1998. Matsumoto’s method of GC/MS analysis for a case of compound heterozygote. 101 metabolic disorders of amino acids, organic acids, sugars, sugar More investigation will be carried out on Iranian patients with alcohols, sugar acids, nucleic acids and nucleic acid bases was used. biochemically confirmed galactosemia, concerning detemination of The air dried urine filter paper offered an easy mode of transport eight common alleles from small towns and rural areas having limited health and laboratory including Q188R, K285N, S135L, L195P, Y209S, F171S, Q169K infrastructure. and X380R alleles in the collected samples and the frequency of the We report 16.5% (93 of 565 referrals) metabolic abnormalities in mutations in Iranian galactosemia patients will be reported. children, while 29.7% (19 of 64) in high-risk neonates. The genetic factors in neonates were consanguinity (26%), death of earlier P0654. Molecular pathology in Czech patients with sibs (21%) and h/o mental retardation (5-8%). Convulsions (37%), porphyria variegata respiratory distress (26%), lethargy (21%) and refusal to feed (21%) E. Malonova1, A. M. Robreau2, J. Zeman1, H. Puy2, V. Silva2, R. were the predominant clinical manifestations. Rosipal1, J. C. Deybach2, P. Martasek1; Genetic counseling to the family was done explaining the role of 1Center of Integrated Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Ist Faculty hereditary, consanguinity, recurrence risk, scope of prenatal diagnosis of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Centre to prevent IEM in their families. India, being diverse in its socio- Francais des Porphyries, INSERM U490, Hopital Louis Mourier, cultural, religious and racial background, the importance of GC/MS is Colombes, France. indicated in establishing its genetic epidemiology, which is currently Porphyria variegata (PV) is an autosomal dominant acute hepatic lacking. The few cases highlighting the application of biomedical porphyria caused by a partial defect in heme synthetic enzyme mass spectrometry in genetic screening will be illustrated. protoporphyrinogen oxidase (PPO). PV is clinically characterized by acute attacks of neurovisceral crises and/or dermatologic P0652. Determination of HLCS genomic structure and manifestation. The clinically manifest patients show typical plasma mutation identification in four patients with HLCS fluorescence at 626 nm, have increased fecal porphyrins and, during deficiency acute attacks, have increased porphyrin precursors in urine. The S. Malvagia1, A. Morrone1, M. A. Donati1, E. Pasquini1, S. Funghini1, activity of PPO in heterozygous patients is about 50%. The human A. Boneh2, H. Peters2, F. Ciani1, E. Zammarchi1; PPO cDNA and gene has been cloned and mapped to chromosome 1Dpt of Pediatrics, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Murdoch- 1q22-23. The gene spans about 5 kb, contains 13 exons, the cDNA Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia. encodes a protein of 477 amino acids. Holocarboxylase synthetase (HLCS) deficiency is a rare AR biotin We have studied 6 unrelated Czech families with clinically and metabolism disorder caused by absent or reduced HLCS enzymatic biochemically diagnosed PV. Four new mutations were detected: one activity. This enzyme catalyses the biotinylation of the four human deletion (1393 del 8 bp), two missense mutations (W227G, C459Y) biotin dependent carboxylases. Its deficiency leads to biotin- and one splicing mutation (IVS 6+1 G®A). Although the relationship responsive multiple carboxylase deficiency (MCD). is not known, the deletion 1393 del 8 bp was identified in two of these The human HLCS gene has been mapped to chromosome 21q22.1. families. In the last family the already described deletion 1177 del Up to now, sequencing analyses in the HLCS gene have been G was found. The pathological significance of missense mutations performed on its 2466 bp cDNA, making the confirmation of the was determined by their expression in prokaryotic system. Both genetic lesions at the genomic level difficult. We report on the map these missense mutations resulted in the absence of PPO activity in of HLCS genomic structure, deduced from the DNA sequence E. coli which is in good agreement with an expected 50% activity in of human chromosome 21 published by the gene card web sites the heterozygous state. Availability of screening for all PV families http://hgp.gsc.riken.go.jp; http://bioinfo.weizmann.ac.il/cards- will ensure correct diagnoses in all gene carriers and prevents life- bin/carddisp?HLCS. All Exon/Intron boundaries were tested using threatening porphyric attacks. (Supported by Charles University grant genomic primer. The putative deduced 9 exons, encompassing the GAUK 5/200/c and LN00A079 from MŠMT of Czech Republic) coding region, were confirmed and PCR conditions for amplification of all genomic fragments were set up. These data confirm that the HLCS gene contains 9 exons plus two additional exons upstream of 212 Posters - Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 213 P0655. Genetic Heterogeneity In Italian Anderson-Fabry found that the incidence of PKU in the island of Puerto Rico (PR) is Families 1:18,000 on average. The most frequent hyperphenylalanemia in S. Bernabini1, B. Minuti1, E. Pelo1, F. Martinelli2, W. Borsini3, M. R. PR is classic PKU. In the present study we screened 15 classical Scordo3, A. Sodi4, R. Mignani5, M. L. Battini6, A. Sessa7, F. Torricelli1; PKU Puerto Rican patients for mutations by PCR amplification of 1Cytogenetic and Genetic Unit, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy, all exons followed by DGGE and/or SSCP analysis and direct DNA 2Nephrology and Transplant Unit, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy, sequencing. We found several polymorphic sites in exons 4, 7, 3Departiment of Neurosciences, University of Florence, Florence, 11, and 12 and a novel frameshift mutation in exon 4. The novel Italy, 4Departiment of Ophtalmology, University of Florence, Florence, mutation was found in one patient with a homozygous insertion of an Italy, 5Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Infermi Hospital, Rimini, Italy, A nucleotide at codon 120. Two patients were homozygous for the 6Departiment of Dermatology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, E280K mutation and another patient was homozygous for the R176X 7Nephrology Unit, Vimercate, Vimercate, Italy. mutation. The E280K mutation has been found in high frequency Fabry disease is an X-linked recessive disorder of glycolipid among Cuban PKU patients, whereas the R176X mutation was found metabolism resulting from a deficiency of the lysosomial enzyme previously in Southern Europe PKU patients. Some patients carried α -galactosidaseA(GLA). The reduced enzyme activity leads to missense mutations in addition to another homozygous mutation in the progressive accumulation of glycosphingolipids throughout the the PAH gene. NIH-NIGMS grant R25-GM61838 and RCMI grants body, particularly in: skin, kidney, nervous system, eye, heart. The G12RR03051 and 1P20RR11126 from NIH-NCRR supported this α-galactosidaseA gene is located at Xq22 and consists of seven study. exons; more than 150 mutations have been identified in unrelated Fabry subjects. Our work was conducted to detect mutations in P 14. Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism ten unrelated Italian families. All the subjects have been estimated clinical to renal, cutaneous, cardiac and neurological level; in all it P0658. The Development Of A Haplotyping System For has been executed the dosage on blood of α -GLA-A. Up until today, Galactosaemia we identified seven affected males and eleven female carriers. In two J. M. Flanagan1, O. Tighe1, C. O’Neill2, E. Naughten2, P. D. Mayne2, families the study is still in progress, in one family we identified no D. T. Croke1; mutations. All of the exons are small enough to allow amplification by 1Royal College of Surgeons, Dublin, Ireland, 2The Childrens Hospital the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and investigation of sequence Temple St., Dublin, Ireland. changes by Conformation Sensitive Gel Electrophoresis (CSGE) Classical, or transferase deficient, galactosaemia is an inherited analysis and sequencing. We have detected 9 mutations: 7 single metabolic disorder, caused by mutation of the Galactose-1- base substitutions (6 missense and 1 nonsense), 1 small deletion Phosphate Uridyl Transferase (GALT) gene. Previous studies have (delCT ex7) and one splice site alteration (IVS4-16 G →A).The shown that classical galactosaemia has an overall incidence of 1 missense mutations identified are G35R,R112C,R227Q,R301P and in 21,000 live births in Ireland, higher than elsewhere in Europe. D313Y.In a family it has been characterized in all the males affected Although there is a spectrum of causative mutations in the GALT and the females carriers the mutation missense in exon 6 (R301P) gene, one mutation (Q188R) predominates in Caucasians. The and one mutation of splicing in intron 4 (IVS4).This study confirm the frequency of this Q188R mutation exhibits an East to West gradient elevated heterogeneity of the mutations in α-GLA-A gene in patients of increasing frequency across Europe, peaking in Ireland (89.1%). with Anderson-Fabry disease that accompanies to one extreme This raises questions as to the origins and introduction of the Q188R clinical variability. mutation to Ireland. Through a combination of bioinformatics, PCR, dHPLC and P0656. Molecular analysis of three Czech patients with Restriction Fragment Length analysis (RFLP), four novel Single 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA lyase deficiency Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNPs) and three flanking Short Tandem L. Mrázová1, E. Pospíšilová2, J. Hrdá2; Repeat (STR) markers linked to the GALT gene have been identified. 1Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, A haplotype system for Galactosaemia has been established through 2General Faculty Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. the combination of these markers with two previously known SNPs. Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA lyase (HL, EC 4.1.3.4) Sixty Irish control DNA samples have been analysed demonstrating catalyzes the last step of leucine catabolism and the ketogenic that 8 distinct haplotypes exist in the Irish population. The analysis pathway. Deficiency of HL caused by mutations in HL gene leads to of the haplotype backgrounds of the common GALT gene mutations 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric aciduria (HA) an autosomal recessive present in the European population is now underway. This should metabolic disorder. Three unrelated patients with HA were diagnosed help resolve the origins and migrations of the GALT gene mutations. in our Institute. The diagnosis was confirmed by measurement of enzyme activity HL in lymphocytes and/or fibroblasts at all three P0659. CA repeats in the first intron of the CFTR gene in patients and their family members. cystic fibrosis patients and healthy Latvians To confirm the diagnosis at molecular level we have directly A. Krumina1, L. Krumina1, M. Lazdins2, V. Svabe1, Z. Krumina3, U. sequenced PCR or RT/PCR products amplified from probands Teibe1, V. Baumanis2; gDNA or cDNA. In two cases we have found known homozygous 1Medical Academy of Latvia, Riga, Latvia, 2Latvian State University, missense point mutations 698A→G (H233R) and 122G→A (R41Q), Riga, Latvia, 3State Medical Genetics Centre, Riga, Latvia. respectively. In the last case, 3-years old girl, we have found A dinucleotide CA repeat within intron 1 of the CFTR gene, highly heterozygous mutations H233R/del41G. Del41G (Pro9fs(-1)) is a informative in tracing unknown mutations causing cystic fibrosis novel one base deletion in exon1, which leads to a frameshift and (CF) in families as well as in population genetic studies, has been premature stop codon after 32 aminoacids. Subsequently we have identified by D.S. Moulin in 1997. The aims of our study were to set up PCR-RFLP assays for mutations H233R and del41G to verify analyse CA repeat polymorphism in CF patients and healthy Latvians, results and to determine mutations in family members. The results of and to compare our results with the data on other populations. 22 molecular analysis correlate with measured enzyme activity. CF patients, 24 their family members and 42 healthy Latvians were subjected to DNA analysis. CA repeats were studied by denaturing P0657. DNA analysis of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gel electrophoresis of amplified PCR products and three control gene in Puerto Rican phenylketonuria patients samples were chosen for sequencing analysis. Absolute linkage A. Sanchez-Valle1, D. Pizarro1, R. Valle1, J. Y. Renta1, M. González2, disequilibrium was found between the CF mutation dF508 and 21 C. L. Cadilla1; - CA repeat allele. When considering allele distribution, Latvian 1University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine Dept. of Biochemistry, population presented a unimodal distribution, showing peak at 22 San Juan, PR, 2Dept. of Pediatrics, San Juan, PR. repeats. Expected heterozygosity, estimated as 1 - Σ pi², where pi is Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive metabolic the frequency of the ith allele in the locus, for Latvian population was disorder caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase 0.696 that is lower than in other described European populations. (PAH) gene. The PAH gene harbours many mutations (~ 400 variant The data obtained in our study support conclusions of E.Mateu et alleles), which cause various degrees of phenylalanine hydroxylase al. (1999) about high informativeness of this CFTR gene marker for deficiency. Missense mutations, represent ~ 60% of the mutations family and population studies. so far recorded. The Puerto Rico Newborn Screening Program has Posters - Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 214 215 P0660. Linkage and candidate gene analysis of region(±5Mb), may require genotyping 300-500 SNPs. Especially Vesicoureteral Reflux. with such a high throughput, individual genotyping of SNPs H. R. Kelly1, A. Yoneda2, S. Kelly2, D. Shields3, C. Molony3, A. Green1, remains expensive. Although current methods may be accurate, P. Puri2, D. Barton1; robust and adequate for large scale application, a cheaper and 1National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, 2Children’s less time-consuming alternative to individual genotyping is using Research Centre, Dublin, Ireland, 3Royal college of Surgeons, Dublin, allele frequencies determined in DNA pools. We have developped Ireland. an accurate and reproducible protocol for direct allele frequency Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR), the retrograde flow of urine from the determination using pyrosequencingTM technology in large genomic bladder into the ureter and kidneys, is a common disorder, found in DNA pools(374 individuals). A correlation of 0.980 was measured 1-2% of children. VUR can cause kidney damage and is the most between the allele frequency detected by this method and by common cause of end-stage renal failure and severe hypertension individual genotyping. In the context of disease-associated SNPs in children. It is caused by a shortening of the segment of the ureter studies, we compared the allele frequencies between disease and which runs through the submucosal layer of the bladder wall. There control groups. The measured difference varied with 1.5±0.9% is a strong genetic component to VUR but the mode of inheritance is between the two detection methods. It may be concluded that the still unknown. protocol with large DNA pools could reliably detect a 4% difference We have collected 480 DNAs from 97 families with more than one between populations. Furthermore, it is economic with regard to child affected with primary VUR. We are using this resource to search amounts of DNA and reagents required. The method is currently for VUR susceptibility genes. used to screen a region of chromosome 2(6Mb) and 10(3.5 Mb) for Candidate genes or regions are selected based on literature reviews. SNPs with an allele frequency differences between type-2-diabetes The uroplakins are 4 integral membrane proteins that physically or obesity and control groups. This allows a rapid identification of strengthen the bladder wall. Based on uroplakin knockout mice interesting SNPs for further association studies and susceptibility- studies, Hu et al., 2000 suggested the existence of a VUR subtype gene discovery in these complex diseases. distinct from that caused by the deletion of the AT II receptor,. This report led to the selection of the first group of genes investigated. Two P0663. Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 4G5G candidate regions were also investigated: chromosome 10q, based polymorphism in stroke patients on a report of a patient with a deletion in this region associated with A. Begonja, E. Topic, A. Simundic, M. Stefanovic; VUR and chromosome 1q, where markers over a 20cM region are Clinical Hospital Sestre Milosrdnice, Zagreb, Croatia. reported to show strong evidence of linkage. In the promoter region of the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI- Results so far have shown evidence for lack of linkage to VUR in 1) gene a common 4G5G polymorphism was described. A 4G allele these genes or regions. is associated with increased transcription of PAI-1 protein due to different binding of transcription regulating proteins than in 5G site. P0661. The mutation rates and polymorphisms of ten This may change the fibrinolitic capacity, decreasing the ability to lyse autosomal tetranucleotide loci in Western Siberian clots. Many studies showed that 4G5G polymorphism was associated population with increased risk for cardiovascular disease. Still, conflicting data are reported for cerebrovascular disease, even suggesting protective T. V. Nikitina; role of 4G allele. Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. In order to investigate relation between 4G5G polymorphism and Microsatellite loci are powerful and convenient markers for genetic stroke incidence, 52 stroke patients and 126 healthy subjects were studies, but it is necessary to evaluate the applicability of specific genotyped by PCR-SSCP analysis. Genotype distribution among STR markers for practical aims and for description of population controls was: 4G4G 24% (30), 4G5G 48% (60) and 5G5G 29% (36). history. Tetranucleotide STRs have several technical advantages The allelic frequencies in control group were: 4G 48% and 5G 52%. because of lesser prone to artificial slippage. However the mutation In patients group the genotype distribution was: 4G4G 23% (12), rates of this class of microsatellites differ significantly between loci. 4G5G 40% (12) and 5G5G 37% (19). The frequencies for 4G and The purpose of this study was to evaluate the mutation rates and 5G alleles were 43% and 57%, respectively. There was no significant allelic frequencies of ten autosomal tetranucleotide loci in Western difference for genotype and allele frequencies between control Siberian population. Allelic polymorphisms were studied in 200 – 290 and patient group (χ2 test). A trend towards a lower prevalence of unrelated individuals from Tomsk region, and mutation rates were the 4G allele in the patients group was observed (43% vs. 48% in estimated as frequency of parent-child mismatches in the segregation control group, OR 0.8, 95% CI 0.53-1.32). These preliminary findings analysis of STR alleles in 134 families with proven paternity. We suggest that 4G allele is not a risk factor for stroke and may even used polyacrilamide gel electrophoresis following PCR amplification be related to its reduced incidence. Further studies are needed for tetranucleotide loci D2S1242, D11S1983, D16S2624, D17S1185, on a larger number of subjects to evaluate the role of 4G allele in D19S601, D20S161, D20S168, D21S1413, D21S11and D21S1435. cerebrovascular disease. All loci studied have an average heterozigosity > 0.65, PIC > 0,550 and amplicon sizes < 300 b.p. It is revealed five new allelic variants in four different loci in Tomsk population. We analyzed 1198 events P0664. Autosomal dominant Juvenile Amyotrophic of allelic transmission from the parents to children and detected nine Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and distal Hereditary Motor de novo mutations events, that corresponds to average mutation rate Neuropathy (distal HMN) with pyramidal tract signs of the complex of the loci studied 7.5x10-3 per locus per meiosis. No J. I. Devolder-Irobi1, E. De Vriendt1, V. Van Gerwen1, M. Auer- mutations were found in four loci (D11S1983, D16S2624, D20S161, Grumbach2, B. Plecko3, K. Wagner4, M. Kennerson5, G. Nicholson5, D20S168), and two mutations were observed in each of three D. Zhu5, H. P. Hartung6, V. Timmerman1, P. De-Jonghe1,7; markers D17S1185, D19S601, D21S1435. Most of events were 1Molecular Genetics Department, Flanders Interuniversity Institute single step mutations, and mutations of paternal origin happened for Biotechnology (VIB), Born-Bunge Foundation (BBS), University three times often than maternal ones. of Antwerp (UIA), Antwerpen, Belgium, Antwerpen, Belgium, 2Department of Neurology, Karl-Franzens University Graz, Austria., P0662. Rapid SNP allele frequency determination to Graz, Austria, 3Department of Paediatrics, Karl-Franzens University accelerate LD mapping strategies. Graz, Austria, Graz, Austria, 4Institute of Medical Biology and Human B. Neve1, P. Froguel1,2, L. Corset1, E. Vaillant1, V. Vatin1, P. Boutin1; Genetics, Karl-Franzens University Graz, Austria, Graz, Austria, 1Institut Biologie de Lille/Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France, 2Queen 5Molecular Medicine and Neurobiology Laboratories, ANZAC Mary and Westfield college, University of London, London, United Medical Research Institute, University of Sydney, Concord Hospital Kingdom. NSW, Australia, Sydney, Australia, 6Department of Neurology, Positional cloning of complex disease-susceptibility genes by linkage Karl-Franzens University Graz, Austria, Graz, Austria, 7Division disequilibrium(LD)-mapping involves genotyping a vast amount of Neurology, University Hospital Antwerpen (UZA), Antwerpen, of single nucleotide polymorphisms(SNPs). A general aim is to to Belgium, Antwerpen, Belgium. achieve a density of at least 1SNP/10kb in previously identified Autosomal dominant juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is chromosomal regions and to screen all coding and regulatory a rare disorder and so far only one family has been reported and regions of candidate genes. A combined SNP map for a manageable mapped to chromosome 9q34 (ALS4). The diagnosis of ALS in this 214 Posters - Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 215 family is based on almost exclusive lower motor neuron pathology the criteria for WMS. A genome-wide search was performed using in combination with less prominent pyramidal tract signs. Atypical microsatellites markers at an average distance of 10 cM and revealed features include normal life expectancy, the absence of bulbar linkage of the disease-causing gene to chromosome 19p13.3-p13.2 involvement and the symmetrical distal distribution of atrophy and (Zmax = 5.99 at θ=0 at locus D19S906). A recombination event weakness. We performed a molecular genetic study in 3 families between loci D19S905 and D19S901 defined the distal boundary and that we had diagnosed as distal hereditary motor neuronopathy a second recombination event between loci D19S221 and D19S840 (distal HMN), i.e. distal spinal muscular atrophy or spinal Charcot- defined the proximal boundary of the genetic interval encompassing Marie-Tooth syndrome, and found linkage to the ALS4 locus. the WMS gene (12.4 cM). Interestingly, the collagen V alpha 3 The clinical phenotype in these 3 families of different geographic gene has been assigned to this region, and appeared to be a good origin (Australian, Austrian and Belgian) is strikingly similar to the candidate gene by its function, but RT-PCR analysis of skin fibroblast original ALS4 family except for a younger onset age in the distal mRNAs failed to detect any pathogenic mutations in one family. HMN families. These data suggest that ALS4 and distal HMN with These results were confirmed by transmission electron microscopy pyramidal tract signs may be one and the same disorder. In all 3 of skin biopsies showing normal diameter and striation of collagen families, a disease-associated haplotype was present in all affected fibrils. Ongoing studies will hopefully lead to the identification of the individuals. Genotyping data demonstrated that the families do disease-causing gene. not share a common disease haplotype. Cumulative significant LOD-scores (z > 3) are reached with seven STR markers. These P0667. A Belgian family linked to the locus for results indicate that the distal HMN locus with pyramidal tract signs intermediate CMT on 19p12-p13.2 is located within the 5 cM ALS4 region, i.e. between the flanking K. Verhoeven1, E. De Vriendt2, V. Van Gerwen2, P. De Jonghe1,3, V. markers D9S64 and D9S164. This region represents a 3.5 Mb region Timmerman2; according to the Golden Path at UCSC. 1Molecular Genetics Department, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for biotechnology (VIB), Born-Bunge Foundation (BBS), University P0665. Atb0/slc1a5 Gene. Fine Localisation And of Antwerp (UIA), Antwerpen, Belgium, 2Molecular Genetics Exclusion Of Association With The Intestinal Phenotype Department, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology Of Cystic Fibrosis (VIB), Born-Bunge Foundation (BBS), University of Antwerp (UIA), S. Larriba, L. Sumoy, M. D. Ramos, J. Giménez, X. Estivill, T. Antwerpen, Belgium, Antwerpen, Belgium, 3Division of Neurology, Casals, V. Nunes; University Hospital Antwerp (UZA), Antwerpen, Belgium. Institut de Recerca Oncologica, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a clinically and genetically Spain. heterogeneous disorder of the peripheral nervous system. It is Genetic heterogeneity in the 19q13.2-13.4 region called Cystic characterized by progressive weakness and atrophy, initially of the Fibrosis Modulator Locus 1 (CFM1) seemed to be associated to peroneal muscles and later of the distal muscles of the arm. Most the intestinal phenotypic variation of cystic fibrosis (CF). The Na+- CMT patienst can be classified as having either CMT1 or CMT2 dependent amino acid transporter named ATB0 was previously found by use of a cut-off value of 38 m/s for the motor median nerve to be located in 19q13.3. In the present study, we performed fine conduction velocity (NCV). However, in some CMT families, patients chromosomal mapping of ATB0 on radiation hybrid (RH) panels G3 have motor median NCVs ranging from 25 to 45 m/s. This CMT type and TNG. Based on the most accurate location results from TNG-RH has been designated as “intermediate CMT”. Recently, two loci for panel, mapping analysis evidenced that ATB0 is localised between autosomal domiant intermediate CMT have been identified; the first STS SHGC-13875 (D19S995) and STS SHGC-6138 in 19q13.3, that locus maps to chromosome 10q24.1-q25.1 in an Italian family, the corresponds with the immediately telomeric/distal segment of the second locus maps to 19p12-p13.2 in an Australian family. Here, we strongest linkage region within the human CFM1 (hCFM1) syntenic performed a genome wide scan in a Belgian family with autosomal region. The position in relation to the hCFM1 syntenic region, besides dominant CMT with 386 short tandem repeat (STR) markers of the functional characteristics of the encoded protein and its apparent the Applied Biosystems Prism Linkage mapping set MD-10 (ABI). relevance to meconium ileus (MI) led us to evaluate the possible Fragment analysis was performed on an ABI 3700 automated implication of ATB0 in the intestinal phenotype of CF. sequencer. Two-point linkage analysis was performed for all STRs. Regarding to the genomic structure, Blast-N program allowed us Additional and flanking STRs were genotyped when LOD scores for to determine that ATB0 gene is organised into eight exons. An ABI markers reached the LOD value of 1. A LOD score of 3.3 was exhaustive mutational study of the gene was performed by SSCP found with markers D19S586 and D19S226, which locates the gene analysis in CF patients with and without MI. Several sequence responsible for the CMT phenotype in the Belgian family in the region variations in the ATB0 gene were identified, although none of them of intermediate CMT on 19p12-p13.2. However, we were not able to seemed to be related to the intestinal phenotype of CF. Even though the delineate the 19p12-p13.2 linkage region of 16 cM. no particular allele or haplotype in ATB0 appears to be associated to CF-MI disease, new SNPs identified should be useful in segregation P0668. Molecular haplotype determination using and linkage disequilibrium analyses in families affected by other PyrosequencingTM technology disorders caused by the impairment of neutral amino acid transport. M. Pettersson, M. Bylund, A. Alderborn; Pyrosequencing AB Vallongatan 1, Uppsala, Sweden. P0666. Homozygosity Mapping of a Weill-Marchesani Syndrome The identification of haplotypes from a combination of single Locus to Chromosome 19p13.3-p13.2. nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on one chromosome is a L. Faivre1, A. Mégarbané2, A. Alswaid3, L. Zylberberg4, N. Aldohayan5, powerful tool for genetic research. Haplotyping is usually performed A. Campos-Xavier1, D. Bacq6, L. Legeai-Mallet1, J. Bonaventure1, A. statistically by computational analysis or by time consuming cloning Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1; techniques. Here we present a simple molecular approach for reliable 1Département de Génétique et INSERM U393, Hôpital Necker- haplotype determination on an individual basis. The procedure is Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Unité de Génétique Médicale, based on allele-specific PCR in combination with PyrosequencingTM Université Saint Joseph, Beirut, LEBANON, 3Clinical Genetics, technology. Riyadh Armed Forces Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4CNRS Allele-specific PCR primers were designed with the 3´end at the SNP UMR 8570, Université Denis Diderot, Paris, France, 5Department position and primers specific for each allelic variant of the SNP were of Ophthalmology, Riyadh Armed Forces Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi tested in two separate reactions. A PCR product in both reactions Arabia, 6Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France. implied a heterozygote SNP, whereas a PCR product from just one Weill-Marchesani syndrome (WMS) is a rare disease characterized reaction denoted the homozygote for which the allele-specific primer by short stature, brachydactyly, joint stiffness, and characteristic eye was complementary. A mismatch introduced in the second base from abnormalities including microspherophakia, ectopia lentis, severe the 3´end was shown to dramatically improve the discriminatory myopia and glaucoma. Despite clinical homogeneity, both autosomal ability between alleles. Amplified allele-specific fragments too long dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance with occasional for analysis by Pyrosequencing technology were subdivided by brachymorphism in heterozygotes have been reported. Here we nested PCR. Analysis of the SNPs using the PSQTM 96 System report on homozygosity mapping of the WMS gene in two large (Pyrosequencing AB) allowed identification of the haplotype. The Lebanese and Saudian families. All affected individuals (n=5) fulfilled genotyping after allele-specific PCR showed a typical “homozygous Posters - Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 216 217 pattern” of either allelic variant depending on the specificity of the component of endothelial basement membrane, making COL8A2 an allele-specific PCR primer. This procedure was used for haplotyping attractive candidate gene. of fragments up to 10 kb. Analysis of the coding sequence of COL8A2 within FEDPed1 Haplotype determination by the described procedure proved to be revealed a missense mutation (Gln455Lys) within the triple helical highly reliable. The results gained from Pyrosequencing technology domain. This missense mutation was demonstrated in 2 further have the benefit of being quantitative. Any amplification of a non- families with FECD and one family with PPCD. Haplotype analysis specific allele would therefore be detected by the system and of these families suggested the presence of a common founder illustrated as a peak in the pyrogramTM. mutation within two out of three FECD families and the PPCD family, all of whom originate from Northern England. Haplotype analysis also P0669. Familial Capillary Malformation Maps to suggested the presence of an identical but independent mutation a Chromosome 5q third Australian FECD family. I. Eerola1, L. Boon2, S. Watanabe3, H. Grynberg4, J. Mulliken5, M. This is the first description of a molecular basis for the corneal Vikkula2; endothelial dystrophies and the first association of defects in COL8A2 1Laboratory of Human Molecular genetics, Christian de Duve Institute with human disease. of Cellular Pathology, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Christian de P0671. Tau negative frontal lobe dementia at 17q21: Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology, Université catholique de Louvain, Significant finemapping of the candidate region to a Brussels, Belgium, 3Division of Plastic Surgery, Showa University 4.8cM interval School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 4Medisud Medical Center, R. Rademakers1, M. Cruts1, B. Dermaut1, K. Sleegers2, S. M. Rosso3, Brussels, Belgium, 5Vascular Anomalies Center, Children’s Hospital, M. Van den Broeck1, H. Backhovens1, J. van Swieten3, C. M. van Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Duijn2, C. Van Broeckhoven1; Vascular anomalies comprise a heterogenous group of disorders 1University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium, 2Erasmus University the severity of which varies from life-threatening lesions to cosmetic Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3University Hospital Rotterdam harm. They are defects of vasculogenesis/angiogenesis and thereby Dijkzigt, Rotterdam, Netherlands. provide a tool to study the mechanisms involved in these processes. We report the results of a genome-wide search in a 4-generation Capillary malformation (CM, or “port-wine stain”) is the most common pedigree with autosomal dominant early-onset dementia (mean onset vascular malformation occurring in 0,3% of newborns. CMs are small age: 64.9 years, range 53 - 79 years). In this family we previously flat cutaneous lesions that consist of an increased number of ectatic excluded the known Alzheimer’s disease genes based on linkage capillary-like channels within papillary dermis. Vascular birthmarks, analysis and mutation screening of the amyloid precursor protein such as salmon patch, are milder variants of CM that occur up to 40% gene (exons 16 and 17) and the presenilin 1 and 2 genes. In addition of newborns. Unlike common macular stains, the reddish coloration we excluded mutations in the prion protein gene and exons 9 to 13 of CMs does not disappear, but becomes darker with advancing age. of the microtubule associated protein tau (MAPT) gene. We obtained Increased incidence of lesions in first-degree relatives of CM patients conclusive linkage with chromosome 17q21 markers with a maximum and several reported familial cases suggest that genetic factors may multi-point LOD score of 5.51 at D17S951 and identified a candidate play a role in the pathogenesis of CM. We performed a genomewide region of 4.8 cM between D17S1787 and D17S958 containing MAPT. linkage analysis on 13 families with inherited CM. In non-parametric Recent clinical and neuropathological follow-up of the family showed linkage analysis, statistically significant evidence of linkage (peak that the phenotype most closely resembled frontotemporal dementia NPL score 6.72, p-value 0.000136) was obtained in an interval of (FTD) characterized by dense ubiquitin-positive neuronal inclusions 69 cM on 5q11-5q23. Parametric linkage analysis gave a maximum that were tau negative. Extensive mutation analysis of MAPT combined HLOD score of 4.84 (a-value 0.67) from the same region identified 38 sequence variations in exons, introns, untranslated and the analysis using only the linked families, defined a smaller, regions and the 5’ regulatory sequence, however none were statistically significant locus of 23 cM (LOD score 7.22). This comprised within the disease haplotype. Although our findings do not locus contains several genes implicated in angiogenesis, such as entirely exclude a mutation in a yet unanalyzed region of MAPT, the RASA1and MEF2C. (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be). apparent absence of MAPT mutations combined with the lack of tau pathology is highly suggestive for another defective gene at 17q21 P0670. Molecular and Phenotypic Analysis of Mutations responsible for FTD in this family. in COL8A2 in the Corneal Dystrophies J. E. Yardley1, S. Biswas1,2, F. Munier3,4, R. Perveen1, N. Hart- P0672. An infrequent haplotype of the PCTA-1 gene, Holden1, P. Cousin4, J. E. Sutphin5, B. Noble6, M. Batterbury7, C. located in the susceptibility region 1q42.2-43 (PCaP), Kielty8, A. Hackett9, R. Bonshek2, A. Ridgeway2, D. McLeod2, V. C. indicates association to prostate cancer Sheffield5, E. M. Stone5, D. F. Schorderet4, G. C. M. Black1,2; C. Maier1, K. Rösch1, T. Paiss2, S. Bochum1, K. Herkommer2, J. 1University Department of Medical Genetics, St Mary’s Hospital, Häußler1, O. Cussenot3, W. Vogel1, G. Assum1; Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Academic Department of 1Abteilung Humangenetik, Ulm, Germany, 2Abteilung Urologie, Ulm, Ophthalmology, Manchester Royal Eye Hospital, Manchester, Germany, 3CeRePP, Evry, France. United Kingdom, 3Hôpital Jules Gonin, Lausanne, Switzerland, Prostate cancer (PCa) is a complex disease with diverse genetically 4Division Autonome de Génétique Médicale, Lausanne, Switzerland, predisposing factors. 5Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, The University The underlying “defects” may range from severe rare mutations in of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA, 6Department of yet unidentified genes to common variants which, in compromise to Ophthalmology, The General Infirmary at Leeds, Leeds, United their frequencies, contribute with reduced penetrance. While high risk Kingdom, 7Department of Ophthalmology, Royal Liverpool University alleles well explain familial aggregation of PCa, observed in about Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 8School of Medicine, University 10% of all affecteds, low risk alleles may account for a higher portion of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 9Hunter Genetics, of the disease, especially “sporadic” cases. Concerning a putative Newcastle, Australia. predisposition to PCa, we investigated the gene encoding the The corneal dystrophies are a group of conditions which include Prostate Carcinoma Tumor Antigen-1 (PCTA-1), mapping to 1q42.2- Fuchs’ Endothelial Dystrophy of the Cornea (FECD) and 43, a major susceptibility region identified in a French and German Posterior Polymorphous Dystrophy (PPCD). These conditions are genome wide search. The open reading frame of PCTA-1, which was characterized by a loss of corneal clarity due to an abnormally found to be free of deleterious mutations previously, harbours several functioning endothelium (Waring et al. 1982). It is thought that this is SNPs altering the amino acid sequence in four residues. In turns a result of defects in neural crest differentiation (Bahn et al. 1984) of a population based association study six SNPs were genotyped A genome-wide search of a three generation family (FECDPed1) with in 265 controls, 216 sporadic and 57 familial patients. None of the FECD demonstrated significant linkage with D1S2830 (Zmax = 3.72, examined SNPs per se revealed association, but one out of five θ = 0.0). The critical region was refined to 1p34.2 - p32. The COL8A2 resulting haplotypes, which we call “C2 allele”. Elevated numbers gene lies within this region and encodes the α2 chain of type VIII of heterozygous carriers of the C2 allele were found in sporadic collagen. Developmental studies have suggested a role for type VIII (10,3% versus 3,8% in controls, p=0,0039), and familial cases collagen in cell differentiation (Shuttleworth 1997) and the protein is a (12,3%, p=0,0173). Logistic regression analyses produced relative 216 Posters - Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 217 risks of 2,9 (CI: 1,39-6,13) and 3,6 (CI: 1,30-9,83) in the affected gene locus was used, as follows: dinucleotide repeats in introns 13, subgroups, respectively. This association between prostate cancer 22 and 25; polymorphisms in presence/abcense of restriction sites and the C2 allele may be due to the conspicuous haplotype itself, in introns 18, 19 and 22; a SSCA polymorphism in intron 7 and a because it codes for a unique PCTA-1 protein, or could reflect linkage tandem repeat in the DXS52 locus, located outside of the Factor VIII disequilibrium to a neighbouring susceptibility gene. gene locus. Twenty five (82 %) families showed informativity at at least one P0673. A role for Maternal MTHFR genotype in marker locus. Only 2 families (8 %) were uninformative at all the nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate. markers used. N. J. Prescott, R. M. Winter, S. Malcolm; Pedigree data identified 29 women at reproductive age (mothers Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom. of affected boys not included) which were of high risk of having a Nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate is a common congenital anomaly haemophilia A - affected boy. DNA analysis allowed determination of with a complex genetic component. The etiology is likely to be carrier status in 25 women (83 %), of those 16 women were identified influenced by environmental factors. Folic acid is essential to early to be haemophilia A carriers and 9 noncarriers. embryonic development and recent studies have suggested a role Ten prenatal diagnoses were performed by analysis of DNA for “folate genes” in cleft lip. We genotyped over 200 parent-case polymorphisms. Seven of these pregnancies were carried to term, triads for the 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) producing 5 girls and 2 healthy boys. One male fetus was diagnosed C677T polymorphism to determine whether this functional variant to be at high risk to be affected by haemophilia A, nevertheless, is responsible for nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate in affected parents did not opt for an abortion. individuals. We could find no distortion in the transmission frequency of MTHFR parental alleles tested by TDT. Examination of Hardy- P0676. DNA Variability of Human Genes Weinberg equilibrium detected an over-representation of variant J. C. Stephens, J. A. Schneider; MTHFR homozygotes amongst mothers of affected children when Genaissance Pharmaceuticals, New Haven, CT. the mothers were themselves affected (odds ratio 4.61 95% CI We have investigated the level of DNA-based variation (both SNPS 1.35-15.77). We postulate that these results are direct evidence of and haplotypes) for over 5,400 human genes. In addition, we a multifactorial interaction in these families involving maternal folate have characterized how this variation is distributed in a number of status, MTHFR genotype and another locus. biologically and clinically important ways. First, we have determined how SNPs are distributed in human genes: where they occur relative P0674. Further heterogeneity in human malignant to various functional regions; levels of variability of human SNPs; pattern of the molecular sequence of SNPs; and how these compare infantile osteopetrosis: evidence for a novel locus on to the corresponding sequence of a chimpanzee. Second, we have chromosome 6q21 determined how these aspects of SNP distribution vary among four A. Ramirez1, J. Faupel1, C. Stöckel1, C. Hasan2, U. Bode2, P. human population samples. All genes were sequenced on DNA Propping1, C. Kubisch1; obtained from 82 unrelated individuals: 20 African-Americans, 20 1Institute for Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of East Asians, 21 European-Americans, 18 Hispanic-Latinos and 3 Pediatrics, Bonn, Germany. Native Americans. In particular, we looked at patterns of SNP and Malignant infantile osteopetrosis (OMIM #259700) is a rare haplotype sharing among the four larger population samples. Third, autosomal recessive disease. The characteristic clinical findings we have determined the patterns of linkage disequilibrium among as osteosclerosis, hepatosplenomegaly and pancytopenia become SNPs, which of course determines the haplotype variability of each apparent during the first months of life. Mutations have been gene. This pattern also varies substantially among populations. In found in the a3 subunit of the H+-ATPase and the voltage-gated order to connect important clinical variability (e.g., genetic disease or chloride channel CLCN7, demonstrating that osteoclast dysfunction susceptibility, variable drug response) to the DNA variability of human with inadequate bone resorption is the underlying cause of this genes, an understanding of these patterns of variability within and severe disorder. In a small inbred family with malignant infantile among human genes is a fundamental prerequisite. osteopetrosis no mutation could be found in the two known osteopetrosis genes. We therefore pursued a candidate locus P0677. Evidence for linkage of aggressive prostate approach to unravel the causative gene defect in this family. We excluded homozygosity for several candidate gene loci which in mice cancer to chromosome 7q32 in German prostate cancer cause severe osteopetrosis, among them c-FOS on 14q24, c-SRC on families 20q11, OPGL on 13q14, and CSF-1 on 1p13. We also investigated a S. Jainta1, S. Woerner1, B. Patino-Garcia1, K. Herkommer2, J. locus on chromosome 6q21, which is syntenic to a region on mouse Haeussler1, W. Vogel1, T. Paiss2,1; chromosome 10 where the causative gene for the osteopetrotic 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, mouse “grey-lethal” has been mapped. We detected homozygosity 2Department of Urology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. in a region spanning approximetly 15cM between markers D6S1717 Chromosome 7q32 has been suggested to contain genes that and D6S287. In this region, there are several candidate genes, like e. influence the progression of prostate cancer from latent to invasive g. Fyn-related-kinase (FRK), BET3, and MARCKS. We are currently disease by Witte et al. [AJHG 67:92-99,2000]. This locus did not conducting a systematic mutation analysis of several candidate show up in previous genome wide scans and emerged by QTL genes in this region. In summary, we provide evidence for a novel analysis in sib pairs. We looked for linkage of prostate cancer locus for human infantile malignant osteopetrosis on chromosome aggressiveness to chromosome 7q by stratification in 108 German 6q21 which probably represents the human ortholog of the murine prostate cancer families according to lymph node affection and “grey-lethal” locus. grading of the tumor. A panel of 8 polymorphic markers ( PE Applied Biosystems) on 7q was used. We found no evidence of linkage P0675. Molecular Diagnosis of Haemophilia A in Bulgaria between a prostate cancer susceptibility locus and markers on chromosome 7q in the complete set of 108 families. However, the by DNA Analysis Using Polymorphisms Linked to Factor subset of families with aggressive prostate cancer (positive lymph VIII Gene Locus nodes in one family member or two cases of GIII tumors) had an R. D. Petkova1, R. Kabakchieva2, I. Kalev3, I. Kremensky4; NPL of 1.50 (p = 0.06). Most evidence for linkage came from a few 1University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynaecology “Maichin families with aggressive and late onset disease, mean age of onset dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2First Clinic of Paediatrisc, Sofia, Bulgaria, >65 years and NPL of 2.56 (p=0.01). D7S640, the marker with the 3First Clinic of Paediatrics, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Univeristy Hospital of higest NPL in our analysis, is located exactly between the markers Obstetrics and Gynaecology “Maichin dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria. that gave the strongest signals in the study of Witte et al. [AJHG 67: Twenty - seven families affected by haemophilia A, consisting of 138 92-99,2000]. In the German population, chromosme 7q32 is linked to members (among these, 30 haemophilia A - affected males) were a type of prostate cancer that is characterized by a late onset and an typed for polymorphisms within and outside the Factor VIII gene in aggressive course of the disease. order to determine carrier status of female relatives and to estimate possibilities for prenatal diagnosis when needed. Twenty of these families (74 %) did not have previous history of haemophilia A. A panel of 8 informative DNA polymorphisms, linked to the Factor VIII Posters - Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 218 219 P0678. Confirmation of Genetic Homogeneity of P0681. Chromosome 20p is linked to prostate cancer Syndactyly Type 1 in an Iranian Family susceptibility in the German population M. Ghadami; T. Paiss1,2, F. Kurtz2, S. Wörner2, K. Herkommer1, J. Häussler2, W. Nagasaki Uni Sch of Med, Nagasaki, Japan. Vogel2; Syndactyly type 1 (SD1) is the most common type of syndactyly, 1Department of Urology, University of Ulm, Germany, 2Department of inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, and characterized by Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Germany. complete or partial webbings between the third and fourth fingers Chromosome 20q13 has been suggested to harbour a prostate and/or between the second and third toes. We recently encountered cancer (PC) susceptibility locus in families that were characterized an Iranian family in which 33 members in six generations were by a low number of affected familiy members, late onset disease affected with SD1. As a locus of SD1 in a German family has recently and no male-to-male transmission. As this epidemiologic profile been assigned to chromosome 2q34-q36, we performed a linkage is characteristic for many German PC families we performed analysis of the Iranian SD1 in order to know whether the disorder linkage analysis using 7 markers on chromosme 20. There was no is genetically homogeneous. With the analysis on 15 affected and evidence for linkage in the whole sample of 108 PC families and 16 unaffected persons using dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms as in the subsets with mean age of onset < or > 66 years or with the markers, we mapped the SD1 locus to 2q34-q36 with a maximum number of affecteds/family < or > 3 as criteria for stratification. In LOD score of 6.92 at a recombination fraction q = 0.00 (penetrance = a previous study we identified a subset of families that were linked 1.00) for the D2S2179 locus. The result not only confirmed the gene to chromosome Xq27-28 (NPL > 1) but at the same time had an assignment but also suggests genetic homogeneity of the disease. affected individual in the paternal line of their pedigree. In this subset of 26 families with the conflicting characteristics of male-to-male P0679. Identification of athe locus for ichthyosis-prematurity transmission and X chromosomal allele sharing, multipoint parametric syndrome on chromosome 9. linkage analysis (Genhunter 1.3) showed a maximum LOD score J. Klar1, M. Pigg, MD1, T. Gedde-Dahl, Jr2, A. Vahlquist3, N. Dahl1; of 4.10 (p=0.001) at D20S112. This may indicate interaction of 1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Institute two genetic determinants of PC susceptibility. Marker D20S112 is of Forensic Medicine, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of Medical localized on 20p11.2-12 and is distinct from the susceptibility locus Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden. (D20S887) suggested in the initial study on chromosome 20q. Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) is a heterogeneous group of skin disorders. Ichthyosis-Prematurity Syndrome (IPS), is a P0682. Linkage disequilibrium mapping of the HLA-linked rare form of ARCI with a relatively high prevalence in the Norwegian MYAS1 locus for autoimmune myasthenia gravis. population. C. Vandiedonck, G. Beaurain, B. Eymard, C. Tranchant, P. Gajdos, Key features are thick caseous desquamating epidermis and H. J. Garchon; complicated pregnancies probably due to polyhydramnion and INSERM U25, Paris, France. an opaque amnion fluid caused by the shedding of large amount Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disorder of the of epidermally derived cells. This results in premature birth of the neuromuscular junction characterized by production of auto- affected child. antibodies against muscle acetylcholine receptors (AChR). Recently, Thirteen families with at least one affected member and one healthy we demonstrated linkage and association of the extended HLA-DR3 or affected sibling were identified. Altogether, the 13 families included haplotype with the form of MG associated with thymus hyperplasia 17 affected members and 13 healthy siblings. All families are related and high auto-antibodies titers, defining the MYAS1 locus. In the to a defined region in middle-Norway and Sweden. present study, given the strong linkage disequilibrium across the DR3 A genome-wide linkage analysis gave indication for linkage to haplotype, we sought to refine the localization of the MYAS1 locus chromosome 9q, and further analysis resulted in a maximum by combining TDT and ANOVA of AChR antibody titers. A panel of cumulative lod-score of 3.73 in the 9q34 region. fourteen microsatellites and six SNPs, evenly spaced across a 2.5 Haplotype analysis of meiotic recombination events refined the Mb region between the DRB1 gene and the D6S265 microsatellite, genetic interval to a 9 cM region between markers D9S250 and ~100 kb centromeric to HLA-A, was genotyped in 717 MG patients D9S63. This restricts the IPS locus to a physical distance of 8 Mb in and, for 228 of them, in their relatives. Using single-locus TDT, the chromosome 9q33.3-q34.13 region. the strongest association was observed with the TNFd*1 allele, in the class III region (P=1x10-5). No association was observed with P0680. Genomic mapping of a fourth gene involved in D6S265, which therefore defines the telomeric boundary of the Familial Hypercholesterolemia MYAS1 interval. Two-locus TDT bearing on ancestrally-recombinant L. Villéger1, M. Abifadel1,2, D. Allard1, J. Rabès1,3, J. Weissenbach4, haplotypes reduced the MYAS1 interval to 700 kb excluding both M. Varret1, C. Junien1,3, C. Boileau1,3; DRB1 (P=0.008) and C2.4.5 (P=0.007) which is located between 1INSERM UR383, Paris, France, 2Faculté de Pharmacie, Université HLA-B and -A. ANOVA of anti-AChR antibody titers further narrowed Saint-Joseph, Beirut, LEBANON, 3Service de Biochimie, CHU the MYAS1 interval. Variance was best explained by MH*169 Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France, 4Centre National de Sequençage, (P=7x10-4) and TNFd*1 (P=2.6x10-3) and by their combination Evry, France. (P<1x10-12). A primary region where to look for the MYAS1 gene may Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is one of the most be therefore a 40 kb DNA segment limited by these two markers. It common hereditary diseases, characterized by a selective increase of currently includes four genes which are under active investigation. LDL particles, giving rise to premature mortality from cardiovascular complications. ADH results from molecular defects in the LDLR gene P0683. Refinement of a locus for a distinct syndrome of (Familial Hypercholesterolemia), the APOB gene (Familial ligand- autosomal dominant cleft lip and palate to 2q35 Defective apolipoprotein B-100) and the FH3 gene (1p32-p34.1). We R. M. Winter1, N. J. Prescott1, M. M. Lees2, S. Malcolm1; identified a large French ADH family (HC6) in which the involvement 1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2St George’s of these 3 genes had been excluded suggesting the existence of a Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom. fourth locus (FH4). We undertook the identification of the FH4 locus Orofacial clefting is a common craniofacial anomaly that occurs using linkage analysis in family HC6 by a candidate region approach. in many multiple congenital anomaly (MCA) syndromes. Kumar After the exclusion of 30 candidates, we undertook a whole genome et al (1996) reported a dominant MCA with cleft lip and palate approach with 220 new microsatellite marker. Linkage was obtained and characteristic facies in two families of Caucasian origin. The with a LOD score of 3.86 (q=0) and confirmed by a multipoint LOD phenotype in these families overlaps with both Hypertelorism, score analysis. Suggestive linkage was also obtained for 4 other Microtia, clefting syndrome (HMC) and Fronto-nasal dysplasia but nonLDLR/nonAPOB/nonFH3 families conforting the localization of we believe this dominant cleft lip syndrome may be recognisable as the FH4 locus in this genomic region. Finally, a critical region of 1.9 a distinct entity. We have carried out a whole genome scan in these cM was defined which contains the FH4 gene. We constructed a 3.8 two families and identified co-segregation to a locus on 2q35. For the Mb physical map covering our genetic region and identified 82 genes, larger family we have used additional family members to refine this that we are testing by direct sequencing in collaboration with the locus to a region of 10 Mb across a haplotype of four markers which Genoscope. co-segregate in 6 affected individual and one apparently unaffected individual. We have excluded the candidate genes DLX1 and DLX2 218 Posters - Mental Retardation 219 by sequencing and fine mapping. All other regions of the genome an indeterminate nucleotide variant is detected, follow-up analysis have been excluded except for the short arm of the X chromosome is recommended. This may include evaluation of parental samples, and work is currently underway to confirm exclusion at this locus. RNA and X chromosome inactivation (XCI) studies. Three cases These results demonstrate a major dominant cleft lip locus with high from the indeterminate group have been selected to reveal the but possible incomplete penetrance. complexities that can occur, which have ranged from assessing novel missense and silent nucleotide variants that have not been reported P0684. Genetic analysis of two unrelated Italian Families previously among more than 1400 published mutations; evaluating with non specific X-mental retardation non-coding variants that are highly conserved; and interpreting cDNA M. Miano1, I. Annunziata1, F. Di Leva1, G. Fimiani1, S. Russo2, F. findings in the face of skewed XCI. It is evident that laboratories that Cogliati3, G. Casari4, A. Ciccodicola1, M. Ursini1, M. D’Urso1; offer a comprehensive mutation testing service for MECP2 and other 1IIGB, Naples, Italy, 2Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 3Istituto genes on the X chromosome must be sufficiently resourced to meet Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, 4Istituto San Raffaele, Milan, Italy. the full range of challenges that can arise. X-linked non specific mental retardation (MRX) accounts for ~ 25% of mental retardation in males. Despite this high frequency, little is P0687. Rett syndrome in females and in a male known about the molecular defects underlying this disorder, mainly N. Misovicova1, J. Krsiakova1, R. Rosipal2, J. Zeman3, P. Martasek2; because of the clinical and genetic heterogeneity which is evident 1Martin Faculty Hospital, Martin, Slovakia, 2Medical Faculty, Charles from linkage studies. A wide variety of MRX loci have been mapped University, Praque, Czech Republic, 3Medical Faculty, Charles on X chromosome. At least 8 MRX genes have been identified , but University, Praque, Czech Republic. each accounts for only 0.5-1.0% of MRX cases. Here we report two Rett syndrome is an neurodevelopmental disorder characterised MRX families. The first family has nine males in two generations by autism, dementia, ataxia and loss of purposeful hand use. with classic X-linked inheritance of variable degree of non specific The exclusive involvement of females was explained by X- linked mental retardation.We have performed on this family a two point dominant inheritance with lethality in the hemizygous males. The linkage analysis that shows tight linkage for marker GATA72E05 with responsible gene has been identified in the Xq28 region and Lod Score of 3.14 at q=0.00. Two point linkage interval corresponds encodes the methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2). A non fatal Rett to roughly 23 cM in the pericentromeric region of X chromosome. syndrome in male has been published in the year 2000. The authors According to linkage data and their functional characteristic, we are confirmed the somatic mutation in MeCP2 gene. performing the mutational screening of some genes in this region to We have a small cohort of 8 girls with Rett syndrome. The mutation prove their involvment in this patology. analysis revealed different mutations in MeCP2 gene ( R294X, The second family is composed by eight males in three generation K135E, T158M, 1069delAGC). Recently we examined a 23 year characterized by a mild to severe X-linked mental retardation. male with classical features of Rett syndrome. The normal perinatal Previous analysis linked this family in Xq28 between marker period was followed by a period of regression, loss of acquired skills, DXS1073 and F8c (Lod Score=2.71 at q=0.00). We have performed ataxia, gait disturbance and deterioration of the brain functions. The mutational analysis for 10 candidate genes present in this region numerical aberration of the X chromosome was excluded, the man by sequencing and RT-PCR analysis and we have found some has a normal karyotype 46,XY. We expected that the mosaic mutation known and unknown polymorphisms. We are now looking for other using the methods based on heteroduplex analysis and sequencing candidate genes and we are performing further analysis to esclude will be detected. genomic rearrangements. P0688. MECP2 mutations in males; Report of a case with P0685. Whole Genome SNP Scans: what is currently Prader-Willi-like phenotype possible and affordable T. Kleefstra, H. G. IJntema, A. R. Oudakker, H. van Bokhoven, B. B. C. R. Cantor, A. Braun, M. Shi, C. Rodi, R. Macdonald; A. de Vries, B. C. J. Hamel; Sequenom, Inc., San Diego, CA. UMC St Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands. SEQUENOM has worked with Incyte Pharmaceuticals and Glaxo Heterozygous mutations in the X-linked MECP2 gene have first Smith Klein to develop a set of validated SNP assay portfolios been described in Rett syndrome (RS), a progressive neurologic that altogether number about 200,000 polymorphic SNPs. These developmental disorder, occurring almost exclusively in females. assays can be run on pooled DNA samples to generate accurate Diagnostic criteria for RS were established by Hagberg et al. estimates of allele frequencies in populations of interest. Allele Recent studies indicate that MECP2 mutations are not necessarily frequency differences in phenotypically-stratified populations can prenathally lethal in males, but are the cause of lethal congenital reveal genes with strong associations to phenotypes. Alternatively encephalopathy and even of non-fatal congenital encephalopathy. Of SNPs can be genotyped on individual DNAs and allele and genotype- the latter group, some patients have clinical features suggestive of phenotype correlations done subsequently in silico. The relative the Angelman syndrome (AS), others are reported with nonspecific advantages and costs of the two procedures will be compared. For mental retardation (MRX) only. The clinical and molecular features individual genotyping multiplexed sets of SNP assays can cut costs of an additional male patient with a de novo MECP2 mutation are considerably. Progress in developing a multiplexed genome scanning presented and compared to previous reported cases. set will be described. Using these methods individually, and in combination, a number of interesting gene associations to complex P0689. disease phenotypes have been discovered. The potential importance Refined molecular characterisation of a de novo and utility of some of these associations will be demonstrated. t(5;18)(q33;q12) associated with Rett-like syndrome and autism P 15. Mental Retardation C. Windpassinger1, K. Wagner1, S. W. Scherer2, P. M. Kroisel1, E. Petek1; P0686. Challenges that arise from a routine MECP2 1University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2The Hospital for Sick Children, mutation testing service. Toronto, ON, Canada. S. Whatley1, A. Murray2, N. Mason1, A. Clarke2, D. Ravine2; Mutations in the MECP2 gene cause the severe neurodevelopmental 1Department of Medical Biochemistry, University Hospital of Wales, disorder called Rett Syndrome. Children afflicted with Rett Syndrome Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, University often also exhibit autistic-like behaviours. Beside MECP2 mutations, Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom. several cases of structural abnormalities of autosomes associated An initial surge of demand for MECP2 mutation analysis has settled with Rett Syndrome are known. Here we report on a 10-year-old boy into a steady-state pattern. We have screened for mutations using with a reciprocal 5/18 translocation. His clinical manifestations are a bi-directional sequencing. Among 292 samples referred, results have combination of mild dysmorphic features and those of Rett Syndrome fallen into four major categories: pathogenic nucleotide variant (74); and autism. Due to several cases of autism in patients with 18q polymorphic variant (14); variant, pathogenicity indeterminate (13); deletions, our primary goal was do narrow down the breakpoint with the remainder being wildtype. Among the wildtype results, we region on chromosome 18. Fluorescence in situ hybridisation are aware of 13 cases where the clinical diagnosis is Rett syndrome experiments using various region specific YAC- and BAC clones and another 10 in whom the diagnosis is strongly suspected. When led to split signals in a 200 kb sequenced BAC clone indicating that Posters - Mental Retardation 220 221 the corresponding DNA insert is spanning the breakpoint region. P0692. Effect of premutation in the FMR1 gene on Subsequent Southern blot analysis with probes derived from the cognitive and physical phenotype in fragile X assessed spanning BAC clone was performed to isolate a junction fragment. by pedigree analysis. Sequence analysis of the junction fragment will help to find candidate D. Z. Loesch; genes for the neuropsychiatric features seen in our patient. La Trobe University, Melbourne, Bundoora, Victoria, Australia, Australia. P0690. Genotype / Phenotype Correlations In A Large The effect of premutation status in the FMR1 gene on cognitive and Series Of Rett Syndrome Patients physical measures in fragile X males and females was investigated A. Moncla1, J. Mancini2, A. Kpebe3, B. Chabrol2, M. O. Livet2, N. using a robust modification of the maximum likelihood estimators for Philip1, L. Villard3; pedigree data. This approach is much more powerful than standard 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hopital des Enfants de la statistics because it allows for testing model assumptions, such Timone, Marseille, France, 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hopital as concerning the effect of explanatory variables, and for reducing des Enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 3Unité de Recherche variability in the data by down-weighting unusual observations, and INSERM 491, Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France. adjusting for intra-familiar variation. It also allows for estimation Mutations in the human Xq28-linked MECP2 gene are responsible of heritability of complex traits. The data from extended 110 for 70 to 80% of Rett syndrome cases and also for atypical clinical fragile X families (including 185 fragile X subjects and 110 normal presentations. relatives) were analyzed. Fragile X status was determined by the We are presenting the results of our studies in a serie of 64 female number CGG repeats in the FMR1 gene. Physical phenotype cases in which we looked for mutations in the MECP2 gene. These was represented by trunk, limbs, head and face measures, and patients were divided into three groups : neuropsychological phenotype, by the cognitive (Wechsler), and - Group I (23 patients) with Rett syndrome diagnosed in our executive function measures. Evidence is presented for strong multidisciplinary consultation. phenotypic (neuropsychological) involvement in premutation carriers, - Group II (28 patients) referred by external collaborators for a especially in males, which predominantly affects performance skills suspicion of Rett syndrome and executive cognitive functioning. The effect of premutation status - Group III (17 patients) from our center exhibiting a severe on physical phenotype was less evident and concerned only some encephalopathy with autistic behaviour. facial measures in both sexes, and the measure of joints’ laxity In the first group, 21 mutations were identified ; in the second, 8 in females. Heritability ranged from the highest (88%-90%) for mutations and zero in the third group. These results confirm that the physical measures, to the lowest (10%) for some executive function vast majority of mutations in the MECP2 gene lead to a classical Rett measures. syndrome phenotype. They also show that a large proportion of girls with a severe mental handicap are not found to be associated with a P0693. Should all girls learning disabled or mildly MECP2 mutation on the contrary to what was recently proposed in retarded be screened for FMR1 mutation? the litterature. M. I. Tejada1, C. Puyo1, M. Durán1,2, M. A. Lopez Ariztegui3, M. P. In addition, we did not find any genotype-phenotype correlations for Botella4, M. Poch5; the Rett syndrome patients taking into account the mutation type, the 1Unidad de Genética. Hospital de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain, 2Instituto functional domain affected by the mutation and the X-chromosome de Biología y Genética Molecular. Facultad de Medicina, Valladolid, inactivation status of these patients except for the mutation involving Spain, 3Laboratorio de Genética. Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo the C-terminal domain associated with a « forme frustre » of the (Bizkaia), Spain, 4Servicio de Pediatria. Hospital Txagorritxu, Vitoria- disease. It is thus likely that a number of not yet identified factors are Gasteiz, Spain, 5Servicio de Pediatria. Hospital San Millan, Logroño, responsible for the clinical variability of this syndrome. Spain. Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common inherited cause P0691. Fragile X syndrome : clinical and behavioral of mental retardation, with a prevalence of about 1/4.000-5.000 in study. males. Therefore many clinicians must deal with fragile X individuals H. H. Afifi1, A. K. Abdel-Aleem2, O. O. Shaheen3; in their daily routine, but many of them still don’t recognise this 1Human Genetics Department, Clinical Genetics Section, National syndrome. This problem is greater in women, in whom the prevalence Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Human Genetics Department, is theoretically the same as in males, but due to the fact that at least Molecular Genetics Section, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 50% of the fully mutated women are normal, the clinical prevalence in 3Psychiatry Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. females is in fact much lower, about 1/10.000. The present study included 25 boys with mental retardation of Our laboratory has been working on FXS molecular testing since unknown etiology and their mothers. Each boy manifested, at 1991, receiving the majority of requests for FMR1 testing from least, two of the following features: positive family history of mental Northern Spain. Since our first description of a girl with the FRAXA retardation, long face, large ears, hyperextensible finger joints full mutation with no history of mental retardation in her family and bulbous halluces. Patients were assessed for 18 physical (Tejada et al., 1998), we have been recommending to test women features and 23 behavioral features. Reverse transcriptase- for FXS. Moreover, in cooperation with “The Fragile X Association” polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) amplifies across the two KH we have been lately developing an information program to different domain regions specific for FMR1 gene. Diagnosis of patients was professionals: pediatricians, psychologists, teachers, etc. absolutely dependent on the detection of absent FMR1 transcriped Here we present the molecular results of the 2001-year and mRNA. This approach successfully diagnosed fifteen boys (60%) compared them with the 10 previous years. In this later year we from 11 families as fragile positive and ten boys (40%) from 8 have studied 38 case index females and found 3 new non-related families as fragile negative. Multiple regression analysis revealed cases of FXS (3/38= 7,89%) without affected males in their families. 11 features (4 physical and 7 behavioral) with high predictive We also report the initial symptoms, behaviour features, physical value for fragile X syndrome. The frequency of speech defect was description and mental status of these 3 girls (aged 5, 3 and 5 significantly increased in boys with fragile X syndrome. Delayed years respectively), to add new data on the knowledge of fragile X language, numerical and time concepts, domestic activities and syndrome in women. directive behavior were significantly delayed in those boys. Eysenk personality questionnaire, Beck depression inventory and parental P0694. Fmr-1 full mutation in leukocytes of a female not attitude questionnaire were applied to all mothers and revealed affected by X-Fragile syndrome. increased psychoticism, neuroticism, criminality and various degrees P. Battaglia, E. De Fanti, R. Grimau Merino, L. Giardina, R. of depression in mothers of fragile X boys. In conclusion, the Schiavon; combination of physical and behavioral traits is helpful in suggesting Legnago Hospital, Legnago, Italy. the diagnosis of fragile X syndrome. The preselection 5-criteria A 35 years old woman was evaluated for FMR-1 mutation because device proved suitable for detection of fragile X candidates, thereby her children (a male and a female) were found to be FMR-1 full improve the cost-effectiveness of fragile X molecular testing. We mutation (CGG > 200 repeats). The laboratory tests performed to propose application of this device in clinical pediatric practice for early investigate the X fragile syndrome were: 1) chromosomal analysis detection of fragile X syndrome in young children. 2) PCR of blood sample 3) Southern Blot method after treating DNA 220 Posters - Mental Retardation 221 from leukocytes with Eag and EcoRI restriction enzymes. Results: patients (Phelan et al and Wilson et al, 1995) with 2q37 deletion, 1) normal 46, XX caryotipe in blood nucleated cells without fragile only one of nine showed a normal karyotype. The group of patients sites detected, 2) a single faint band of PCR product following FMR- presented here carried submicroscopic deletions allowing the 1 gene amplification, 3) the absence of 2.8 Kb band corresponding evidence that BDMRS is an emerging clinical grouping. The presence to the unmethylated FMR-1 allele, accompanied by a smear in of chromosomal polymorphisms is under investigation to verify a correspondence of the methylated allele. To interpret these findings genetic predisposition to 2q37 rearrangements. we hypotize that in blood cells of this women the ratio between FMR- 1 full mutation and FMR-1 normal allele might be in favour of the P0697. X-linked Lissencephaly with Absent Corpus abnormal allele. This could be supported by the not clear result on Callosum and Ambiguous Genitalia (XLAG). Clinical, MRI PCR. The peculiarity of this young woman is the absence of mental and Neuro-Pathological Findings. retardation and other classical abnormality typical of the X fragile D. Bonneau1, A. Toutain2, P. Saugier-Veber3, A. Gélot1; syndrome, so that we can suppose a rare form of FMR-1 abnormality 1Génétique Médicale, Angers, France, 2Génétique Médicale, Tours, involving at least her blood leucocytes. Further investigations about France, 3Génétique Médicale, Rouen, France. other forms of tissue mosaicism are in progress. X-linked Lissencephaly with absent corpus callosum and ambiguous Genitalia (XLAG) is a newly recognized syndrome responsible for a P0695. Genetic-Diagnostic Survey of 3570 Children with severe neurological disorder of neonatal onset in boys. Based upon Mental Retardation the observations of three new cases, we confirm the phenotype in A. Yuksel1, H. Kayserili2, T. Tukel2, S. Basaran2, M. Yuksel Apak2; affected boys, we describe additional MRI findings, we report the 1Genetics and Teratology Research Center, Istanbul University, neuropathological data and, we show that carrier females may exhibit Istanbul, Turkey, 2Division of Medical Genetic, Institute of Child neurological and MRI abnormalities. In affected boys, consistent Health, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. clinical features of XLAG are intractable epilepsy of neonatal onset, This study was conducted on 3570 subjects who were referred severe hypotonia, poor responsiveness, genital abnormalities to our outpatient clinic from July 1, 1985 to December 31.1998 and early death. On MRI, a gyration defect consisting of anterior for evaluation of mental retardation (MR) Medical records and pachygyria and posterior agyria with a moderately thickened brain photographic documentation were reviewed in all. History, cortex, dysplastic basal ganglia and complete agenesis of the corpus physical and neurological examinations, chromosomal analysis, callosum are consistently found. Neuropathological examination of molecular studies, skeletal surveys; cranial imaging studies, the brain shows a tri-layered cortex containing exclusively pyramidal electroencephalography and metabolic screening test were neurons, a neuronal migration defect, a disorganization of the basal performed as indicated. ganglia and a gliotic and spongy white matter. Finally, females related Patients were classified into two groups as patients who have to affected boys may have mental retardation and epilepsy, and often isolated MR only, and MR with multiple congenital abnormalities display agenesis of the corpus callosum. These findings expand the (MKA+MR). phenotype of XLAG, may help in the detection of carrier females in MR group (n: 582) consisted of known monogenic syndromes (n: 90), affected families and give arguments for a semidominant X-linked enzyme deficiencies (n: 112), patients of unknown etiology with MR mode of inheritance. (n: 380), MKA+MR group (n: 2988) consisted of chromosome abnormalities (n: P0698. Long Term Follow-up Of A Girl With Oro-facio- 1384)., recognizable syndromes (n: 55), known monogenic disease digital Syndrome Type I Due To A Mutation In The Ofdi (203), structural central nervous system abnormalities (n: 540) and Gene unclassified patient with MKA+MR (n: 806) C. Stoll1, P. Sauvage2; Out of 582 patients with MR and 2988 patients with MKA+MR 1Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 2Hôpital de Hautepierre, etiology were noticed into 202(34.7 %) and2182 (72.02 %) Chirurgie Infantile, Strasbourg, France. respectively. In 1954 Papillon-Léage and Psaume described a dominant, X-linked The results were compared with the similar studies in literature. condition which they named oro-facio-digital (OFD). This condition was split in at least 9 syndromes, the more common being OFDI. We P0696. High occurrence of Brachydactyly-Mental report a girl with OFDI syndrome followed-up during 24 years. Retardation syndrome among mentally retarded subjects The parents were unaffected. An older brother had hydrocephaly, and in Italy mental retardation. A younger sister is unaffected. A. Ragusa1, O. Galesi1, M. A. Lo Giudice1, M. Fichera1, E. Borgione1, The proband was examined for the first time when she was 3 months T. Mattina2, M. Pierluigi3, F. Faravelli3, F. Dagna Bricarelli3, D. Greco1, old for median cleft lip and cleft palate, lingual frenula and hypoplasia P. Failla1, C. Romano1; of the maxillary and the mandible. She had clinodactyly of the 5th 1Oasi Institute, Troina, Italy, 2Clinica Pediatrica, Catania, Italy, fingers, shortening of fingers and toes 3, 4 and 5 and syndactyly. She 3Laboratorio di Genetica Umana, E.O. Galliera, Genova, Italy. was operated on several times. Background Brachydactyly-Mental Retardation syndrome (BDMRS), At 19 years of age renal insufficiency appeared. Renal transplantation MIM 600430, also defined as Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy-like was performed. (AHO3) syndrome, is associated to distal deletion on 2q37 region. A mutation, an insertion of a G leading to a frameshift in the OFDI This association was first described independently by Phelan et al gene encoding a protein containing coiled-coil α-helical domains was and Wilson et al (1995). identified in the patient who was asking for prenatal diagnosis when Results MultiFISH based screening for subtelomeric chromosome she was 24 years old. defects (Cytocell) was performed on 250 mentally retarded patients. Associated malformations of the OFDI syndrome are cerebral, The observed frequency of subtle chromosomal abnormalities was and renal. There was no developmental delay and no cerebral 6% (15/250). Among the fifteen subjects carrying chromosomal malformations in this patient. There were multicystic kidneys with rearrangements six showed 2q37 de novo deletions (2.4%) renal insufficiency leading to renal transplantation. The results were associated to BDMRS. Since the probe included in the kit still detects good. 2q37 telomeric polymorphism (Macina et al, 1994; Knight et al, 1997), In conclusion a girl with OFD type I syndrome was followed up during for all patients the 2q37 deletion was mapped by microsatellites and 24 years. A renal transplantation was performed when she was 20 FISH analysis using genomic probes (PAC and BAC) encompassing years old. A frameshift mutation of the OFDI gene was identified. the chromosomal region. Parental origin was determined by microsatellites analysis. The occurrence of the length polymorphism P0699. X-linked mental retardation with cerebellar at 2q37 was also found in 17 subjects (7%). In two of them the hypoplasia polymorphism was present in compound heterozygosity with the N. M. Philip1, L. Villard2, C. Raybaud3, B. Chabrol4; BDMRS-associated deletion. 1Département de Génétique Humaine, Hôpital d’Enfants de la Conclusion Advancement of FISH strategies allowed to screen Timone, Marseille, France, 2INSERM U491, Marseille, France, large series of mentally retarded patients and consequently improve 3Service de Neuroradiologie, Hôpital d’Enfants de la Timone, the frequency definition of some recurrent chromosomal aberrations Marseille, France, 4Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital d’Enfants de la escaping from conventional karyotype. Among previously reported Timone, Marseille, France.Posters - Mental Retardation 222 223 We report a three genration family including 4 boys aged 3 to 17 with a posterior-to anterior gradient, intermediate increase in cortical years presenting with moderate mental retardation, abnormal thickness, corpus callosum agenesis. Recently, Bonneau et al. facial appearance and brain anomalies. Mean age at walking was described female carriers phenotype: all carriers (5/5) had partial 30 months. Language was severely delayed and reading was not or complete corpus callosum agenesis with no or mild mental acquired in the eldest ones. All had tall stature above 2SD. Facial retardation. None had severe mental retardation nor seizures. We appearance was similar with macrocephaly, deeply-set eyes and report a new family. The propositus, a male, presented at birth with and prominent chin. Brain MRI showed the same findings in all the classical type of the disease and died at day 10. His sister had affected boys: supratentorially, mild to large dilatation of the ventricles seizures at day 2. At 3 years, she had profound mental retardation was noted without cortical dysplasia. On of the boys had vetriculo- and severe epilepsy. RMI showed corpus callosum agenesis, peritoneal shunt because of marked dilatation of the third and lateral posterior agyria-pachygyria and abnormal white matter. Karyotype ventricles. The most prominent abnormalities were seen in the was normal 46 XX. No mutation was detected in XLIS gene. X- posterior fossa: the cerebellar vermis was hypoplastic with various inactivation study is on progress. The mother had normal intelligence degrees of Dandy-Walker complex. The two obligate carrier females but RMI showed partial corpus callosum agenesis. This observation demontrated mild mental retardation and tall stature. Brain MRI confirm the frequency of corpus callosum agenesis in XLAG carriers. showed diffuse cerbral atrophy in both and a slight supratentorial In contrast, a severe phenotype was never observed in female expansion of the cisterna magna through a posterior hiatus of the carriers and skewed X-inactivation is supposed to be responsible for tentorium in one. severe expression in this girl. We compared the phenotype of these patients with the one described in previously reported families with X-linked mental retardation with P0702. Report of 2 new FRAXE families detected by cerebellar abnormalities. In most of these reports, the clinical picture FRAXA and FRAXE post-natal screening was characterized by progressive cerebellar atrophy and clinical M. Doco-Fenzy1, P. Cornillet-Lefebvre2, P. Helms3, E. Ulrich1, J. ataxia, which is very different from the pure mental retardation with Couchot4, M. Mozelle5, M. Quillerou5, D. Gaillard1; congenital cerebellar hypoplasia seen in our patients. 1Department of Genetics, CHRU, Reims, France, 2Department of Assuming X-linked inheritance, linkage analysis using 32 highly Haematology, CHRU, Reims, France, 3Department of Pediatrics, polymorphic parkers evenly distributed along the X chromosome was CHRU, Reims, France, 4Department of Pediatrics A, CH, Charleville, performed. There was no recombination between markers DXS1039 France, 5Department of Pediatrics, CH, Troyes, France. (Xp11.23) and DXS1047 (Xq25). FRAXA is one of the most common cause of mental retardation for boys, FRAXE is rarely reported. From 1997 to 2001, 857 P0700. Clinical investigation and candidate gene screen families were screened for FRAXA and FRAXE amplification. The of families mapped to the Partington syndrome region in study concerned 581 boys and 276 girls showing non-explained Xp22.1. developmental delay. CGG and GCC repeat amplifications have S. G. M. Frints1, J. Fryns2, M. Borghgraef2, K. Hollanders1, P. been studied for respectively FMR1 and FMR2 genes. Through Marynen1, G. Froyen1; this screening 11 new FRAXA families and 2 new FRAXE families 1Human Genome Laboratory, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for were detected using respectively Pergolizzi and Knight’s modified Biotechnology, Department of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, PCR protocole (Cell 1993) and chemiluminescence for agarose gel 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, revelation. Department of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. The first FRAXE proposant was an 8 years old boy affected by Partington et al. (1988) described a three-generation family (MRXS1, mental retardation, stuttering and frontal headache, constipation, MIM *309510, PRTS) with a syndromic form of X-linked mental cryptorchidy and corpus callosus agenesis.He had no facial retardation (XLMR). The clinical features in 10 affected males dysmorphism but strabismus. WISC-R showed: 54 (verbal : 66, included mild to moderate mental retardation, dystonic movements performance : 51) , he was not efficient in mathematics. of the hands, dysarthria and seizures. Through linkage analysis a PCR revealed an abnormal amplification over 350 GCC repeats for maximum LOD-score of 3.1 was obtained at marker DXS989 with him, 115 repeats for his mother and 71 repeats for his grand-mother. flanking markers DXS365 and DXS28 (Xp22.1). The PRTS region The second FRAXE proposant was a 14 years old boy, with long comprises about 10 megabase and includes 9 novel transcripts face and nose, a mouth finely drawn, small ears, photosensible and 13 known genes that are expressed in brain and muscle. The seizures, and headache. He was very anxious, and had difficulties in PRTS is a rare and specific clinical entity. So far, no patients other mathematics. PCR revealed an abnormal amplification over 320 GCC than the original family have been described. We present two repeats for him, 203 repeats for his healthy sister, 121 for his mother, brothers with PRTS and three males of a two-generation family and 50 repeats for his grand-mother. four other men and women had with non-specific XLMR (MRX36), who after clinical reinvestigation amplification over 83 repeats in this family. A prenatal diagnosis was show PRTS features. Neurological features in the affected males realised for his sister and only the sexe status of the female foetus include moderate mental retardation, dysarthria, facial muscle was announced . weakness, severe dysdiadochokinesis, slow dystonic movements and mild spasticity of the hands without ataxia or spasticity of the P0703. Coffin-Lowry’s syndrome: About a familial case legs. The symptoms are non-progressive, extra-pyramidal and F. Maazoul, L. Ben Jemaa, R. Mrad, M. Chaabouni, M. Ksontini, H. without cerebellar involvement. We try to further delineate the PRTS Chaabouni; phenotype and based on recent findings of Dr. J. Gecz and Dr J. Congenital and Hereditary Service, EPS Charles Nicolle, Tunis, Chelly, we will present data on a candidate gene screen performed Tunisia. on the two brothers with PRTS, MRX36, a family with West syndrome Coffin-Lowry’s syndrome is individualized in 1975 by Temtamy and on a selected group of MR male-patients. from 2 descriptions princeps of Coffin and Lowry. It is an X-linked semi- dominant inherited disorder, mental delay is deeper at the P0701. X-linked lissencephaly with absent corpus boy’s, the gene is localized and identified on the short arm of the X callosum and ambiguous genitalia (XLAG) : a new family chromosome, in Xp22-2, it codes for a protein kinase RSK2. The with severe expression in a girl incidence of this syndrome is to be about 1 per 50-100 000 males/ L. Burglen1, I. Desguerre2, D. Rodriguez3, G. Ponsot2; year. 1Unit of Medical Genetics, Department of Neuropediatrics, Hôpital We report the observation of a mother and its daughter presenting Trousseau, Paris, France, 2Department of Neuropediatrics, Hôpital a mental retardation, an obesity, a facial dysmorphy, a digital Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, France, 3Department of Neuropediatrics, abnormalities and a deformations of the skeleton, evoking Coffin- Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France. Lowry’s syndrome .The investigates genetic find similar cases in X-linked lissencephaly with absent corpus callosum and ambiguous the family. We begin in this work a comparative study with the data genitalia (XLAG) is one of the distinct malformation syndrome of the literature, we discuss the differential diagnosis, and we shall associated with lissencephaly. Only 9 male patients were reported insist on the interest of the molecular study in a purpose of antenatal since the first description by Berry-Kravis in 1994. All were diagnosis. severely affected with intractable epilepsy from birth, profound mental retardation, temperature instability, growth retardation and ambiguous genitalia. Neuroradiologic findings were lissencephaly 222 Posters - Mental Retardation 223 P0704. Prospective Evaluation Of Audio-Visual Function 2Service d’Endocrinologie et Génétique Médicale, Hôpital des In Down Syndrome Infants Enfants, Toulouse, France. A. Ozkilic, B. Eroglu Kesim, A. Deviren, S. Hacihanefioglu, A. Yuksel; Numerous cytogenetical and molecular evidences suggest that Genetic and Teratology Research Center, Cerrahpasa Medical terminal 22q region is involved in language development. Indeed, Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. many 22qter cryptic deletions were recently reported from patients There is limited knowledge of early development of visual and harbouring a mild mental retardation, absent or few dysmorphic auditory function in Down syndrome. traits, frequent behavioural problems and severe speech impairment In this study audio-visual function of 35 Down syndrome infants (0-6 as a constant feature. We report clinical and molecular data from a months old) were analyzed and followed prospectively 3-6 months family where a terminal 22q deletion was identified. The proband, a later. 8 years old girl suffered of a global development delay with a patent In assessment of auditory function, other than the 7 infants with discrepancy between development of speech and of the other areas. chronic otitis media, brain-stem auditory evoked potential (BAEP) This deletion was inherited from a paternal balanced translocation testing was applied to the remaining 28 infants. Compared with between the terminal end of a 22q arm and the p arm satellites of a age-matched 62 normal children the major anomalies were chromosome 14. The karyotype of her father was 46,XY,ish t(14;22 significantly elevated response threshold (%39 hearing loss) and )(p11.2;q13.33)(D22S1726+,ARSA+;D22S55+,D22S1726-,ARSA-). poorly differentiated wave I. Latency of wave V and I-III, III-V and Interestingly a 22qter partial trisomy was identified on a proband’s I-V interpeak intervals were shorter but were within the 2 standart brother affected with Asperger’s syndrome, including a very precious deviation. As a developmental change, follow-up testing showed that language, rich vocabulary and pedantic speaking style. So, one or interpeak intervals continued to shorten with age. more genes localised in this critical terminal 22q region might be In assessment of visual function, 35 Down syndrome infants (0-6 implicated in language development through gene dosage effect. months old) were evaluated with visual examination and flash visual evoked potentials (FVEP) testing. Compared with age-matched P0707. Peculiar facies and mental retardation in mother 36 normal infants, latency of N2 and P2 were longer (p< 0.05) and and daughter: a possible new syndrome? amplitude of N2 and P2 were smaller in Down syndrome patients (p< E. Lapi, A. Cecconi, E. Andreucci, M. L. Giovannucci Uzielli; 0.05). University of Florence, Firenze, Italy. The results of this study reveal that in Down syndrome the The Authors describe a couple mother-daughter (35 and 11 yrs old development of peripheral hearing and vision is delayed and also respectively), whose phenotype is characterized by a peculiar facies, abnormal. BAEP and VEP testing are proposed to assess the minor anomalies of the limbs and mental retardation in a medium development and detecting the problems of hearing and vision in range. Both of them have broad nasal bridge, upslanting palpebral Down syndrome infants. These tests should be repeated between fissures, high cheekbones, bulbous nasal tip, anteverted nares, long periods of 6-12 months even if the results of initial tests are normal. philtrum, thin and inverted V-shaped upper lip and full lower lip: they appear to be of South East Asian origin rather than Caucasian (which P0705. Cognitive and Behavioral Phenotype of Children they are, also because of their olive complexion). They have a rough with Some Common Dysmorphic Syndromes voice; hands with short digits(<3rd centile), partial skin syndactyly S. A. Shopova1, E. G. Simeonov2, G. Shalamanov3; and clinodactyly of the 5th; stocky feet, with a large big toe. The 1Section of Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Medical mother’s final stature is154cm, quite below her genetic target. The University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Section of Clinical Genetics, Department daughter is growing in the 10th centile (Tanner B1,P1 ). Behavioural of Pediatrics,Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Technical University, alterations have been noticed: attention deficit, hyperactivity, Sofia, Bulgaria. anxiety in both and depressive tendency in the mother. A brain MRI Testing the cognitive capacity is a relatively new approach when does not show anomalies in the daughter, while the mother’s left examining patients having genetic diseases. These diseases often cerebral hemisphere appears underdeveloped, with a “simplified“ tend to be diagnostic problems due to their wide variety. That renders cortical design. EEGs are alterated with no correlated clinical signs. the precise estimation of the cognitive and behavioral phenotype a A good quality, 450 G bands karyotype appears normal in both great importance. our propositae; fragile X is negative; the research of subtelomeric Aim: to study cognitive and behavioral characteristics of patients rearrangements is in progress. with dysmorphic syndromes most often met in clinical practice Using a computerized dysmorphology database, no condition had (Down, Frigali X, Prader-Willi, Williams-Beuren, Noonan and Cornelia a combination of such peculiar facies, minor anomalies of the limbs de Lange) and to define the specific cognitive and behavioral and mental retardation. To the best of our knowledge it looks like we phenotypes. are in front of a recognizable and transmissible syndromic pattern, Results and discussion:The different dismorphic syndromes possibly unique. manifest cognitive capacity deviations of different severety. IQ level in an individual patient changes with age in different ways. In P0708. Angelman syndrome: a genetic and clinical our experience patients with Down, FRAX-A and CdeL syndromes survey of 243 patients. show an intellectual decline with age, as other authors have D. Giardino1, M. T. Bonati1, F. Cogliati1, G. Gottardi1, F. Cavalleri1, observed, while patients having PWS, WBS and NS manifest an F. Natacci2, A. Selicorni3, P. Bonanni4, A. Romeo5, S. Russo1, L. unequivocal tendency to imrove their cognitive skills. The most Larizza6,1; maladaptive behavior is shown by patients with CdeL and FRAX- 1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, 2Istituto Sacra Famiglia, A. The relationship between intellectual functioning and adaptive Cesano Boscone, Italy, 3II- Clinica pediatrica, Università di Milano, skills is in inverse proportion - for example for CdeL syndrome Milan, Italy, 4(5) D.U.NPI, IRCCS Stella Maris,, Calambrone ( Pisa), there are low IQ values and a large number of psychopathological Italy, 5C.R.E.I.- Osp. Fatebenefratelli, Milan, Italy, 6Dipartimento di behavioral symptoms hampering adaptability, while for NS there are Biologia e Genetica, Università di Milano, Milan, Italy. comparatively high IQ values and negligible behavioral deviations. Angelman syndrome (AS) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder Conclusions: The patients with some dismorphic syndromes with a difficult clinical diagnosis and a heterogeneous genetic basis. manifest more or less specific psychological profiles of cognitive and More than 70% of patients carry a 15q microdeletion detectable behavioral characteristics. These profiles may be successfully used by FISH. Up to 5% of patients have maternal UPD, identifiable both in support of diagnostic process and as a basis for adequate by segregation analysis of chromosome 15 microsatellites. Up medical and psychological intervention and counselling of parents. to 5-10% of cases are due to an abnormal imprinting process. M-PCR test reveals all genetic defects except mutations in the P0706. Asperger syndrome and severe language UBE3A/E6-AP gene, which are responsible for the remaining 20% impairment in two siblings, as the type and countertype of cases. We report on 243 patients with a clinical diagnosis of AS of an unbalanced cryptic familial 22qter rearrangement. analyzed by one or more of the following techniques: FISH, M-PCR, P. De Mas1, N. Chassaing1, C. Pienkowski2, S. Julia1, M. Vincent1, G. chromosome 15 haplotyping, UBE3A mutation screening. In order Bourrouillou1, P. Calvas1, E. Bieth1; to define the recurrence risk in IC patients, microdeletions were 1Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, tested by Southern-blot analysis and sequencing of the minimal overlapping region of AS deletion. Fifty-five cases negative just Posters - Mental Retardation 224 225 by FISH or M-PCR were excluded by further analyses because of P0711. A 17p11.2 deletion associated with a mild Smith- insufficient diagnostic criteria at clinical re-evaluation. A laboratory Magenis phenotype and GH deficiency. test confirmed the diagnosis in 66 out of the remaining 188 patients, P. Maraschio1, G. L. Marseglia2, C. Danesino1, E. Spadoni1, P. with 42 deletions, 18 (including 4 familial cases) mutations of UBE3A/ Colapietro3, L. Tiepolo1; E6-AP gene, 5 defects of the imprinting process and one maternal 1University of Pavia - Dipartimento di Patologia Umana ed Ereditaria, UPD. We think that the low percentage of positive cases is likely Pavia, Italy, 2Clinica Pediatrica - IRCCS San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, due to scarce diagnostic criteria leading to misdiagnosis: work on 3Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche - a check list of clinical signs which can predict AS-specific genetic University of Milano, Milano, Italy. lesions is in progress. We also performed comparison of the clinical A 7-years old girl was referred for chromosome analysis because manifestations of our confirmed AS patients across the different of recurrent infections and microcephaly. High resolution banding subgroups aiming at assessing a putative phenotype-genotype revealed an interstitial deletion in 17p11.2. The deletion was correlation. confirmed by FISH with the SMS probe (Oncor). The girl presents with few facial dysmorphic features: anteverted P0709. sleep and its disturbances in Angelman syndrome ears, full upper lip with a “tented” appearance and mild micrognathia. H. de Leersnyder; Overall facial “gestalt” does not resemble the Smith-Magenis Hopital Necker, Paris, France. Syndrome (SMS). Thyroid function is in the normal range, while Angelman syndrome (AS) is a severe neurogenetic disorder, GH secretion was reduced upon stimulation. Her height, at 3rd characterised by severe mental retardation, ataxia, seizures, absence percentile until 5.5 years, has improved to the 10th percentile after of speech and characteristic facial features. We have studied starting replacement therapy. She is microcephalic (below the 3rd sleep behavior of 62 AS patients aged 2 to 20 years through sleep percentile) and has short hands. Immunity function is normal apart questionnaires filled by the parents. Bedtime was between 8 and from a IgA value at the lower limit of normal range. The girl had 10.30 p.m. , awakenings between 6 and 9 am, these results were occasional absence-like episodes and repeated EEGs showed non- similar to control group (30 healthy children aged 2 to 20 years), specific alterations. Psychomotor development evaluation revealed 53% of the children woke-up 1 to 3 times each night, and need a borderline I.Q. She was diagnosed with ADHD (Attention Deficit parent’s attendance to go back asleep. These sleep disturbances Hyperactivity Disorder); she has temper tantrums, occasional have a major impact on parents and family members, who report stereotypic behaviours and mild sleep disturbances, while she never tiredness, depression, becoming sleep-deprived themselves. After attempted to self-injurious behaviours, typical of SMS. FISH, aimed the age of 3 years, children had no naps during the day , and do at defining deletion extent and boundaries, was carried out with not objective fatigue. Adding anti-epileptic medication, 42% of the YACs 795c9 and 828b9 mapping in tel cen order within the SMS patients take different medications for sleep. Patients had maternal deletion interval. Both signals were given by y795c9, while a strongly deletion 15q11-q13 (84%), paternal disomy (10%), imprinting diminished signal was detected on one17p by means of y828b9, defects (1%) or mutations of the UBE3A gene (4%). There was no pointing out that the deletion is more centromerical than the typical phenotype-genotype correlation for sleep disturbances in AS. The SMS one. Further FISH experiments are in progress in order to mechanism of sleep disorders in AS is complex, insomnia may be address the genotype-phenotype correlation on such peculiar 17p related to abnormalities in brain development which may include microdeletion case. abnormal function of the circadian system and seizures play a part in night awakenings. Psychological impact of lack of language could P0712. Results of subtelomeric screening in 52 families find its expression during the night, pointing to anxiety. Therapeutic with unspecific mental retardation. management of sleep disorder in AS remains a necessity for the Z. Helias-Rodzewicz1,2, E. Bocian1, P. Stankiewicz1, E. Obersztyn1, physician and parents. E. Kostyk3, K. Jakubow-Durska1, A. Kutkowska-Kazmierczak1, T. Mazurczak1; P0710. Cellular mosaicism of maternal 15q11 imprinting 1Dept. Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, in an atypical Angelman syndrome without obesity Poland, 2Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Warsaw, B. LeHeup1, C. Philippe1, K. Buiting2, M. Juif-Elmerich3, P. Jonveaux1; Poland, 3Univeristy Children Hospital, Cracow, Poland. 1Departement de Genetique Medicale, CHU de Nancy, Vandoeuvre Recently, it has been shown that subtelomeric chromosome les Nancy, France, 2Institut fur Humangenetik, Universitatklinikum, rearrangements may be a common cause of idiopathic mental Esseb, Germany, 3Service de Pediatrie, Hopital Ste-Croix, Metz, retardation (MR). Such aberrations were found in ~7 % of patients France. with severe or moderate MR and dysmorphic features. However, Atypical forms of Angelman syndrome with obesity, muscular further studies are needed to elucidate their prevalence and to hypotonia and ability to speak have been reported in patients establish more cost-effective selection criteria for subtelomeric test. with methylation pattern of the 15q11 region which supports the We report results of screening studies in 52 families with idiopathic hypothesis of cellular mosaicism for a maternal imprinting (Eur J Hum MR. Apart from MR, the main inclusion criteria were clinical features Genet 1999, 7, 638) . We herewith report a new case with the same suggestive of a chromosomal aberration. Fluorescence in situ pattern of the 15q11 methylation, which extends further the clinical hybridisation with Chromoprobe Multiprobe T System (Cytocell) was pattern of such anomalies. used. In five cases subtle rearrangements were found. Verification The girl was born from healthy parents aged 37 years at conception of the karyotype at a higher resolution level has revealed that two and she is the second child. Pregnancy was uneventful. Length and rearrangements were half cryptic and in two cases both products birthweigth were normal. She walked unaided at 18 months. First of identified translocation could be seen. In one of them it was words were said at 12 months. Language did not develop thereafter. not a subtelomeric rearrangement but it could not be seen in the At 3 years 6 months her weight and height were at the mean for the routine karyotype because of similar banding pattern and the size age. Her head circumference was at -1 sds for age. She exhibited of involved regions. The prevalence of subtelomeric abnormalities mainly hyperactivity and was joyful. Cytogenetic analysis was normal. was 4/52 (7,7%). All identified aberrations were familial in the origin Because of the behavior characteristics the methylation pattern of and no abnormalities were shown in patients with mild MR. Our the 15q11 SNRPN was evaluated. The maternal band was found results confirm previous findings, indicating the important role of fainted on three different samples (SNRPN exon alpha, Southern subtelomeric rearrangements in the aetiology of MR. They also blot, XbaI and NotI double digestion). Methylation-specific PCR at the emphasise the preferential occurrence of such abnormalities in SRPN locus confirmed a faint maternal band. Quantitative Southern patients with severe MR and positive family history for intellectual blot analysis of the critical IC region (AS-SRO) showed a normal disability. Moreover, they also show that higher banding resolution dosage. Therefore IC deletion is unlikely. Sporadic imprinting defect should be used in the routine karyotyping in this group of patients. and cellular mosaicism are likely explanations for such a pattern. The present observation without obesity further extends the clinical P0713. 14q32.2 subtelomeric deletion in a child delineation of this anomaly. with severe congenital anomalies and a cryptic Ackownledgement: We thank the help of B Horsthemke, Institut fur t(Y;14)(p11.3;q32.2). Humangenetik, Universitatklinikum, Essen M. Poscente1, R. Rinaldi2, E. Buffone3, B. Grammatico2, L. Florean4, M. Assumma3, P. Grammatico4,2;224 Posters - Mental Retardation 225 1Medical Genetics, University, Rome, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, San using subtelomeric probes have been introduced. To facilitate a Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Neonatal Intensive Therapy, more efficient analysis, multi-colour hybridisation techniques for S. Camillo-Forlanini Hospital,, Rome, Italy, 4Medical Genetics, subtelomeric probes are being developed. COBRA (COmbined University “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy. Binary RAtio labelling) is a recent multi-colour FISH labelling We describe a newborn with a de novo subtelomeric deletion of technique which combines ratio and combinatorial labelling to attain the terminal portion of the long arm of chromosome 14 due to a especially high multiplicities [Ref. 1, 2]. t(Y;14)(p12.3;q32.2). With the novel “Subtelomere COBRA FISH”, the specific detection The child was born at 36 weeks of gestation from healthy non- of all necessary 41 BAC and PAC FISH probes (second generation consanguineous parents. Fetal ultrasound examination at 28 probe panel, Ref. 3) is possible in only two hybridisations. By weeks showed intrauterine growth retardation and anhydramnios. strict probe selection and characterisation and by using the ULS At birth the child demonstrated: weight 1160 g (<3th centile), length / Universal Linkage System ® labelling technique, high specificity 40 cm (<3th centile), head circumference 28,5 cm (<10th centile), and hybridisation efficiencies could be reached. This allows the short nose with broad nasal root, low set dysmorphic ears, hands unequivocal analysis of 21 respectively 20 probes per hybridisation fingers anomalies, male external genitalia, undescendent left testis, with only two to three metaphases each. In contrast to other imperforate anus and interventricular defect; umbilical cord was subtelomeric multi-colour techniques, the high multiplicities of mono-arterial. The child died on day 19th . Subtelomere COBRA FISH make it possible to differentiate e. g. long Cytogenetic analysis using GTG tecnique revealed a 45,X karyotype. arm and short arm subtelomeric regions of a given chromosome thus Because of the presence of external male genitalia, a FISH analysis permitting the diagnosis of cryptic pericentric inversions in addition to with a SRY specific BAC probe (PHU 14) was performed, showing translocations and deletions. the presence of fluorescent signal in 14q telomeric region . The technique, its validation and first results will be presented. Further FISH analysis carried out with YAC and BAC probes specific References: [1] Eur J Hum Genet (1999) 7: 2-11, [2] Genome Res. for 14q32.3-qter region revealed a subtelomeric deletion with a (2000) 10:861-865, [3] Am J Hum Genet (2000)67:320-332 breakpoint beyond 116 cM. Supported by Deutsche Forschungsgesellschaft / DFG, Doktor Father’s karyotype with GTG and FISH analysis with PHU 14 probe Robert Pfleger-Stiftung, Richard Winter-Stiftung and the University of was normal. Bonn (BONFOR program) At least ten patients with a 14q terminal deletion have been reported with some common clinical features: an exact characterization of the P0716. Studies Of Telomeric Fish Screening And deleted segment in our case can contribute to the delineation of a High Resolution Cgh In Populations With Recurrent distinct 14qter deletion syndrome. Miscarriages Or Mental Retardation B. Benzacken1, E. Pipiras1, J. P. Siffroi2, C. Bauman3, L. Burglen4, D. P0714. Subtelomeric Chromosome Abnormalities in Heron5, T. Billette de Villemeur4, Y. Alembik6, J. Gaudelus1, J. P. Wolf1, Patients with Developmental Disorder P. Bitoun1; K. Rapakko, A. Mustonen, T. Lopponen, H. Kokkonen, J. Leisti; 1CHU Paris-Nord, Bondy, France, 2Hopital Tenon, Paris, France, Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital/University 3Hopital Robert Debre, Paris, France, 4Hopital Trousseau, Paris, of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. France, 5Hopital de La Pitié, Paris, France, 6Hopital de Hautepierre, Subtle chromosomal abnormalities have been reported to occur Strasbourg, France. in 7.4% of patients with moderate to severe mental retardation Aberrations of chromosomal telomeres are a frequent cause as identified with a multiprobe telomere FISH protocol (Knight et of mental retardation, particularly if they are associated with al. 1999). We have studied 69 patients with mental retardation dysmorphism. It has been postulated that they could also account for or developmental delay, and non-specific dysmorphic features, recurrent miscarriages. who had a normal 550 band G-banded karyotype. FISH testing OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study is to use and compare was performed using the Cytocell Multiprobe-T system. Clinically both Fluorescent In Situ Hybridisation (FISH) and high resolution significant abnormalities were found in six patients (8.7%, see Table). Comparative Genome Hybridisation (CGH) in 2 populations: Three cases were familial. In addition we detected a common familial children with mental retardation, and couples having had at least 3 polymorphism del(2)(q37.3) in four patients (5.8%). unexplained miscarriages. Patient Karyotype Parents PATIENTS : 200 children with idiopathic mental retardation and 57 couples (114 patients) were studied after informed consent according 46,XX,der(2)t(2;10)(q37.1; maternal balanced 1 to the Helsinki convention. Of 200 patients 29 were excluded q26.3) translocation because they had abnormal karyotype, non-telomeric microdeletion 46,XY,der(9)t(9;19)(q34;p paternal balanced 2 or a sib in the study. 13.3) translocation METHODS: FISH was performed using the Cytocell or Adjenix 3 46,XX,der(18)t(2;18)(p25.3 normal karyotype probes. CGH was performed using the Adjenix Nick Translation kit ;q23) and the Cytovision Image Analyser. 4 46,XX,del(1)(p36) normal karyotype RESULTS: In the mental retardation group 13/171 anomalies were 46,X,der(X)ins(X;9)(q22;p24 maternal 46,X,der(X)ins(X;9)(q found or 7.6% using FISH. Anomalies were often familial and 5 5 .2p24.3) 22;p24.2p24.3) involved chromosome 22q. CGH was performed in 50 patients: 39 picked at random and 11 to validate the method. One familial 6 46,XY,del(20)(q13.3) normal karyotype microdeletion was found involving chromosome 17. 7 couples had Detailed clinical findings of the patients and their relatives will be an abnormal Karyotype but no FISH anomalies were found in the presented. miscarriage group. Subtelomeric FISH analysis proved to be a useful method in the CONCLUSIONS : Telomeric FISH screening is useful for diagnostic detection of cryptic subtelomeric changes and provides a means for and prognostic purposes in children with mental retardation and genetic counselling and prenatal diagnostics. normal karyotype resulting in 7.6% anomalies. It does not seem useful for couples with recurrent miscarriages.The value of CGH will be discussed. P0715. A novel method for the detection of subtelomeric rearrangements: Subtelomere COBRA FISH P0717. FISH characterization of 16p11.2-p12.2 tandem H. Engels1,2, A. Ehrbrecht1, S. Zahn1, K. Bosse1, J. Vrolijk2, P. Propping1, G. Schwanitz1, A. K. Raap2, J. C. A. G. Wiegant2, H. J. duplication in a dysmorphic patient with severe mental Tanke2; retardation and autistic behaviuor. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, F. Natacci1, P. Finelli2, G. Gottardi2, C. Zuccarini1, D. Giardino2, M. 2Laboratory for Cytochemistry and Cytometry, Dept. of Molecular Cell Sala1, L. Larizza3; Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. 1Foundation Institute Sacra Famiglia, Cesano Boscone, Italy, Cryptic subtelomeric chromosome rearrangements have recently 2Cytogenetic Laboratory,Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, been implied in the aetiology of mental retardation. Systematic 3Department of Biology and Genetics, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. FISH screening techniques to detect such rearrangements Chromosome 16p partial trisomy is a rare anomaly, described in Posters - Mental Retardation 226 227 the literature in less than 30 patients. We report on the genotype/ Screening for metabolic diseases and repeated chromosomal phenotype correlations drawn on a 23 years old dysmorphic analyses were normal as were parental chromosomal analyses. Brain male affected by mental retardation and autistic behaviour, who MRI showed periventricular leucodystrophy. was found to have a 46,XY,add(16)(p13) karyotype, redefined A screening for cryptic subtelomeric chromosome aberrations (Vysis as 46,XY,dup(16)(p12.1p12.2). The detailed clinical evaluation ToTelVysion) detected a cryptic unbalanced translocation 11qter / showed the presence of hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge and tip, 16qter causing partial monosomy 11q25 and partial trisomy 16q24. short phyltrum, macrostomia, thick lips, short stature, joint laxity. Parental analyses demonstrated a maternal balanced translocation FISH analysis by using a WCP and a PCP chromosome 16 probes t(11;16)(q25;q24)(VIJyRM2072-,16QTel013+;VIJyRM2072+,16QTel0 confirmed duplication of 16p11.2-12 region. FISH studies with YAC 13-). Both findings were confirmed by the novel Subtelomere-COBRA probes belonging to WC16.2 contig and BAC probes mapping in multi-colour FISH method. Further family studies including the the region between 16p12.3 and 16p11.2 allowed to restrict the analysis of the ongoing pregnancy will be presented. duplication to the 16p12.1-12.2 region; the inclusion of 16p11.2 Given the proband’s relatively mild phenotype, the results emphasise band in the duplicated fragment is still under test. The comparison the importance of subtelomere studies in mildly retarded patients. between clinical features of 16p trisomic patients in the literature and Supported by Deutsche Forschungsgesellschaft / DFG, Richard those of our patient carrying a precisely characterized chromosomal Winter-Stiftung, Doktor Robert Pfleger-Stiftung and the University of abnormality can improve the karyotype/phenotype correlations for Bonn (BONFOR program). 16p imbalances. The absence of microcephaly, heart and genital abnormalities in our patient and in the other one with a similar16p P0720. Molecular cytogenetic characterization of two anomaly, previously reported, suggests that distal 16p is involved in cases with cryptic rearrangements of the 6q subtelomeric the pathogenesis of these anomalies, while the presence of severe region. mental retardation with autistic behaviour, may be attributed to more P. Grammatico1,2, A. Novelli3, M. Poscente1, C. Ceccarini3, C. De centromeric 16p sequences. Bernardo2, B. Dallapiccola3,1,2; 1Medical Genetics, University “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 2Medical P0718. Clinical, cytogenetic and molecular analyses of Genetics, San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3CSS Mendel, partial 21q monosomy in a girl with mental retardation, Rome, Italy. marfanoid habitus and minor dysmorphic features We report two cases with cryptic rearrangements of the 6q J. Wirth1, B. Lemcke2, I. Kennerknecht2, R. Exeler2, D. Ehling1,3; subtelomeric region characterized by using FISH techniques. 1Developmental Biology and Molecular Pathology, University of Case n. 1 is a 28 years old male with: severe mental retardation, Bielefeld, Germany, 2Westfaelische Wilhelms-Universitaet Muenster, hypoplasic malar regions, cupid bowed upper lip, everted lower lip, Institut fuer Humangenetik, Germany, 3Praenadia GmbH, Muenster, micrognatia, large, anteverted and low set ears with prominent anti- Germany. helix, surgically corrected nasal dysmorphisms and slight bilateral Phenotypic and molecular analysis of patients with partial clinodactyly. Standard karyotype and molecular test for FMR1 gene monosomy 21 resulting from translocations, ring chromosomes appeared to be normal. or pure partial monosomy 21 allows to define which regions of FISH analysis for subtelomeric regions using the Cytocell Multiprobe chromosome 21 contribute to the generation of specific aspects of T System showed the 6q deletion that was revealed to be de novo. A the 21q- syndrome. Here we report on the clinical, cytogenetic and further characterization of the breakpoint was carried out with 6q27 molecular characterization of a `pure´ de novo partial monosomy region YAC and BAC probes. 21 with a deletion of 21q22.2-qter. FISH mapping of cytogenetically Case n. 2 is a 9 years and 9/12 male child showing severe and genetically anchored YAC and BAC clones resulted in the psycomotor retardation, patent ductus arteriosus, vescico-ureteral identification of a breakpoint spanning BAC clone. Our FISH results reflux, frontal bossing, short palpebral fessures, lateral displacement clearly showed that the deletion breakpoint is located distal to of inner canthi, flat nasal bridge, big and low set years with prominent ETS2 gene, in the proximal part of the region 21q22.2. Furthermore anti-helix, triangular mouth, long upper lip, micrognatia, barrel thorax, molecular studies using polymorphic markers supported these scoliosis, wide spaced and low set nipples, bilateral hip dislocation, findings and showed that the derivative chromosome 21 was clubfoot, campto-clinodactyly of toes. Standard karyotype was normal of paternal origin. The patient who presented with mild mental while the FISH analysis by using the Cytocell Multiprobe T System retardation, marfanoid habitus and minor dysmorphic features, is evidenced a 2q deletion and a 6q duplication. lacking most of the typical features seen in the 21q- phenotype and These two cases stress the necessity of using specific subtelomeric thus is quite unique. Our findings support the suggestion that the loss FISH probes to detect cryptic rearrangements in patients with of the region at 21q22.2-qter is critical for only some minor aspects syndromic mental retardation. of the 21q- syndrome. Genotype-phenotype correlations of our case The precise characterization of the involved regions by using and other reported cases will be discussed. molecular techniques may be useful in order to clinically define new microdeletion/microduplication syndromes. P0719. Unbalanced subtelomeric translocation 11q;16q in a mildly retarded boy with severe speech delay and P0721. FISH analysis of replication and transcription of minor dysmorphic signs chromosome X loci in Rett syndrome S. Zahn1, A. Ehrbrecht1, D. Seufert1, G. Schwanitz1, H. Engels1, B. I. Y. Iourov1, A. D. Kolotiy2, S. G. Vorsanova2, P. M. Sheinson1, I. V. Albrecht2; Soloviev1, Y. B. Yurov1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human 1National Center of Mental Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, Genetics, Essen, Germany. 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Moscow, Russian We report on a mildly retarded boy, whom we investigated at the Federation. ages of 2 and 4 1/2 years. Differential replication staining using BrdU + Hoechst 33258 He is the first child of a healthy non-consanguineous couple. The technique has been carried out on a series of 60 girls with Rett mother is currently pregnant. syndrome (RTT). The results indicated that regions Xq23 and Xq28 of After an uneventful pregnancy and delivery by caesarean section, inactive chromosome X could contain early replicating and, therefore, measurements were normal (3130g , 47,5cm, 34cm). Neonatally, the transcriptionally active loci at RTT. Interphase fluorescence in situ boy developed meningitis. His craniofacial dysmorphism included hybridisation (FISH) studies of replication timing, using chromosome a high forehead, slightly depressed, broad nasal bridge and tip X specific genomic DNA probes, was applied to determine the loci with anteverted nares, thick lips, small mandible and high arched with altered replication and transcription at RTT. 14 randomly selected palate. He had pes equinovarus, mild muscular hypotonia and right PAC clones for Xp, Xcen and Xq were used. Two clones from Xq28 kryptorchidism. (anonymous clone PAC 24.23.0 and PAC 671D9, containing MeCP2 His motor development supported by physiotherapy was normal locus), probably, escape inactivation in late-replicating chromosome (crawling with 6 months, sitting with 8 months, walking with 13 X in RTT patients. Therefore, region Xq28 could contain the genes months). He suffered from repeated otitis media and his hearing was escaping X- inactivation and expressing from the human active severely impaired. His active and passive verbal development is and inactive chromosomes X. These results support the hypothesis severely delayed. proposing the disturbances in dosage compensation effect due to 226 Posters - Mental Retardation 227 aberrant activation of genes in inactive chromosome X at RTT genes causing this disease in 1991 allowed development of precise (di-allelic expression instead of mono-allelic). Our results indicate that laboratory diagnostics methods. Nevertheless, for many years these MecP2 itself could escape X-inactivation and reduce the pathogenic methods remained expensive, time- and labor-consuming. This effect of mutated allele at RTT. Supported by Copernicus2 and INTAS hampered the development of fragile X screening programs, the grants. necessity of which is widely accepted. We present a molecular test for fragile X syndrome as well as P0722. Molecular-cytogenetic studies of Rett syndrome for FRAXE mental retardation based on FMR1/FMR2 promoter (RTT) in Russia: the investigation of 4 boys and 81 girls methylation detection via methylation-sensitive PCR. It may be S. G. Vorsanova1, Y. B. Yurov2, V. Y. Ulas1, I. A. Demidova1, A. D. used not only for fragile X diagnostics, but also as a non-invasive Kolotiy1, A. K. Beresheva1, V. O. Sharonin1, M. Giovanucci-Uzielly3, L. screening test on umbilical cord blood to identify fragile X (FRAXA Giunti4, I. V. Soloviev2; and FRAXE) patients and those carrying extra X chromosome(s) 1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Moscow, Russian among newborn boys (47,XXY; 48,XXXY; 49,XXXXY; 46,XX male Federation, 2National Center of Mental Health, Moscow, Russian karyotypes and mosaic variants). It may become a powerful tool for Federation, 3Centre of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University detecting fragile X carriers alternative to overall screening of young of Florence, Frorence, Italy, 4Centre of Genetics and Molecular women, for the latter is associated with serious technical, ethical and Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. financial problems. The methylation-sensitive test proposed here Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder is one of the most efficient and cost-effective screening methods, with the incidence of 2.5% in mentally retarded girls in Russia. We for it allows detection of genetic abnormalities with a total incidence have performed cytogenetic studies of 85 patients (81 girls and 4 of approximately 1:500 and is at least tenfold less expensive then boys) with clinical picture of RTT. Molecular analysis in 30 randomly conventional molecular detection of fragile X or extra X chromosomes selected RTT patients revealed that 84% of them have mutations in in males. Introduction of such a test would allow early adequate MeCP2 gene. Among 85 patients: 81 girls with clinical picture of RTT therapeutic and psychological activities towards boys with frequent were with normal female karyotype (46,XX); two boy was with normal forms of X-linked genetic abnormalities and, in combination with male karyotype in cells of blood (46,XY) and two boys were with cascade screening in families, reduce considerably the incidence of mosaic forms of Kleinfelter’s syndrome (47,XXY/46,XY) in blood and the fragile X syndrome. muscle cells. 24 mothers and parents of RTT girls were with normal karyotype, three mothers - with mosaic form of Turner syndrome P0725. X inactivation and fragile X methylation in human (45,X/46,XX), mosaic form of trisomy X syndrome (46,XX/47,XXX) placentas and one - mosaic karyotype -47,XX,+mar/48,XXX,+mar. We analysed P. Steinbach1, S. Jakubiczka2, T. Bettecken3; chromosome X in lymphocytes of 81 affected girls with clinical picture 1Universitätsklinikum, Ulm, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, of RTT using BrdU + Gimsa staining technique. Specific type of Magdeburg, Germany, 3GSF Forschungszentrum, Neuherberg, inactive chromosome X (so-called type “C”) with unusual staining of Germany. chromatin in long arm of the chromosome X was found in 76 (93%) In female somatic cells X inactivation is associated with differential girls with RTT. This technique was positively used for presymptomatic CpG methylation on the X chromosomes, e.g., the LINE1 element of diagnosis of RTT in five girls in affected families. We believe that the DXS255 minisatellite is extensively methylated only on the active the phenomenon of altered chromatin conformation in inactive X whereas CpGs in the androgen receptor and the FMR1 gene are chromosome X could be used as laboratory test for preclinical methylated only on the inactive X chromosome. Full expansion of the diagnosis of the RTT. Supported by Copernicus2 and INTAS grants. FMR1 CGG repeat in male and female fragile X patients is usually associated with promotor hypermethylation. In chorionic villi of female P0723. Crytic translocation resulting in Angelman placentas, X inactivation methylation differs significantly from somatic syndrome: implication for genetic counselling cells. Also, differences between X inactivation and full mutation C. Missirian1, P. Malzac1, J. Arfi1, C. Vo Van1, X. Chauve1, M. A. methylation of FMR1 have been reported. We have evaluated the Voelckel1, M. G. Mattei2, A. Moncla1; methylation status of FMR1 and other X linked loci in chorionic villi 1Department of Medical Genetics, Marseille, France, 2Unité INSERM from first trimester and full term female placentas of normal and 491, Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille, France. fragile X pre/full mutation individuals. In contrast to somatic tissues, Angelman syndrome is a well-characterised neurobehavioral X inactivation methylation was absent from DXS255 and from the disorder, associated with different abnormalities: large de novo FMR1 promotor at any stage of development while methylation maternal deletions of 15q11q13, paternal uniparental disomy of was present on other loci. In contrast to X inactivation methylation, chromosome 15, mutations in the UBE3A gene and imprinting defect. fragile X full mutation hypermethylation has been detected in a 13 Most Angelman syndrome cases result from de novo deletion related week old male fetus but was frequently not seen in the first trimenon. to the presence of repeat elements, duplicons, flanking 15q11q13 Human chorionic villi are hypomethylated. Differential methylation region. and inactivation of X-linked genes seems to depend on tissue However, few reported cases demonstrate that deletions may be and locus specific methylase interaction as proposed for fragile X the result of cryptic structural chromosomal abnormality which hypermethylation. involve the 15q11q13 region. This notion led us to systematically control the maternal chromosome 15 structure with molecular P0726. Prenatal diagnosis of X-linked Opitz G/BBB cytogenetic method. This strategy allowed us to identify a patient with syndrome 15q11q12 deletion resulting from malsegregation of cryptic maternal C. N. Yapijakis1,2, I. Konstantopoulou3, T. Antoniadi1, D. reciprocal translocation between chromosome 15 and 22: 46, XX, Yannoukakos3; t(15;22)(q12;q11.2). 1Dept. of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bioerevna Diagnostic This observation illustrates the necessity to currently used molecular Center, Athens, Greece, 2Dept. of Neurology, University of Athens cytogenetic method to detect such rearrangement taking account Medical School, Athens, Greece, 3Lab. of Molecular Diagnostics, their high recurrence risk. Research Center Demokritos, Athens, Greece. Opitz G/BBB syndrome (OS) is an inherited disorder characterized P0724. Methylation-sensitive multiplex FRAXA-FRAXE by midline defects and psychosomatic retardation. OS is genetically PCR assay is a powerful non-invasive neonatal screening heterogeneous with a X-linked and an autosomal form known (respectively Xp22 and 22q11.2). We describe here the first (to our method capable of detecting genetic abnormalities in 1: knowledge) reported case of prenatal diagnosis of X-linked OS. 500 newborn boys. A 9 year-old Greek boy presented with typical signs of OS, V. Strelnikov1, V. Zemlyakova2, V. Artamonov3, E. Vasil’ev2; including mental/growth retardation, hypertelorism, strabismus, 1Institute for Molecular Medicine, Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, epicanthus,narrow palpebral fissures,flattened nasal bridge, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian flat filtrum, micrognathia, cranial assymetry and brachycephaly, Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, prominent forehead, low set ears, oesophageal stenosis, heart 3Russian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. defects, corpus callosum hypoplasia, seizures, hypotonia, and Fragile X syndrome (FRAXA mental retardation) is the most frequent hypospadias.There was no family history with similar cases.The form of inherited mental retardation. Discovery of molecular defect Posters - Mental Retardation 228 229 boys’ parents were apparently normal, unrelated, and had no other P0729. Prevalence of fragile-X female carrier in Taiwan is child.Another pregnancy was terminated at 6 months, because US lower than expected revealed that the male fetus presented with laryngotracheal cleft C. Tzeng1, W. Chen2, K. Huang2; and clubfoot.The boy had a normal karyotype, and FISH analysis of 1Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei Foundation Medical Center, the DiGeorge region of 22q11.2, revealed no abnormalities found in Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Department of Obstetrics and autosomaly inherited OS cases.We therefore searched for a mutation Gynecology, Chi-Mei Foundation Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan in the MID1 gene, which is responsible for X-linked OS. SSCP Republic of China. analysis of the whole gene revealed a child’s DNA segment of 345 bp Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is not treatable today, but can be with an abnormal electrophoretic pattern compared to normal controls prevented by prenatal genetic examination. Identifying female and his father.The boy’s mother was heterozygous for the abnormal mutant carrier before or at early pregnancy through a wide screening segment. program is considered a practical approach. However, the carrier The parents asked for prenatal testing for OS. DNA from CVS was prevalence in a population and cost of screening test should be obtained at 12th week of pregnancy and screened for the mutant carefully evaluated prior to implementation of such a program. To MID1, in addition to two chromosome Y genes.The fetus was male ascertain the prevalence of FXS in Taiwan, we screened a total of and had the OS mutation, so after genetic counseling, the parents 1002 pregnant women using a high-resolution Southern blot test to decided to terminate the pregnancy. examine the pooled DNA, and a simple non-radioactive PCR test to identify heterozygous women (Tzeng et al; Diagn Mol Pathol P0727. A rheostat model for a rapid and reversible form 2001;10:34-41). From these women, we did not find any carrier of of imprinting-dependent evolution premutation and/or full mutation. There were 22 women with an allele A. L. Beaudet, Y. Jiang; exhibiting CGG-repeat between 40 and 52, including two with 48 and Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX. three with 52. Approximate one third of the women could be rapidly The evolutionary advantages of genomic imprinting are puzzling. excluded from being a carrier with the simple PCR test by proving We propose that genomic imprinting evolved as a mechanism both their alleles were different and within normal CGG-repeat that maximizes the inter-individual variability in the rates of gene range. This is the first study reporting the female fragile-X carrier expression for dosage-sensitive loci that can alter the phenotype over rate in Asia population, with a result indicating that the carrier rate in a wide continuum with minimal unrelated deleterious effects, and we Taiwan is lower than that reported from Israel, Finland, Canada, and refer to this as a rheostat model. We hypothesize 1) that genomic the United States, ranging between 1:113 and 1:320. Therefore, we imprinting provides a haploid selective advantage (HSA) - not an do not recommend such a program to screen general population in original proposal; 2) that many imprinted genes have evolved genetic Taiwan. Whether it is worthy for women with family history of mental and epigenetic mechanisms that facilitate quantitative hypervariability retardation with undermined cause needs to be further investigated. (QH) of gene expression; 3) that the combination of haploid selective advantage and quantitative hypervariability makes possible a rapid P0730. 5 years of molecular diagnosis of Fragile X and reversible form of imprinting-dependent evolution (IDE) that can syndrome (1997-2001): a collaborative study of 22 mediate changes in growth, behavior, and perhaps other traits; 4) laboratories in France. that this enhanced adaptability to a changing environment provides V. Biancalana1, C. Beldjord2, B. de Martinville3, E. Bieth4, M. Blayau5, selective advantage as an assisted form of evolution; and 5) that J. Bonnefont6, I. Creveaux7, V. Cusin8, M. Doco-Fenzy9, F. Fellmann10, these mechanisms have provided at least one of the driving forces F. Gerson11, A. Guiochon-Mantel12, C. Houdayer13, M. Kottler14, G. for the evolution of genomic imprinting in mammals. The rheostat Lesca15, C. Philippe16, F. Prieur17, H. Puissant18, M. Raynaud19, P. model suggests some nontraditional genetics including both genetic Saugier-Veber20, A. Taillandier21, L. Taine22, M. Voelckel23; and epigenetic variants contributing to an integrated mechanism of 1Laboratoire Diagnostic Génétique, Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire mixed Mendelian and non-Mendelian inheritance, the possibility that Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire - Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, the majority of variants are not intrinsically deleterious but are each 3Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Lille, France, 4Service de potentially advantageous depending on the environment, a reversible Génétique Médicale, Toulouse, France, 5Laboratoire de Génétique form of assisted evolution, and the ability to protect a silent allele Moléculaire, Rennes, France, 6Département de Génétique from selection for many generations but reactivate and expand it in Moléculaire - Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 7Laboratoire Biochimie the population quickly. Médicale et Biologie Moléculaire, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 8Laboratoire Biochimie Génétique - Hôpital Debré, Paris, France, P0728. Characterization of a novel brain specific 9Laboratoire cytogénétique, génétique et biologie prénatale, Reims, transcript as candidate for imprinting France, 10Service de cytogénétique, Besançon, France, 11Laboratoire S. Worch, I. Hansmann, D. Schlote; Génétique Moléculaire, Nantes, France, 12Laboratoire d’hormonologie Institut fuer Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie, Halle, et biologie moléculaire, Le Kremin-Bicêtre, France, 13Biochimie et Germany. Biologie Moléculaire - Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 14Laboratoire We have identified a novel human gene on chromosome 20q13, biochimie B, Caen, France, 15Laboratoire Génétique Moléculaire, a region known to be syntenic to distal mouse chromosome 2 Lyon, France, 16Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Nancy, France, containing imprinted genes. The human transcript is strongly 17Laboratoire Génétique, St-Etienne, France, 18Service de génétique expected to be brain specific as Northern analysis of 8 tissues CHU, Angers, France, 19Service biochimie et génétique, Tours, revealed expression of a 3.2 kb and a 3.0 kb transcript in brain France, 20Laboratoire Génétique Moléculaire, Rouen, France, only. The corresponding cDNA (AJ311122) contains a 1680 bp ORF 21Centre d’étude de biologie prénatale, Versailles, France, 22Service distributed on 13 exons spanning a genomic region of approximately 250 kb. de génétique médicale, Bordeaux, France, 23Laboratoire de The homologous mouse cDNA (AK005136) contains a 1680 Génétique Moléculaire, Marseille, France. bp ORF either, and multiple tissue Northern analysis revealed The fragile X syndrome is the most common cause of inherited 3 major transcripts of 3.3 kb, 2.9 kb and 2.5 kb visible in brain mental retardation. A preliminary study of the efficiency of the only emphasizing the human expression pattern. During detailed screening in mentally retarded probands with no previous familial expression analysis using 8 different brain specific tissues a complex diagnosis was done in Strasbourg with a comparison between data pattern has been detected concerning the quantity of every single from 1991-1994 and 1997-2000 (1058 and 2771 families analyzed transcript depending on analyzed tissue. A developmental specific respectively). This comparison showed a quite stable efficiency of expression pattern has been found during embryogenesis displaying the diagnosis since 1994 (between 1.5 to 3.2% of positive cases), weak signals from day 10 pc and strong signals from day 15 pc and some improvements in its precocity and exhaustiveness with a onwards to adult mice suggesting a function from late development. decrease of the age at diagnosis of the proband (average :16 to 12 Database analysis using translated human and mouse gene products years) and an increase of the percentage of families detected with revealed homology to several hypothetical proteins of yet unknown only a sporadic case (35 to 65%) or with a female proband (7.7 to function sharing a striking homology of approximately 120 aa at 15%). the C-terminal end suggesting the existence of a shared domain, This study was enlarged to 23 laboratories and we will present the evolutionary conserved down to D. melanogaster and C. elegans. results covering 5 years of screening. The preliminary data from 18 This work was supported by DHGP. laboratories are in agreement with the above results. 15517 families 228 Posters - Mental Retardation 229 were studied, and allowed the identification of 351 FraX probands. PCR analysis in 14 causes from 79. We performed the methylation The efficiency is 2.26%. The average age of FraX probands detected analysis for group of 8 patients with detected CGG-expansion or was 11. The detection concerned a sporadic case in 56% of the negative PCR analysis (CGG-expansion or deletion). Hin6.1 is a families, and a female in 12%. methylation-sensitive enzyme that cuts only unmethylated recognition 225 of the 351 families were analysed further in each laboratory, sites. The PCR of Hin6.1-restricted DNA by use of primers flanking leading to the testing of 463 females at risk, among whom 338 the FRAXA CpG islands amplifies only the non-restricted (inactivated) carriers of premutations or full mutations were diagnosed, and to 52 copies of CpG islands. We detected hypermethylation in samples prenatal diagnoses. with CGG-expansion (5/8) as well as in samples with negative PCR The data from the 23 laboratories will be presented, with issues (3/8). This test is very simple, inexpensive and effective method. At concerning premature ovarian failure and premutation discovered in a our mind, this test would be useful for performing diagnosis, postnatal mentally retarded proband. and prenatal diagnostics as a control of Southern blot analysis and direct PCR analysis and for screening patients with mental P0732. Five years experience with DIG labeled probes on retardation and newborn boys. Southern blots applied in Fragile X diagnostics W. H. Deelen, C. Jansen, S. R. Ramlakhan, I. Labrijn-Marks, R. P0735. Mutation spectrum in Rett syndrome in Denmark Olmer, D. Dooijes, A. M. W. vanden Ouweland, D. J. J. Halley; J. B. Nielsen1,2, K. Ravn2, M. Schwartz2; Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 1John F. Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Rigshospitalet, The DIG labeling and detection system is a simple system to detect Copenhagen, Denmark. single copy genes on Southern blots. DIG labeled probes are at At present 88 patients have been registered in Denmark with the least as sensitive as 32 P labeled probes, they are very stable diagnosis Rett syndrome, 87 female patients and one boy. They were and faster and safer to work with. In our hands, incorporation of born in the period 1923 - 1999. Seven have died at ages between DIG-dUTP by PCR is the most preferred labeling method, which 11 and 65 years. Seventy-four have been screened for mutations in generates highly specific probes. The hybridized probe can be MECP2 by sequencing the exons 2-4. In 62 patients a mutation was detected after hybridization with an alkaline-phosphatase antibody identified (84 %), 48 single base substitutions, 12 small deletions and and CDP-star as a substrate. We have been using the DIG technique two small additions. The single base substitutions were 23 nonsense in our diagnostic tests for fragile X syndrome. Since this is a triplet mutations: Y141X(2), R168X(5), R255X(7), R270X(3) and R294X(6) expansion syndrome with a wide range of fragment lengths, it is a and 25 missense mutations: R106W(4), R133C(2), S134C(1), critical application for Southern blotting. The DIG labeling method T158M(11), P302L(1), R306C(5) and R309W(1). proved to be a reliable single test that discriminates between R309W has not earlier been reported. The patient has a very mild normal alleles, premutations, full mutations and mosaics. Postnatal variant form of Rett syndrome with only a few of the typical traits. screening involved > 2000 samples and we identified 30 patients and There is a slight tendency towards a milder phenotype in the cases 31 carriers. We did 26 prenatal diagnoses and found 8 affected and 3 with a missense or a late truncating mutation. But it applies to all the carrier fetuses. recurrent mutations, R133C excepted, that the phenotype varies from mild to severe. P0733. Analysis of FMR 1 methylation in Fragile X The oldest of the seven patients with the R255X mutation is 27 years old and still able to walk independently, while the youngest is 2 years Syndrome in Iranian Population old and probably will never be able to walk. The oldest of the 11 M. Hasanzad1, S. Hosseini Amini1,2, F. Taghizadeh1,2, S. Teimourian1,2, patients with the T158M mutation is 78 years old, she walked with R. Karimi-Nejad2, Y. Shafeghati1,2, m. Karimi-Nejad2, H. Najmabadi1,2; support until she was 41 years old, while three of these patients, 2-9 1Genetics Research Center the Social Welfare and Rehabilitation years of age, have never walked independently. University., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Karimi-Nejad Pathology For details about the boy, see abstract by Ravn et al. and Genetic Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Fragile X syndrome is the most common cause of inherited mental retardation. This syndrome is knows to be the result of a dynamic P0736. Low frequency of MECP2 mutations in mental trinucleotid mutation at the 5’ UTR (Untranslated region) of the FMR1 retardation of unknown origin: implications for routine (Fragile X Mental Retardation) gene. DNA diagnostics We use PCR as a pre-screen and only to proceed to southern blot H. G. Yntema, T. Kleefstra, A. R. Oudakker, B. B. A. de Vries, W. on those sample which fail to amplify (males) or show a single Nillesen, E. A. Sistermans, H. G. Brunner, B. C. J. Hamel, H. van normal alleles (females). The remaining samples were subjected Bokhoven; to southern blot analysis that often combined with methylation Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. analysis by restriction enzyme digestion with a methylation-sensitive Mutations in the methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MECP2) gene are enzyme. Determining methylation status EcoR I is combined with a not always lethal in males. MECP2 mutations have been found in methylation sensitive enzyme Nru I was used. males with severe mental retardation with or without progressive In both procedures PCR and Southern Blot analysis non- radioactive encephalopathy, males with an Angelman-like phenotype, and males protocol were used PCR product were detected by silver staining and with mild nonspecific mental retardation. It was suggested that the digoxignin was used in Southern Blot. frequency of mutations in MECP2 in mentally retarded males equals Total of 275 individuals from 200 families with at least one mentally the frequency of the CGG expansion in the FMR1 gene. In order to retarded child were examined 110 case had a full mutation, 17 with determine if MECP2 screening should be implemented in a routine a permutation and 148 were normal. In prenatal diagnosis that diagnostic setting for patients with nonspecific mental retardation, was performed for 8 fetuses from these families 2 normal males, 1 we tested a cohort of 500 male and 100 female mentally retarded normal females 3 fullmutation males and 2 fullmutation females were patients who were negative for the expansions across the FMR1 detected. CGG repeat. Furthermore, 70 mentally retarded patients with a clinical diagnosis of Angelman syndrome, but without a molecular P0734. CGG-repeat expansion and metilation status abnormality on 15q, were included in this study. In each of these of the promotor region of FMR1 gene analysis in the three patient groups only one causative mutation could be identified. Several amino acid changes appeared to be polymorphisms after Fragile-X sindrome patients from Ukraine testing unaffected male family members. Because one of these N. V. Gryschenko, S. G. Malarchuk, L. A. Livshits; patients showed a Prader-Willi like phenotype, we performed MECP2 Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine. mutation analysis in 100 patients with a clinical but no molecular FRAXA is folate sensitive fragile site, which associated with X-linked diagnosis of Prader-Willi syndrome. Until now no mutations have mental retardation. FMR1 gene, whose 1-st exon includes the been found. We conclude that the incidence of MECP2 mutations in FRAXA site on Xq27.3, accounts for nearly 20% of all X-linked forms patients with mental retardation of unknown origin is low and we do of mental retardation. The fragility in this site is due to expansion of not favour implementation of this gene in routine DNA diagnostics. CGG-reports, which associated with hypermethylated CpG islands. Results of the mutation analyses and clinical findings in the patients For this study we selected the group of patients with Fragile-X with a MECP2 mutation will be presented. syndrome phenotype from Ukraine. We detected CGG-expansion in FMR1 gene by Southern blot analysis using pX6 probe and/or direct Posters - Mental Retardation 230 231 P0737. Large Deletions of entire Exons of MECP2 gene, Rett syndrome (RS) is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental may represent the genetic defect in some RTT patients disorder that almost exclusively affects girls. A prevalence is with no mutations found in the coding region by using estimated to be 1:10, 000 to 1:15, 000 females. Patients with classic RS are characterized by a period of normal growth and development DNA sequencing analysis followed by regression with loss of speech and acquired motor M. L. Giovannucci Uzielli, L. Giunti, S. Guarducci, E. Anichini; skills. Neurologic abnormalities include spastic paraparesis, ataxia, University of Florence, Firenze, Italy. intermittent hyperventilation, and epilepsy. Growth retardation, Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked progressive neurodevelopmental scoliosis, and autonomic dysfunction are common. RS is caused disorder. Affected females develop normally until 6-18 months of age, by mutations in X-linked MECP2 gene, encoding for methyl-CpG- then gradually lose speech and purposeful hand use, and develop binding protein 2. It plays an important role in the regulation of gene microcephaly, autism, ataxia, seizures, abnormal hyperventilation and expression. The spectrum of mutations in MECP2 gene is known stereotypic hand movements. Rett syndrome is caused by mutation from numerous countries and ethnic groups and steps are being in the MECP2 gene on chromosome Xq28 (Amir et al., 1999). taken to determine the genotype/phenotype relationship in order to To date, mutations in the coding region of MECP2 account for RTT in understand the disease process. Here we report mutation analysis of 65-85% of the known cases. 36 patients with RS from the Czech and Slovak republics. Systematic We performed a long distance PCR coupled with long-read direct sequencing of the entire coding sequence of MeCP2 gene revealed, sequencing, to analize the entire MECP2 gene coding region in 101 in exon 4, thirteen different disease-causing mutations in 22 sporadic unrelated RTT girls. patients (61%). Two have not been previously published: a small Mutations were identified in 79/101 patients, both with classic and deletion of 3 bp (1069delAGC), and a deletion of 172 bp along non-classic phenotype. the insertion of 41 bp (1063del172bp+ins 41bp). Eleven patients Special attention was dedicated to the subjects with no mutation had nonsense mutations (Y141X, R168X, S204X, R255X, R270X, found in the coding region of MECP2 gene by sequencing analysis, R294X), eight carried missense mutations (R133C, K135E, T158M, using further approaches. In one family we found in the mother a R306C), and one had a frameshift mutation (1157del41bp). The novel polymorphic, common neutral variant C-A in the last codon, at the polymorphism 587 C>G (T196S) was detected in a patient carrying 3’ of exon 3. The father does’nt shows the variant, and the RTT the mutation 397 C>T (R133C). (Supported by Czech Granting daughter has apparently only the maternal allele. Agency - GACR 301/01/P068 and LN00A079 from MSMT of Czech We developed a quantitative PCR based densitometric dosage Republic) assay, on a Long Readir LICOR -4200, to demonstrate the deletion of entire exons of MECP2 gene in this RTT patient. P0740. Analysis of the MECP2 gene by Direct Sequencing Other approaches (FISH, Southern blotting and RT-PCR analyses) are now in progress to confirm this hypothesis. in Hungarian Rett Syndrome Patients J. Kárteszi1, J. Bene2, É. Morava1, M. Czakó2, K. Hollódy3, B. P0738. Comprehensive mutation analysis of the MECP2 Melegh1, G. Kosztolányi1; 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University gene and the analysis of 54 Rett syndrome suspected of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Medical Genetics and Child patients Development, MTA-PTE Clinical Genetic Research Group, University Y. J. Vos1, G. J. J. Mol1, J. H. Begeer2, E. Verlind1, P. C. van den of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Akker1, C. H. C. M. Buys1, R. Hordijk1, R. M. W. Hofstra3; Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Groningen, Rett syndrome is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, University Hospital, characterized by loss of acquired skills, stereotypical hand Groningen, Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University movements, microcephaly, trunk ataxia and hyperventilation. of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. Epilepsy may also be present in some patients. Mutations in the Rett syndrome is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder, gene encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) have been affecting 1/10.000-15.000 girls, characterised by a period of early identified as cause of Rett syndrome. Based on these results we normal growth and development followed by regression with loss of initialized mutation screening of MECP2 in Hungarian Rett syndrome speech and acquired motor skills, stereotypic hand movements and patients. Patients of the Hungarian Rett Syndrome Association were seizures. The disease-causing gene, mapped to Xq28, was identified involved in the present study. So far we have examined 19 patients, as MECP2, encoding the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2. from various districts of Hungary, who were supposed to have Rett To analyse this gene in patients suspected of Rett syndrome, we syndrome for MECP2 mutations. Initially a detailed clinical evaluation developed an efficient pre-screening method, based on denaturing were performed including physical, neurological and orthopedical gradient gelelectrophoresis (DGGE), followed by direct sequencing examinations, EEG and bone X-ray studies. Genetic studies included in case an aberrant band pattern is found. The DGGE system chromosomal analysis and FISH for Angelman syndrome. Routine consists of 15 amplicons which all can be analysed under one single metabolic screening and serum IEF for CDGS were also performed experimental condition. in every patient to exclude other underlying etiologies. Based on Until now 54 patients have been analysed, whose clinical diagnosis these scrutinized analysis, the clinical diagnosis of Rett syndrome varied from mental retardation to classic Rett syndrome. In 14 could be supported in 15 patients out of the 19 cases. Mutations in patients (26%) 10 different mutations have been identified, 3 MECP2 were detected in 8 cases. We found five already described nonsense mutations in 5 patients and 7 missense mutations in 9 mutations in six patients (R106W in two patients, P152R, R168X, patients. One nonsense mutation has not yet been reported, Q47X. R270X, R294X), a novel single base insertion in exon 3 (276insG) In one patient two missense mutations have been found, both in a patient with a clinical history showing slow progression, and a previously published as being the cause of Rett syndrome. large deletion in exon 4 in a patient with typical Rett syndrome. A new The overall mutation frequency is far below other published results. polymorhism (N126K) characteristic for the Hungarian population was In view of our extensive experience in designing DGGE systems for also detected. This amino acid alteration was found in all examined mutation detection that result in the detection of virtually all possible patients so as in healthy controls. mutations, this low frequency is most probably due to loose inclusion criteria. Clinical characteristics of the patients will be presented in P0741. A 10-year-old boy with classical Rett syndrome comparison with the results of the mutation analysis. caused by a frameshift mutation the MECP2 gene. K. Ravn1, J. Bieber Nielsen2, P. Uldall2, F. J. Hansen3, M. Schwartz2; P0739. Mutation analysis of MeCP2 gene in 36 patients 1Rigshospitalet 4062, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Rigshopitalet, with Rett syndrome of Slavic origin: Detection of two Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. novel mutations and one new polymorphism Rett syndrome (RS) is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental R. Rosipal1, J. Zeman1, J. Hadac2, N. Misovicova3, P. Martasek1; disorder, considered as exclusively affecting girls. Affected male 1Center of Integrated Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, First fetuses were thought to be aborted spontaneously or to have a Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, different phenotype. So far 17 males with a mutation in MECP2 have 2Department of Child Neurology, Thomayer University Hospital, been reported so far. Five of these had the karyotype 47,XXY or Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Martin were mosaic for the mutation. The remaining cases can be divided University Hospital, Martin, Slovakia.230 Posters - Mental Retardation 231 into two groups; a severe type, who dies within the first years of life, 1. Bardoni et al. (2001) Brain Bull. Res. 56: 375-382 all caused by an MECP2 mutation, which in females has be found to 2. Wan et al. (2000) MCB 20: 8536-8547 be associated with classical RS, and a mental retardation type with mutations, which if present in females are compatible with a normal P0744. Towards an understanding of the Fragile X or mildly retarded development. Here we present a 10-year old boy Syndrome: FMRP is translated at the synapses where it with clinical RS, with a normal karyotype, no signs of mosaicism and acts as a translational regulator a truncating mutation 816dup7 in the MECP2-region encoding the F. Zalfa1, B. Primerano1, C. Lauro1, M. Giorgi1, A. Moro1, G. Spinelli1, transcription repression domain, TRD. E. Tongiorgi2, B. Oostra3, F. Amaldi1, C. Bagni1; The resulting MeCP2 protein is predicted to contain a functional 1Dipartimento di Biologia. Università di Roma, Rome, Italy, methyl-binding domain, but lacking most the TRD and the site 2Dipartimento di Biologia. Università di Trieste, Trieste, Italy, facilitating MeCP2 binding to DNA. 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, While comparing the genotype-phenotype correlation in female with Netherlands. mutations in MECP2 is hampered by X chromosome inactivation, the The Fragile X syndrome is an X-linked disorder and the most phenotype of males hemizygous for the same mutations should shred common heritable form of mental retardation, and results from the light over the effect of these mutations on the phenotype. However, deficit or absence of the FMRP protein which is expressed mainly in our patients harbour a typical RS mutation, but have survived beyond the brain and has been implicated in translational regulation. early childhood in contrast to the expectation and the experience for While the vast majority of mRNAs is restricted to the cell soma these mutations. The hypothesis that other genes are interfering with of neuronal cells, a number of them are also transported into the the clinical features of RS is possible. dendrites, where they are translated. Transport and translation of specific mRNAs in extrasomal locations, plays an important role P0742. Mutation or polymorphism in the MECP2 gene in in nerve cell development and synaptic plasticity. Here we show mentally retarded boys : diagnostic implications by RT-PCR that FMR1 mRNA that encodes FMRP is found in A. Grandemenge, V. Bourdon, C. Philippe, P. Jonveaux; synaptoneurosomes. Furthermore, by electron microscopy studies University Hospital of Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France. we detected FMR1 mRNA in proximal and distal dendrites of the Among the well characterized X-linked conditions causing mental hippocampus. retardation, mutations in the methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MECP2) To identify potential localisation signal on the mRNA, we started gene on Xq28 have been found in 70-80% of patients with Rett by analysing the 3’UTR. We observed that the FMR1 sequence syndrome, a neurological disorder which, in addition to other contains several polyadenilation sites. DNA constructs were made symptoms, severely affects higher cognitive functions in females. expressing EGFP fused to the entire 3’UTR or to shorter region and Mutations in the MECP2 gene are involved in a broad spectrum transfected into mouse hippocampal neurons showing that alternative of phenotypes from classical Rett syndrome to mild intellectual poly(A) sites are responsible for producing FMR1 mRNA molecules difficulties in feamles and neonatal encephalopathy in males . with different 3’UTRs differentially delivered into the cell. We have Recently, few MECP2 mutations were reported in males with non investigated the function of the FMRP protein at the synapses by specific mental retardation suggesting that defects in MECP2 are analysing the translational efficiency of mRNAs in synaptosomal responsible for about 2% of X-linked mental retardation. preparations. We find that some dendritic mRNA (a-CaMKII and Arc) To assess the frequency of MECP2 mutations, we screened, by are translated very efficiently in FMR1 K.O. mice as compared to wild DHPLC, the coding sequence and flanking regions of the MECP2 type mice, whereas control RNA, (beta actin) is not affected showing gene in a cohort of 262 mentally retarded males found negative for that FMRP inhibits the translation of target mRNAs. fragile-X syndrome. First results show one recurrent intronic polymorphism (IVS3- P0745. Differential gene expression in the fragile X 19delA) and a nucleotide variant P376S. None of these sequence mouse model modifications were detected in 200 controls. Nevertheless, we I. Gantois, E. Reyniers, F. Kooy; already identified the nucleotide variant P376S, in a girl presenting an University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. atypic Rett syndrome. A detailed familial study on three generations Ten years of research showed that FMRP, the protein missing in showed that the substitution P376S was also inherited by a healthy fragile X patients, is an RNA binding protein that shuttles between uncle, thus ruling out its involvement in the etiology of the disease. the nucleus and cytoplasm. In neurons, the protein transports certain This finding clearly calls for a careful consideration of the brain mRNAs towards the actively translating ribosomes near the pathogenicity of the MECP2 mutations identified in males before synapses. genetic counselling. However, despite intense research it is still unclear why absence of the fragile X protein leads to the mental retardation, macroorchidism P0743. Drosophila as a model to study the physiological and specific behaviour problems observed in fragile X patients. In an pathway in which FMRP (Fragile X Mental Retardation attempt to unravel this mechanism, we performed gene expression Protein) is involved analysis by means of the differential display method using the fragile B. Bardoni, A. Schenck, V. van de Bor, A. Giangrande, J. Mandel; X mouse model. In analogy to human patients, the fragile X knockout IGBMC- Institute de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et mouse shows a learning deficit and macroorchidism. The expression Cellulaire CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France. of approximately 95% of all genes in the hippocampus of control The Fragile X mental retardation syndrome results from the absence mice and fragile X knockout mice was compared. We isolated 224 of the protein (FMRP) encoded by the FMR1 gene. FMRP is an RNA sequences with a length range of 200-1100 bp. 143 sequences binding protein, that has two close homologs, FXR1P and FXR2P. were underexpressed and 81 overexpressed in knockout mice. Absence of FMRP is thought to affect transport and/or translation of Using micro-arrays and real time PCR, for some of these sequences a subset of mRNAs and results in the formation of abnormal dendritic differential expression was confirmed. These partial cDNAs were spines in patients and knock-out mice. sequenced, and homologies with known mouse and human ESTs We have identified 4 novel proteins interacting with FMRP: NUFIP1, and genes were searched on public and Celera databases. CYFIP1 and 2 (that share 95% of amino acids identity) and NUCIF1. The role of these genes differentially expressed in the fragile X Remarkably, CYFIP1 also interacts with Rac1, an important factor in animal model will now be investigated. These may help us to answer neuronal maturation (1). the question how the absence of fragile X protein relates to mental To study the physiological pathways in which FMRP and its partners retardation in patients. are involved, we have chosen Drosophila, as its genome contains only a single FMR/FXR ortholog gene, dFMR (2), one dCYFIP gene P0746. Quantitative analysis of DNA demethylation and and one dNUFIP gene. We found that in fly larvae brain, dFMR is trascriptional reactivation of the FMR1 gene in fragile X specifically expressed in mushroom bodies, a structure involved in cells treated with 5-azadeoxycytidine learning and memory. Analysis of the expression profile of dNUFIP R. Pietrobono1, M. G. Pomponi1, E. Tabolacci1, B. Oostra2, P. and dCYFIP are in progress. We have generated dCYFIP null Chiurazzi3, G. Neri1; mutants and their phenotype is being analyzed. Preliminary results 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Roma, indicate a genetic interaction between dRac1 and dCYFIP mutants Italy, 2Department of Clinical Genetics and Center for Biomedical Posters - Mental Retardation 232 233 Genetics, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Dipartimento in the affected patients. In the latter case FMR1 is abnormally di Scienze Pediatriche Mediche e Chirurgiche, Università di Messina, methylated and transcriptionally silent. Molecular diagnosis is based Messina, Italy. on the determination of the number of trinucleotide repeats by either The Fragile X syndrome is the leading cause of inherited mental Southern blot or fluorescent PCR. Transmission of the deleterious retardation, affecting approximately one in 5000 individuals. In fragile chromosome can also be established by haplotype analysis with X cells carrying a full mutation , hypermethylation of the expanded flanking markers. CGG repeat and of the upstream promoter leads to transcriptional We have searched for the CGG expansion in a family comprising four silencing of the FMR1 gene. Absence of the FMR1 protein results in siblings : two mentally retarded boys and their two sisters. Southern the phenotypic manifestation of the syndrome. We previously proved blot analysis revealed a large repeat expansion in the two boys and that treatment with 5-azadeoxycytidine of fragile X cell lines results the oldest girl, whereas no expansion was observed in the youngest in reactivation of the FMR1 gene restoring the production of the girl. These results were confirmed by PCR. Indirect analysis with specific mRNA and protein product. We now show that this treatment three microsatellites (DXS548, FRAXAC1, FRAXAC2) allowed us causes demethylation of the FMR1 gene promoter. We employed to identify the maternal fragile X chromosome which is carried by the bisulphite sequencing technique to detect the methylation status the four children. In the youngest girl, the presence of this maternal of individual CpG sites in the entire promoter region upstream of the fragile X chromosome is inconsistent with the absence of expansion. CGG repeat. Lymphoblastoid cell lines of fragile X males with full So, we discuss the hypothesis of a gene conversion where the mutations of different sizes were tested before and after treatment segregation of flanking markers is dissociated from that of the CGG with 5-azadeoxycytidine at various time points. We observed that expansion. individual clones are either completely demethylated or not, with few relevant exceptions. We also investigated the extent of methylation P0749. Four novel mutations in the OFD1 (Cxorf5) gene in in the full mutation (CGG repeat) itself by Southern blot analysis the Finnish patients with oral-facial-digital syndrome 1 after digestion with methylation-sensitive enzymes Fnu4HI and S. Ala-Mello1, A. Rakkolainen2, P. Kristo2, A. Orpana2, I. Järvelä2; McrBC and found that the CGG repeat remains at least partially 1University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland, 2University of methylated in many clones with a demethylated promoter. This may Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. explain the quantitative discrepancy between the large extent of Oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1 (OFD1) is an X-linked dominant promoter demethylation and the limited levels of FMR1 transcriptional disorder characterized by malformations in face, oral cavity, and digits reactivation estimated by quantitative real-time fluorescent RT-PCR with a wide phenotypic variation. Recently, mutations in the OFD1 analysis. gene (Cxorf5) at Xp22 were found to underlie OFD1. We report here Supported by FRAXA Research Fondation, Sigma-Tau and the identification of four novel mutations in the OFD1 gene in the Associazione Anni Verdi. Finnish families, two of which are familial and two sporadic.Three of the mutations in this study were located in the same exons as in the P0747. Evidence for Skewed X Chromosome Inactivation original study by Ferrante et al (Am J Hum Genet 2001;68:569-576). in Females with the Fragile X Full Mutation We also report the clinical findings of our patients. Our study confirms K. B. McKelvie1, A. Reynolds1, F. Tassone2, A. K. Taylor3, R. J. the causative role of the OFD1 gene in the pathogenesis of oral- Hagerman2; facial-digital syndrome type 1. 1The Children’s Hospital, Denver, CO, 2M.I.N.D. Institute, University of California Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, CA, 3Kimball Genetics, P0750. Molecular basis of Oral-facial-digital type I (OFDI) Denver, CO. syndrome X chromosome inactivation is generally thought to be a random G. Giorgio, A. Barra, A. Ballabio, B. Franco; occurence in somatic tissue. Skewed X-inactivation has been Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine-TIGEM, Naples, Italy. observed in several human disorders in which there is a deletion Oral-facial-digital type 1 (OFD1) is part of the heterogeneous group of or mutation on one of the X chromosomes. This skewing is thought oral-facial-digital syndromes (OFDS). OFDI is an X-linked dominant to be the result of selection against cells with growth disadvantage. condition lethal in males and is characterized by malformations of the Previous research by Rousseau et al. and Taylor et al. revealed face, oral cavity, and digits. Malformation of the brain and polycystic a skewed X-inactivation pattern for females with the Fragile X full kidneys are commonly associated. By using a systematic mutation mutation. analysis approach we have identified the gene responsible for this As part of a larger Genotype-Phenotype research study, we analyzed genetic disorder, named OFDI, encoding a protein with unknown molecular data for 51 females with the full mutation and 43 females function. To gain insight into the pathogenesis of this disorder with the premutation status for FXS, with an age range of 4 to 65 extensive mutation analysis and functional studies were undertaken. years. In contrast to females with the premutation, females with the Twenty-seven OFDI patients were collected and mutations have full mutation demonstrated skewed X-inactivation with a tendency been so far identified in 17 of them. Details on the newly identified toward a higher activation ratio or proportion of normal active X. mutations and on genotype/phenotype correlation will be presented. The median activation ratio for females with the full mutation was The presence of coiled-coil domains suggests that OFD1 may act significantly larger than that of premutation carriers. Also, linear via a protein-protein interaction mechanism. Interaction mating and regression analysis revealed a significant positive relationship two hybrid experiments are being performed to identify proteins between the activation ratio and age for females with the full potentially interacting with OFDI. Preliminary results show that mutation, but not for females with the premutation. These results OFDI does homo-interact through the central portion of the protein. support previous research. In addition, activation ratio in women with Furthermore, subcellular localization experiments were performed a maternally inherited premutation was compared to women with a on the wild type and mutated forms of the OFDI protein. Our study paternally inherited premutation. There was no signigant difference showed that the wild type protein concentrates in “cytoplasmic found between these two groups. bodies” uniformly distributed in the cytoplasm while in the mutated forms, the cytoplasmic speckles become smaller, with a more diffuse P0748. Loss of mutation at the FMR1 locus : a gene distribution and tend to disappear. The functional characterization of conversion? the OFDI protein product will open the way towards understanding A. Jouanolle1, S. Bernard2, V. David1, M. Blayau1; the molecular and cellular bases of OFDI as well as for the other 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, forms of OFDs. France, 2Gynécologie-Obstétrique, CH La Beauchée, St-Brieuc, France. P0751. Partial deletion of the common 1,5 Mb critical Fragile X syndrome is the most frequent inherited form of mental region in an infant with classical Williams-Beuren retardation. The mutation observed is almost exclusively an syndrome. expanded (CGG) repeat in the first untranslated exon of the FMR1 R. Heller1, S. Endele1,2, B. Schröder1, C. Steglich1, S. Lüttgen1, A. gene. The repeat is polymorphic in length in the normal population Winterpacht1,2; (6 to 55 repeats) and may be unstable. Two types of mutations 1Institut für Humangenetik / UKE, Hamburg, Germany, 2present have been distinguished : premutation (up to 200 repeats) in the address: Institut für Humangenetik, F.-A.-Universität Erlangen- phenotypically normal carriers or full mutation (over 200 repeats) Nürnberg, Germany.232 Posters - Mental Retardation 233 Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS; OMIM 194050) is a contiguous homologies. Haploinsufficiency of these newly identified WBSCR gene deletion disorder with a variable clinical phenotype that is genes may contribute to certain of the WBS phenotypical features. caused in most cases by a heterozygous microdeletion in 7q11.23. Due to two highly homologous flanking ~300 kb duplicons, the P0754. Deletion breakpoint mapping in patients with microdeletion is usually of similar size in almost all cases and Williams Syndrome using somatic cell hybrids encompasses a common ~1,5 Mb interval that contains at least M. Tassabehji1, K. Metcalfe2, D. Donnai2, W. D. Fergusson2, A. 17 genes mostly of uncertain pathogenetic relevance. Phenotype- Karmiloff-Smith3, A. P. Read1, M. J. Carette1; genotype correlation studies for WBS are hampered by the uniform 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2St Mary’s size of the microdeletion. Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Child health, Here we report the case of a 1-year-old boy with a full WBS- London, United Kingdom. phenotype that is caused by a partial deletion of the common ~1.5 Williams-Beuren syndrome (WS) is a developmental disorder caused Mb interval. Initial analysis with two sets of commercially available by a hemizygous microdeletion of ~1.5Mb at chromosomal location FISH-probes (Appligene/Oncor and Vysis) yielded conflicting results. 7q11.23. Up to 28 genes have been identified within the critical We therefore carried out deletion mapping with microsatellite region. Hemizygosity for ELN causes the heart defect SVAS, but markers and an array of targeted FISH probes. Our data could help there is no clear evidence implicating any of the other genes in the to redefine the critical region for the full WBS phenotype (WBSCR). aetiology of the syndrome. To aid genotype-phenotype correlations it Evidence from two other cases in the literature also suggests that is important to define the deletion breakpoints in patients with classic the centromeric portion of the 1,5 Mb interval is not always deleted in and partial WS phenotypes precisely. Homologous recombination patients with full WBS-phenotype. between flanking repeats accounts for the high incidence of de novo The conclusions from our work concern diagnosis and molecular deletions and the deletion breakpoints lie within these repeated aetiology of WBS: regions in WS patients making them difficult to map. We have 1.) Quantitative differences in signal intensity after FISH analysis with therefore made somatic cell hybrids (segregating the normal and commercial probes for a WBS microdeletion should be followed up deleted chromosome 7 homologues) from 30 patients with classic carefully if partial deletions are not to be missed. or partial WS phenotypes, designed a series of specific PCR 2.) Even in patients with full WBS-phenotype the underlying primers using SNP technology, and mapped the breakpoints in the molecular defect is more variable than previously thought. centromeric and telomeric repeat regions by PCR analysis of DNA from these cells. Our results indicate that the breakpoints cluster at P0752. Characterisation of genes in the region of mouse two main loci at the centromeric end and at least three loci at the chromosome 5 orthologous to the region deleted in telomeric end. This has allowed us to group our patients according to Williams-Beuren Syndrome (7q11.23)and their human their genotype for further detailed phenotypic analysis that includes homologues. complex cognitive testing. P. D. Cunliffe, L. Heather, A. P. Read, M. Tassabehji; University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. P0755. Prader-Willi-like phenotype caused by multiple Williams-Beuren syndrome is a hereditary disorder caused by dosage of maternal 15q11-q13 region. deletion of approximately 1.5Mb on human chromosome 7q11.23 and E. Monros1, V. Català2, E. Geán3, P. Póo3; occurring in approximately 1/20000 live births. Symptoms include 1Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Esplugues, Barcelona, Spain, 2Prenatal congenital heart disease, growth retardation, mild mental retardation Genetics, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues, with a distinctive cognitive profile and personality, facial dysmorphism Barcelona, Spain. and frequently infantile hypercalcaemia. The breakpoints of the Objective: Genetic diagnosis of Prader-Willi Sd. in a 13 years old commonly deleted region are flanked by highly homologous repeated male with normal motor development, obesity, moderate mental regions of about 300kb. The flanking repeats are believed to mediate retardation, obsessive behaviour and small penis. the disease causing deletion and have also caused difficulty in its Methods: PWS methylation analysis was done by NotI-XbaI/pN09 genomic cloning and sequencing. The only aspect of the disease hybridisation. Band densities were measured on a GS-700 Bio-Rad phenotye associated with a particular gene is the typical congenital densitometer. Familial segregation analysis of seven 15q11-q13 heart defect, supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS) which is associated linked markers was done by PCR. Karyotype was done by standard with deletion of the elastin gene. The orthologous region in mouse, on methods. Molecular cytogenetic studies included chromosome 15 chromosome 5 (5G), does not have the flanking repeats, however the painting using WCP15 probe and FISH analysis with probes LSI order of the genes within the commonly deleted region is conserved. SRNPN/PML/CEP15 and LSI D15S10/PML/CEP15. Here we report expression profiles, gene structures and analysis of Results: Hybridisation showed the presence of both the paternal and functional motifs for genes recently localised to the mouse equivalent maternal alleles, excluding a PWS methylation pattern. Maternal of the commonly deleted region, including one gene, claudin13, band intensity was 4 fold compared to normal controls. Familial which has not previously been reported to map to this region. segregation analysis of GABRA5 detected one paternal and two Including these genes there are currently 29 transcripts shown to maternal alleles, suggesting a maternal trisomy of the region; reside in this region of mouse chromosome 5. A comparison between D15S144 showed biparental inheritance. Karyotype: mosaicism mouse and human orthologues of the genes is also presented along 47,XY,+mar. Painting demonstrated the suspected chromosome 15 with a complete physical map of the 1.4Mb mouse equivalent of the origin of the marker, which was present in 83% of metaphases. FISH Williams syndrome region. results using specific probes were: 47,XY,+mar .ish der(15)(D15Z1++, D15S10++, SRNPN++). The marker showed the centromeric staining P0753. Identification of nine novel transcripts in the at both ends, and two adjacent signals for both SRNPN and D15S10 Williams-Beuren syndrome critical region loci in the central part. The final cytogenetic result was mosaicism G. Merla1, C. Ucla2, M. Guipponi1, A. Reymond1; 47,XY,+ idic(15)(pter→q11.2 :: q11.2→pter). 1Division of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva Medical School, Conclusions: The patient is a somatic mosaic for a marker Geneva, Switzerland, 2Divisiobn of Medical Genetics, University of chromosome of maternal origin which contains two inverted partial Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. 15q11-q13 regions. Cells carrying the derivative chromosome are Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a developmental disorder tetrasomic for genes contained in the region. The PWS-like features associated with haploinsufficiency of multiple genes at 7q11.23. in the patient are caused by a multiple dosage of maternal 15q11-q13 Here, we report the characterization of WBSCR16, WBSCR17, genes. WBSCR18, WBSCR20A, WBSCR20B, WBSCR20C, WBSCR21, WBSCR22 and WBSCR23, nine novel genes contained in the WBS P0756. Epsilon-sarcoglycan (SGCE), the gene mutated in commonly deleted region or its flanking sequences and of their myoclonus-dystonia syndrome, is imprinted. murine orthologues. They were identified by mapping of previously M. Grabowski1,2, A. Zimprich3, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1,2, F. Asmus3, M. undescribed human ESTs/cDNAs clusters to the WBS critical region. Bauer3, V. M. Kalscheuer4, T. Gasser3, T. Meitinger1,2, T. M. Strom1,2; They encode an RCC1-like G exchanging factor, an N-acetylgalactos 1Institute of Human Genetics, GSF National Research Center, aminyltransferase, a DNAJ-like chaperone, NOL1/NOP2/sun domain- Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der containing proteins, a methyltransferase, or proteins with no known Isar, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Department Posters - Molecular Basis of Development 234 235 of Neurology, Klinikum Großhadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, result from mutations of the gene for CREBBP. This nuclear protein Munich, Germany, 4Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, controls chromatin structure (DNA accessibility) by acetylation of Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. histones, and therefore assists in the initiation of DNA transcription. Myoclonus-dystonia syndrome (MDS, DYT11) has been defined We report on 10 unrelated subjects, nine with RTS and one with as an autosomal-dominant disorder characterized by variable a phenotype of possibly very mild RTS. Mutation analysis was combinations of bilateral, alcohol-sensitive myoclonic jerks and performed using FISH and genomic sequencing. We identified five dystonia. Using a positional cloning approach, we have recently novel mutations (86del148nt, 1108C-T, IVS4+1G-A, IVS7+1G-A, identified heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the gene for 3524A-G), two gross deletions of the CREBBP gene and two single- epsilon-sarcoglycan (SGCE) in MDS families. Pedigree analysis nucleotide coding polymorphisms. The 1108C-T stop mutation was showed a marked difference in penetrance depending on the parental observed twice suggesting a mutational hotspot. The proband with origin of the disease allele. This indicates a maternal imprinting the mild variant was very interesting. She presented a missense mechanism, which has been demonstrated for the mouse orthologue. mutation (3524A-G) predicting a tyrosine-to-cysteine exchange Bisulfite sequencing of the CpG-rich SGCE promotor showed a (Y1175C) within a fully conserved (man vs. mouse) 79-aa segment of parent-specific methylation pattern in lymphoblasts. A rare single the protein domain that elsewhere was shown to confer the histone nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the promotor region allowed us acetyltransferase activity. There has been one previous report of a to distinguish the parental alleles. The methylated strand showed CREBBP missense mutation in RTS (Murata et al., Hum Mol Genet the maternal polymorphism, while the paternal wildtype allele was 2001;10:1071-6). The “digito-facial” phenotype of this proband with unmethylated in all CpG dinucleotides examined. clear-cut digital anomalies, subtle but typical facial changes, normal Expression studies showed that SGCE is only paternally expressed stature, normal head circumference and low but normal intelligence in lymphoblasts. represents a mild RTS variant (“incomplete RTS”) that provides Due to the fact that MDS is a non-degenerative central nervous insight into phenotypic variation with RTS. system disorder we also investigated the promotor methylation in brain tissue. SNPs in the promotor region revealed that there is also P0759. Molecular analysis of the CREBBP gene in 65 differential methylation in human brain, suggesting regulation of patients with Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome. expression in an allele-specific manner. B. Arveiler1, I. Coupry1, C. Roudaut1, M. Stef1, M. Delrue2, M. As imprinted genes are often located in clusters, we examined four Marche1, I. Burgelin1, L. Taine2, D. Lacombe2; adjacent genes by expression analyses in maternal and paternal 1Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France, 2CHU de UPD7 cDNA samples. SGCE and the adjacent PEG10 showed Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. maternal imprinting in lymphoblastoid cell lines, whereas PP5 and The Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is characterized by mental BET1 were not imprinted. These results demonstrate that SGCE is and growth retardation, broad thumbs, broad big toes and facial also imprinted in humans and that chromosome 7q21 contains at abnormalities. RTS is associated with mutations in the CREB-Binding least two imprinted genes. protein (CREBBP) gene. Gross chromosomal rearrangements and microdeletions detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization and P0757. Evaluation of a Mutation Screening Strategy for truncating mutations revealed by protein truncation test or Western the Ube3a Gene in 33 Patients from 25 Families with blot analysis, account for only 20% of RTS cases. We report the Angelman Syndrome use of molecular tools to thoroughly analyse the CREBBP gene in a A. Moncla, P. Malzac, K. Pedeillier, C. Vo-Van, M. A. Voelckel; cohort of 65 patients. These include cDNA probes to search for gross Département de Génétique Médicale, Hopital des Enfants de la rearrangements by Southern blot analysis and to identify mRNA of Timone, Marseille, France. abnormal size by Northern blot, intragenic microsatellite markers to Angelman syndrome (AS) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder look for intragenic deletions, as well as a complete set of primers to which results from deficiencies of the maternal ubiquitin protein ligase amplify each of the 31 exons of the gene for mutation search by direct 3A (UBE3A) gene caused by heterogeneous genetic alterations. This sequencing. We analysed 62 patients and identified 29 mutations : 3 gene remains the only gene in the 15q11-q12 region found to play gross rearrangements by Southern blot and/or microsatellite analysis, a role in the pathogenesis of AS. All UBE3A mutations reported so 1 truncated RNA by Northern blot, 1 small intragenic deletion by far were randomly distributed over the 2.6-kb major coding region RT-PCR and 24 point mutations resulting in either stop codons, including exons 8 to 16. The detection rates are around 30 % in aminoacid substitutions or abnormal splicing of the CREBBP RNA. non deletion/ non UPD/ non imprinting defect index cases, with an Three additional patients were found to be deleted by FISH. Taken incidence of UBE3A point mutations in total AS patients estimated together, these results showed that the combination of the various around 2-10 %. In this study, we investigated 33 patients from 25 techniques allowed us to identify a CREBBP mutation in 49.2% of families with a definite clinical diagnosis of AS and we evaluated 4 RTS cases, which represents the highest percentage of CREBBP methods to establish a mutation screening strategy for the UBE3A mutations reported sofar in RTS patients. These molecular tools will gene. Automated SSCP analysis was used to screen the UBE3A be useful to search for CREBBP mutations in other developmental gene for point mutations in all patients, in combination with direct pathologies with cancer predisposition and mental retardation. sequencing if mutation could not be detected. Since the majority of UBE3A identified mutations are truncating mutations, we developed P 16. Molecular Basis of Development the protein truncation test (PTT) as a possible alternative approach to rapidly detect such inactivating alterations in this large gene. The P0760. Expression pattern of the RSK2- or Coffin-Lowry combination of the different techniques allowed us to identify 22 syndrome gene during murine development point mutations from 25 families (88%)which represents the highest M. Vogel, B. Fischer, H. Hameister, H. Kehrer-Sawatzki; percentage of mutation reported so far in AS. Department of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Germany. Mutations in the RSK2 gene on Xp22.2 are causing Coffin-Lowry P0758. CREBBP mutations in 10 cases of Rubinstein- syndrome, which is characterized by severe psychomotor retardation, Taybi syndrome, including a mild variant showing a facial and digital dysmorphism, and progressive skeletal deformations missense mutation affecting mostly the vertebral column. About 50-60% of the mutations O. Bartsch1, P. Meinecke2, K. Locher3, W. Kreß4, M. Pilz1, E. identified so far lead to premature translation termination and are Seemanová5, K. Ostermann3, G. Rödel3; predicted to cause loss of function alleles. Some missense mutations 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Technische Universität Dresden, are associated with milder phenotypes. In one family, the R383W Dresden, Germany, 2Abteilung Medizinische Genetik, Altonaer mutation is causing non-syndromic X-linked mental retardation Kinderkrankenhaus, Hamburg, Germany, 3Institut für Genetik, without other symptoms. RSK2 is a member of the 90kDa ribosomal- Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 4Institut für S6-serine/threonine kinase family acting at the distal end of the Ras Humangenetik der Universität, Würzburg, Germany, 5Department of signalling cascade. After activation by MAPKs, RSK2 translocates Clinical Genetics, Motol, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. to the nucleus and regulates gene expression by phosphorylation Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a well-defined autosomal of transcription factors such as CREB. RSK2 knock-out mice are dominant disorder of broad thumbs, broad halluces, short stature, 10% smaller compared to wildtype littermates. Additionally, RSK2 microcephaly, facial anomalies and mental retardation. RTS can KO mice have impaired learning and poor coordination, suggesting 234 Posters - Molecular Basis of Development 235 that RSK2 seems to have similar roles in mental functioning both P0763. Search for somatic 22q11.2 deletions in patients in mice and humans. To investigate the spatio-temporal expression with conotruncal heart defects spectrum of RSK2 during mouse development, we performed RNA A. Rauch1, M. Hofbeck2, R. Cesnjevar3, G. Buheitel4, B. Schenker1, in situ hybridization. In early embryonic development (ED 9.5-10.5) R. Rauch2, H. Singer4, M. Weyand3; high RSK2 expression was observed exclusively in somites and 1Institute of Human Genetics of the Friedrich-Alexander University of lateral plate mesoderm from which among other tissues the vertebral Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Department of Pediatric column develops. At later embryonic stages (ED 12.5-14.5) enhanced Cardiology of the University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, RSK2 mRNA levels are detected in the peripheral nervous system 3Heart Surgery of the Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen- (dorsal root ganglia) and in sensory ganglia of the cranial nerves. Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 4Department of Pediatric Cardiology In contrast to the more widespread expression in multiple tissues of of the Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, adult mice, RSK2 shows a highly specific expression spectrum during Erlangen, Germany. embryonic development. The wide range of clinical variability in patients with 22q11.2 deletions has been demonstrated in numerous studies. Nevertheless, it is P0761. HoxB1 allelic variants in hindbrain malformations still an open question if major genetic factors contribute to clinical A. Moroni1, P. De Marco1, E. Merello1, A. Raso1, M. Crippa2, F. Blasi2, expression. Therefore one aim of this study was to investigate, if A. Cama1, V. Capra1; patients with 22q11.2 deletion and conotruncal heart defects show a 1G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2DIBIT-HSR, Milano, Italy. “second hit” somatic 22q11.2 deletion in tissue from the conotruncus, Chiari complex is the most frequent pathology among hindbrain heart vessels or thymus. The second aim was to analyse patients malformations, characterized by caudal cerebellar herniation, with conotruncal heart defects without 22q11.2 deletion in blood sometimes associated with lower brain stem dysmorphism, skull cells for somatic deletion mosaicism. Parents of 19 patients with bases and vertebral anomalies. In vertebrates hindbrain, generation conotruncal heart defects (IAA, TAC, pulmonary atresia with VSD) of regional diversity is achieved through a segmentation process that, agreed to collect and study somatic tissue from heart surgery in their during primary neurulation, leads to the formation of 7 metameric children. 5 of these 19 patients had 22q11 deletions shown by FISH units, called rhombomeres. In this process, Hox genes display a analysis on metaphase spreads from peripheral lymphocytes with 10 key role in controlling and regulating neuronal migration and in DNA probes from the DGS1 region. DNA was prepared from thymus mainteining cellular segmental identity. Among labial hortologous, and/or heart vessels and/or conotruncus tissue and peripheral Hoxb-1 gene is the first one to be activated in CNS and the only lymphocytes in each patient and analysed with 18 microsatellite one to show an expression domain restricted to rhombomere 4 markers from the DGS1 region for allelic loss. Results did not show and in the neural crest cells that from r4 migrate in the second any allelic loss, thus there was no evidence for a somatic 22q11.2 branchial arch. We performed the mutational screening of the deletion. Therefore somatic 22q11.2 deletions apparently do not play homologous HOX-B1 gene in 49 patients and 103 control individuals. a major role in conotruncal heart defects in patients with or without Sequencing of abnormal SSCP conformers revealed the existence germ line 22q11.2 deletion. of three allelic variants characterized by the presence of several in cis associated mutations, all affecting the NH2 terminal region P0764. Expression profiling in mouse neural of the gene. α1 haplotype is characterized by the presence of two development and differentiation. synonimous transitions (C237T and G450A) and one missence M. Zollo1, V. Aglio1, P. Carotenuto1, M. Cocchia1, V. Avantaggiato1, A. mutation (A309T); α2 variant shows, in addition, a 9-bp tandem Andre’1, A. Faedo2, A. Ballabio1, A. Bulfone2; duplication (CCCACAGCG) at position +80, while α3 presents three 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy, 2Stem silent substitutions (G114A, C213T and G246A) and one missense Cells Research Institute (SCRI), Dibit-HSR, Milano, Italy. mutation (C167T). Since the different distribution of the α1 and α2 Our approach combines gene array expression technology and haplotypes in controls and patients and the absence of α3 variant murine subtractive cDNA library to isolate unique and specific in the first population, we hypotize these mutations as predisposing genes preferentially expressed in the embryonic telencephalon. We genetic factors for the insorgence of pathology. have randomly sequenced 3600 cDNA clones (ESTs) from a cDNA subtractive library. A set of unique transcripts (1026) have been P0762. Vax2 inactivation in mouse determines alteration identified, selected and arrayed on glass coated slides. A series of of the eye dorsal-ventral axis, misrouting of the optic experiments based on the potential of cell lines (P19, neuro2A, PC12) fibers and eye coloboma to be induced to differentiation into specific neuronal cell subtypes by A. Barbieri1, G. Alfano1, V. Broccoli1, A. Bulfone1, V. Marigo1, P. Retinoic Acid (RA) or Neural Growth factor (NGF), are undergoing. Bovolenta2, A. Ballabio1, S. Banfi1; This will permit the isolation of genes that are differentially expressed 1TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Instituto Cajal, CSIC, Madrid, Spain. before and after neuronal “in vitro”differentiation. The results will be Vax2 is a homeobox gene whose expression is confined to the confirmed by Real time PCR assays. A detailed sequence analysis ventral portion of the prospective neural retina. Overexpression of of the 372 identified cDNA clones was performed using public this gene at early stages of development in Xenopus and in chicken domain DataBases (such as dbEST, Unigene, Homologene, Locus embryos determines a ventralization of the retina, thus suggesting Link and OMIM), to verify the quality of the library, to identify the its role in the molecular pathway underlying eye development. human homologs, and to map and correlate them to neurological We have generated and characterized a mouse with a targeted disorders. In particular 20% of the selected clones have no public null mutation of the Vax2 gene. Vax2 homozygous mutant mice database match to date, and 23% correspond to genes with unknown display incomplete closure of the optic fissure that leads to eye function. To determine the spatio-temporal expression profile of 110 coloboma. This phenotype is not fully penetrant suggesting that cDNAs, we have performed in-situ mRNA hybridization on mouse additional factors contribute to its generation. Vax2 inactivation embryos (sagittal and coronal sections of E14.5 embryos and whole- determines dorsalization of the expression of mid-late (EphB2 and mount E10.5 embryos) and adult brains. Moreover, experiments are ephrin-B2) but not early (Pax2 and Tbx5) markers of dorsal-ventral undergoing for testing the value of this cDNA array in order to unravel polarity in the developing retina. Finally, Vax2 mutant mice exhibit the molecular defects of the developing brain of mice models mutated abnormal projections of ventral retinal ganglion cells. In particular, in the Tbr1 and Lis1 genes. we observed the almost complete absence of ipsilaterally projecting retinal ganglion cells axons in the optic chiasm and alteration P0765. Expression of SMADIP1 during early human of the retinocollicular projections. All these findings indicate that development correlates with the phenotype of a Vax2 is required for the proper closure of the optic fissure, for the syndromic form of Hirschsprung disease establishment of a physiological asymmetry on the dorsal-ventral Y. Espinosa-Parrilla, T. Attié-Bitach, J. Augé, A. Munnich, S. axis of the eye and for the formation of appropriate retinocollicular Lyonnet, M. Vekemans, J. Amiel; connections. Département de Génétique et INSERM U-393, Hôpital Necker- Enfants Malades, Paris, France. The smad binding protein 1 gene (SMADIP1, MIM 605802) has been identified as causing a polytopic embryonic defect (MIM 235730) including midline anomalies (agenesis of the corpus callosum, Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 236 237 congenital cardiac defect, hypospadias), facial dysmorphism, mental EXT1 locus and three linked to EXT2 locus. Four novel mutations retardation and enteric nervous system malformation (Hirschsprung were identified: a frameshift mutation (K218fsX247) and a nonsense disease, HSCR). We recently screened the SMADIP1 locus in a mutation (Y468X) in EXT1 gene; a missense mutation (R223P) and series of 19 unrelated patients with this phenotype and identified a nonsense mutation (Y394X) in EXT2 gene. Moreover, according de novo large-scale SMADIP1 deletions or truncating mutations to the definite disease-causing allele, linkage analysis provides a in 8 cases. To further investigate the role of SMADIP1 during reliable clue and could be utilized as an alternative approach for embryogenesis, we performed RNA in situ hybridization at early clinical and prenatal diagnosis. stages of human development. According with HSCR and facial dysmorphism in patients, SMADIP1 is expressed in the enteric P0768. Evidence Of The Existence Of At Least A Fourth nervous system and other neural crest derived cells (peripheric Locus For ADNFLE nervous system, facial neurectoderm and cranial nerve ganglia). R. Combi1, S. Duga1, R. Asselta1, S. Boi1, A. Oldani2, M. Zucconi2, L. SMADIP1 mRNAs are also detected in the central nervous system Ferini-Strambi2, M. Malcovati1, L. Dalprà3, M. L. Tenchini1; as soon as day 33 (carnegie 15). In agreement with other clinical 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University features (hypospadias, strabismus, limbs and kidney anomalies, of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Sleep Disorders Centre, University of Milan, and hypotonia) SMADIP1 is further expressed in genital tubercle, Medical Faculty, Scientific Institute H San Raffaele, Milan, Italy, developing eye, limbs, kidney and muscles. Although congenital 3Department of Experimental, Environmental Medicine and Medical cardiac defects are frequently observed, no SMADIP1 expression Biotechnologies, University of Milan-Bicocca, Monza, Italy. is detected in the developing heart. However, this expression Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE), pattern correlates with the spectrum of malformations observed in characterised by clusters of nocturnal seizures with a frontal patients and confirms the pleiotropic role of SMADIP1 during human lobe semiology, mostly occurring during non-REM sleep, follows development. autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance (70- 80%). Three loci have been associated to this syndrome: ENFL1 P 17. Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders (20q13.2), ENFL2 (15q24) and ENFL3 (1q21). Three mutations responsible for ADNFLE have been reported in the CHRNA4 gene P0766. Genotype Analysis of the NF1 Gene in the French (ENFL1 locus), coding for the alpha4 subunit of the neuronal nicotinic Canadians From the Québec Population acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) and two mutations have been found J. Thirion1, L. Fang1, N. Chalhoub1, W. Li2, J. Feingold3, J. in the CHRNB2 gene (ENFL3 locus), coding for the beta2 subunit Ortenberg4, B. Lemieux1; of the same receptor. However, the identified mutations account for 1Faculté de Médecine CHUS, Sherbrooke, PQ, Canada, 2Rockefeller a minority of ADNFLE cases. Additional brain-expressed nAChR University, New York, NY, 3Inserm 393, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, subunit genes (alpha2-7 and beta2-4) are candidates for ADNFLE. 4McGill University, Montreal, PQ, Canada. We performed linkage analyses to evaluate the association between Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant disorder ADNFLE and alpha2-7 and beta2-4 subunits in four families. that afflicts about 1 in 3,500 individuals. The NF1 gene spans about Six chromosome regions were analysed: 1q21 (CHRNB2), 8p21 350 kb at 17q11.2 with 60 exons and has a high mutation rate (CHRNA2), 8p11.2 (CHRNA6 and CHRNB3), 15q14 (CHRNA7), leading to 50% sporadic cases. We genotyped 19 NF1 families 15q24 (CHRNA5/A3/B4) and 20q13.2 (CHRNA4). Significantly including 85 individuals (45 affected and 40 unaffected) from the negative LOD score values were obtained in each family, except French Canadians of the Québec population and investigated in two cases (CHRNA4, family 32; CHRNA2, family 10), where, deletion mutations, allele frequency distribution, linkage and linkage however, no mutations were detected by sequence analysis. disequilibrium (LD) by using six intragenic polymorphic markers Besides further supporting locus heterogeneity of the disease, including 2 RFLPs (EcoRI and RsaI) and 4 microsatellites (IVS26- these findings exclude the involvement of all known neuronal brain- 2.3, IVS27AC28.4, IVS27AC33.1, and IVS38GT53.0) which are expressed nAChR subunits in the etiopathogenesis of ADNFLE in the distributed along an approximately 65kb of the gene. Genotype analysed families and demonstrate the existence of at least a fourth analysis indicated families 7610 and 7473 bear unusual deletions. locus, probably not belonging to the nAChR gene family, involved in In Family 7610 the deletion removed the entire NF1 gene except this syndrome. exons1 to 4b. The breakpoint of the deletion is located between This project is supported by the Italian Telethon Foundation, grant E.C0839. exons 4a and 4b. The deletion 7473 was derived from the maternal chromosome and exons 1 to 5 were deleted. The breakpoint of the P0769. Molecular and genetical study of phenylketonuria deletion is located between exons 7 and 13. Clinical manifestations in Ukraine were mild suggesting that deleting either upstream or downstream M. V. Nechyporenko, L. A. Livshits; contiguous sequence may not lead to a severe phenotype. Deletion Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine. of both upstream and downstream sequences on both sides of the We carrier out genetic investigation of 100 patients with clinically NF1 gene may be needed to cause severe clinical features. The diagnosed phenylketonuria in order to identify PAH gene mutations. allele frequencies of microsatellites IVS27AC28.4 and IVS38GT 53.0 Using DGGE and dHPLC techniques we have screened mutant are compared to previously reported data from Caucasians, including alleles in exons 1, 3, 7, 11, 12 of PAH gene. Identification of Spanish and Italians. The difference is statistically significant mutations were performed by RFLP and direct DNA sequencing. The (P<0.0036) for marker IVS27AC 28.4 between the Québec French most frequent mutation found according to our study was R408W Canadian and the Italian population. (57 %). The frequency of other mutations were: R158Q – 3,5%, R252W – 2,9%, P281L – 2,3%, Y414C – 1,5%, Ivs10nt546, Ivs12nt1, P0767. Mutation Analysis of the EXT Genes in Taiwanese R261Q, G272X, S273F, R413P – 0,6-1%. PAH gene STR and VNTR Patients with Hereditary Multiple Exostoses polymorphisms analysis were performed in this group of patients too. F. Tsai, Y. Shi, J. Wu, C. Tsai; PKU is a highly heterogeneous trait showing a broad continuum China Medical College Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China. of phenotypes. On the basis of individual data on phenylalanine Hereditary multiple exostoses (HME) is an autosomal dominant tolerance and pretreatment phenylalanine serum the 24 patients disorder characterized by short stature , cartilaginous excrescences were assigned to one of the four arbitrary phenotype categories: near the ends of the diaphyses of the bones of the extremities,and classic PKU, moderate PKU, mild PKU and MNH. 19 patients increased risk of chondrosarcoma . Three chromosomal loci have with genotypes R408W/R408W (7 patients), R408W/R158Q (2), been comprised in this genetically heterozygous disease: EXT1 R408W/R261Q (1), R408W/Ivs10nt546 (1), R408W/Ivs12nt1 (1), gene on chromosome 8q23-q24, EXT2 on 11p11-p13, and EXT3 on S273F/R413P (1), R252W/x (1), R408W/x (1), x/x (4) had classic 19p. Both the EXT1 and EXT2 genes had been cloned and been PKU. 3 patients with genotypes R408W/P281L, R261Q/x, x/x were defined as a new family of potential tumor suppressor genes. We had diagnosed as moderate PKU and 2 patients (genotypes R158Q/x and analyzed five patients with clinical features of multiple exostoses, of x/x) had mild PKU. It is interesting to note that two untreated patients which one is sporadic and four are familial cases. For determining with genotype R408W/Y414C were diagnosed as classic PKU and the mutant spectrum of disease attributable to abnormalities in MHP basing on clinical date (they are 11 and 7 years old). This date the three EXT loci, linkage studies were performed before the confirm the necessity of treatment for PKU patients with mild PAH mutation analysis. The results showed that one family linked to gene mutations.236 Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 237 P0770. A new CDMP 1 mutation in a family with pedigrees segregating different retinal dystrophies to identify the brachydactyly type C combination and type of mutations causing the diseases. In family I, M. C. Addor1, V. Kaltenrieder1, F. Gudinchet2, D. F. Schorderet1; we have shown cosegregation of different ABCA4 alleles with STGD, 1Division of Medical Genetics, CHUV - 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland, FFM, CRD and even pattern dystrophy simulating FFM (FFM-like 2Department of Radiology, CHUV - 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland. PD). To our knowledge, this is the first report of a PD phenotype Inherited isolated brachydactyly type C (OMIM 113100) is an explained by mutations in ABCA4. Based on the fact that this disease autosomal dominant disorder with marked variability. Type C is milder than STGD, it is tempting to speculate that it may be consists of shortness of 1st metacarpal, 2nd, 3rd and 5th middle explained by a combination of two mild alleles. On the other hand, phalanges, hypersegmentation of the proximal phalanges of the 2nd in family II, segregating STGD and RP phenotypes, the involvement and 3rd digits and ulnar deflection of the index. In most families, the of ABCA4 in STGD is clear, but this is not the case for RP. Finally, anomalies are restricted to the hands. Associated findings such as in family III, also segregating STGD and RP, ABCA4 fails to explain short stature, radio-ulnar and humero-radial abnormalities, wedging either phenotype. Our data highlight the wide allelic heterogeneity of vertebrae, hip dysplasia, epiphyseal changes, foot anomalies and involving this gene and support the genetic heterogeneity (beyond cupped ears have also been reported. ABCA4) of mixed STGD/RP pedigrees. Locus heterogeneity for brachydactyly type C has been demonstrated. In a kindred with anomalies of upper and lower P0773. Did neuroferritinopathy originate in France? limbs reported by Haws (1963), a gene has been localized in 12q24 C. Fey1, A. R. J. Curtis1, P. F. Chinnery2, A. Lombès3, C. M. Morris1, A. (Polymeropoulos et al., 1996); brachydactyly limited to the hands was Curtis1, J. Burn1; mapped to chromosome 20q11.2 (Lin et al., 1996). Several mutations 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, in the morphogen CDMP1, a member of TGF-b superfamily mapping Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Department of Neurology, to 20q, were predicted to cause haploinsufficiency (Polinkovsky et University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, United al., 1997). We present the clinical findings of 4 affected members of a Kingdom, 3Institut de Myologie, INSERM U523, Paris, France. 3-generation family with involvement of upper limbs only. Blood was We have identified a new dominant neurodegenerative disease, obtained from 8 members of the family. Haplotype analysis showed neuroferritinopathy, which results from a pathological mutation in segregation of the disease phenotype with markers on chromosome the ferritin light chain gene on chromosome 19 (OMIM: 606159). 20q11.2, but not on chromosome 12q24. Subsequently, mutation A single adenine insertion in exon 4 disrupts the DE loop and analysis by sequencing showed a t1380c transition resulting in E helix at the carboxy-terminal end of the subunit and leads to a F354S mutation in CDMP1. This mutation segregated in the 4 brain iron accumulation and a variable clinical phenotype that can affected patients and was never observed in normal members of the mimic Huntington’s disease, parkinsonism and dystonia. Several family, nor in 50 controls. As far as we know, this mutation has never cases have now been recognised in the UK and share a common been described before. haplotype. We have now identified the same mutation in a French family, previously described in the literature with an atypical dystonia, P0771. DGGE analysis of the low density lipoprotein MRI evidence of basal ganglia degeneration and reduced activities of receptor gene mutations in patients with familial several mitochondrial respiratory enzymes (Caparros-Lefebvre et al 1997 J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry, 63: 196-203). We show that this hypercholesterolemia in Greece family shares the closest marker in the disease haplotype found in G. V. Z. Dedoussis1, C. Pitsavos2, G. Sokari1, M. Prassa1, J. north England. Genealogical research has linked some of the English Skoumas2, P. Toutouzas2; families to the 18th century Coulthard family of North Cumbria. The 1Department of Science Dietetics-Nutrition, Harokopio University surname has been traced to a Norman extraction based on the town of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Ippocratio Hospital, Department of of Coudehard raising the possibility of a much more ancient origin for Cardiology, Medical School of Athens, Athens, Greece. the mutation. Further genealogical and haplotype analysis will clarify We used the denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) method the degree to which this mutation should be sought in French people to investigate 45 Greek patients with familial hypercholesterolemia with atypical late onset neurological basal ganglia dysfunction. (FH) for mutations in the promoter region and the 18 exons and their flanking intron sequence of the low density lipoprotein (LDL) P0774. A Novel AVPR2 Mutation in a Kindred with receptor gene. Eight aberrant DGGE patterns were found, and the underlying mutations were characterized by DNA sequencing. These Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus mutations were located in 6 different exons (exons 2, 6, 8, 9, 12, M. C. Lemos1,2, D. Rodrigues1, L. Gomes1, P. T. Christie2, R. V. 14). Among them 8 were missense mutations (C6W, S265R, A370T, Thakker2, M. Carvalheiro1; Q363P, Q363X, D365E, V408M, G571E) and 1 was a splice defect 1Serviço de Endocrinologia, Diabetes e Metabolismo, Hospitais da (2140+5G>A). The splice site mutation and the Q363P are detected Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Nuffield Department for the first time in the Greek population. The prepositus for the of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, splice defect was also double mutant for the mutations Q363X and Oxford, United Kingdom. D365E previously found in Greek-Cypriot subjects. These identified Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is a congenital disorder mutations co-segregated in their family members with defective LDL characterised by the excretion of large volumes of diluted urine receptor activity and hypercholesterolemia, and are thought to be due to impaired renal concentration in response to the hormone causal for the FH phenotype since these were the only molecular arginine vasopressin (AVP). Most cases are inherited in an X-linked defects identified in the entire region and splice site consensus recessive manner and present mutations in the V2 vasopressin sequences. These results demonstrate that there is a broad spectrum receptor (AVPR2) gene. A few cases are autosomal recessive, due of mutations in the LDL receptor gene in the Greek population to mutations in the AVP-sensitive water channel gene, aquaporin-2 (AQP2). P0772. Mutation and haplotype analysis of ABCA4 in A female index case presented with an average fluid intake of 12L/day. An additional four male subjects were affected, presenting mixed Spanish families and implication of this gene in a an inheritance suggestive of an X-linked disorder. Clinical and pattern dystrophy phenotype. biochemical analysis of the index case showed incomplete responses R. Gonzàlez-Duarte1, E. Paloma1, A. Martínez-Mir1, R. Coco2, L. to the water deprivation and vasopressin loading tests. Partial Vilageliu1, S. Balcells1; hemodynamic and coagulation responses to the synthetic V2-specific 1Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, agonist dDAVP were observed. Genetic analysis was performed by Spain, 2IOBA, Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain. PCR amplification of the coding regions and exon/intron boundaries Studies of genotype-phenotype correlations highlighted the function of the AVPR2 gene, followed by automated DNA sequencing. of ABCA4 in retinitis pigmentosa (RP), cone-rod dystrophy (CRD) A 493G→C transversion in exon 2 was observed, leading to the and Stargardt disease (STGD). Initial screening of ABCA4 variants substitution of an alanine by a proline at codon 165. Restriction showed a correlation between the type of mutation and the severity enzyme analysis allowed confirmation of the mutation and its of the disease. Later, in vitro studies of several recombinant cosegregation with the disease. In addition, analysis of 105 ABCR mutants revealed a wide range of severity of biochemical alleles from 70 unrelated individuals revealed an absence of this defects [Sun et al., 2000]. In the present study we have undertaken abnormality. mutational and haplotype analysis of ABCA4 in three mixed Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 238 239 Our study has, therefore, identified a previously unreported mutation P0777. PAH gene mutations identified in Lithuania of the AVPR2 gene, affecting a transmembrane domain of the J. Kasnauskiene, L. Cimbalistiene, V. Kucinskas; receptor. The marked degree of NDI symptoms exhibited by the Human Genetics Centre of Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. heterozygote female patient, in spite of her partial responses to We report the spectrum of the PAH gene mutations in patients with stimulation tests, could be explained by a mechanism of skewed X- phenylketonuria residing in Lithuania. A total of 184 independent inactivation. PAH chromosomes were investigated. All 13 exons of the PAH gene of all PKU probands were scanned for DNA alterations by P0775. Mutation in the gene for protein tyrosine denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). In the cases of a phosphatase SHP-2 (PTPN11) in a large family with specific DGGE pattern was recognized, mutations were identified by Noonan/cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome direct fluorescent automated sequencing or by restriction enzyme E. Schollen, G. Matthijs, E. Legius, J. Fryns; digestion analysis. 19 different PAH gene mutations were identified Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. on 173 PKU chromosomes (95%). The most common ones were Noonan syndrome (NS, MIM 163950) is an autosomal dominant R408W (73.6% chromosomes) and R158Q (6.6% chromosomes) condition characterised by facial dysmorphy, congenital cardiac whereas the remaining mutations appeared to be rare (relative defects and short stature. Most of the clinical features of Noonan frequencies were from 0.55% to 2.2%.). In 11 PKU chromosomes syndrome overlap with cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome. In for 9 patients repeated DGGE scanning of the whole coding region CFC syndrome patients are more severely affected with specific skin of the PAH gene and sequencing exons if specific pattern was abnormalities and moderate mental retardation. Recently, a gene recognized revealed no mutations. Most likely, in these cases mutant responsible for Noonan syndrome in some families has been cloned. chromosomes may harbor large deletions or intronic splice mutations Missense mutations in PTPN11, the gene encoding the non-receptor in the PAH locus. protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, is responsible for at least 50% 52 individuals with PKU were found to be homozygous for the PAH of the Noonan syndrome cases. gene mutation. The vast majority of such patients (51 or 57%) A large, four generation Belgian family with NS in some and CFC appeared to be homozygous for R408W (PAH genotype R408W/ syndrome in other family members, was previously used to fine R408W), while the proband in one family was homozygous for map the Noonan syndrome candidate region in 12q. We now report R158Q (PAH genotype R158Q/R158Q). 33 (36%) patients with PKU the identification of a mutation (Gln79Arg) in the PTPN11 gene were compound heterozygous: in 31 (33%) cases R408W and a rare in this large family. The mutation was found in both the CFC and mutation were identified and in two cases both mutations were rare. NS individuals from this family. We believe that CFC syndrome is a heterogeneous condition (as well as NS) and that some CFC P0778. Mutations of the CYP11A gene could not explain syndrome cases may be the result of variable expression of an SHP- all cases of congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia without 2 mutation. Screening of a larger group of Noonan syndrome and StAR gene mutation in our Caucasian population. CFC syndrome patients is in progress. D. Mallet1, S. Portrat-Doyen1, A. Lecoq1, R. Brauner2, B. Leheup3, J. Carel4, Y. Morel1; P0776. High Prevalence of Molecularly Defined Long QT 1Laboratoire de Biochimie Endocrinienne et Moléculaire, INSERM Syndrome in Finland U329, Hôpital Debrousse, Lyon, France, 2Service d’Endocrinologie H. M. Fodstad1, P. J. Laitinen1, H. Swan2, L. Toivonen2, M. Viitasalo2, Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker enfants malades, Paris, France, K. Kontula1,2; 3Service de Pédiatrie, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, 4Service 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Helsinki University Central d’Endocrinologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital St Vincent de Paul, Paris, Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. France. Long QT syndrome (LQTS) manifests as prolonged QT interval Congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (lipoid CAH) is a rare autosomic on ECG, ventricular arrhythmias and risk of sudden death. The recessive disorder affecting the first step of steroid biosynthesis, prevalence of inherited LQTS is estimated as 1:10 000. Mutations leading to the absence of glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids and sex of five ion channel genes (KCNQ1, HERG, KCNE1, KCNE2 or steroids. Affected individuals present with salt loss, dehydration and SCN5A) may cause LQTS. We have identified two founder mutations patients with XY genotype are phenotypically females. In contrast (KCNQ1-Fin and HERG-Fin) that together account for 35-40% of with other CAH, this disease is not caused by a defect in the enzyme LQTS cases in the genetically isolated Finnish population. (P450scc), but in the Steroidogenic Acute regulatory protein (StAR), This study was conducted to approximate the prevalence of inherited implicated in the transport of cholesterol from the outer to the inner LQTS in the Finns and, in particular, to screen for mutations mitochondrial membrane where P450scc is localized. Almost all of SCN5A among LQTS probands. The causal mutation was lipoid CAH patients (41/42) who are not of Caucasian origin are documented in 86/236 (36%) families studied, and 631 mutation homozygous or compound heterozygous for mutations of the StAR carriers were identified corresponding to a population prevalence gene. By contrast, in our 11 unrelated Caucasian families, we have of 1:8000 (Table 1). Case detection rate suggests that the actual found only 6 families with mutations of the StAR gene. In the 5 other prevalence is at least 1:5000. Simple PCR assays for the KCNQ1- ones, StAR mRNA and Dax-1 and SF-1 genes, of which mutations Fin and HERG-Fin mutations alone detect 35% of cases. Samples cause adrenal insufficiency, have been sequenced and appear to be from 150 LQTS probands without prior mutation detection were normal. As a de novo heterozygous mutation of the CYP11A gene screened for SCN5A mutations. One amino acid change (G5851T encoding P450scc has recently been reported to cause lipoid CAH, corresponding to V1951L) and two silent polymorphisms (G4218A we have sequenced this gene and found mutations in two patients. and C5457T) were detected. This study shows that mutations of the StAR gene are responsible for In conclusion, DNA analyses show great promise in establishment lipoid CAH in only 60% of patients of Caucasian origin. Compound of the LQTS diagnosis and may identify variants showing a disease- heterozygous mutations of the CYP11A gene can also be responsible modifying role. Inherited LQTS may be more prevalent in Finland if residual P450scc enzymatic activity produces enough progesterone than many other Western populations. The LQT1, LQT2 and LQT3 to avoid spontaneous abortion. Nevertheless, other genes should be subtypes of LQTS occur in relative frequencies of 75%:21%:4%, involved to explain the genetic lesion in our 3 remaining families. respectively. P0779. CTG repeat instability in human DM1 germ cells. Table 1. L. Martorell1, D. Monckton2, M. Baiget1; LQTS type Mutation carriers Families Mutation 1Genetics Unit. Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Division KCNQ1 475 66 6 of Molecular Genetics. Institute of Biomedical and Life KCNQ1-Fin 428 59 Sciences,University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. HERG 133 19 9 Myotonic dystrophy (DM1) is caused by the expansion of an unstable CTG repeat located in the 3’-untranslated region of the DM gene HERG-Fin 71 9 (DMPK). The number of CTG repeats is polymorphic in the general SCN5A 23 1 1 population a ranging from 5 to 37 repeats. DM1 patients have All LQTS patients 631 86 16 expansions of greater than 50 repeats and up to many thousands. The size of the repeat is positively correlated with the severity 238 Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 239 of the disease and inversely correlated with the age of onset of a possibility of presence of partial HPRT deficiency in girls with symptoms.Dramatic instability with very large intergenerational unexplained hyperuriceamia. increases and contractions is observed in DM1 patients.Detailed 2. Results of biochemical tests performed in heterozygotes may fail studies of somatic mosaicism have revealed that it is tissue specific, because of X-inactivation status. Mutation analysis is necessary for a biased toward further expansion and continuous throughout the life reliable identification of carriers of mutated gene. of an individual.The trinucleotide repeats instability mechanisms (Supported by grants NE 6557-3-01 of the Czech Ministry of Health involved in DM1 are unknown.In order to gain a better understanding and MSM-111100005 of the Czech Ministry of Education) of the dynamics of repeat instability in the male germline, we have used sensitive small pool-PCR analyses (SP-PCR) to compare P0782. Paternal inheritance of mtDNA in a patient with blood and sperm DNA from 23 males, with different age, CTG repeat mitochondrial myopathy expansion and clinical form.Analysis of sperm DNA from control M. Schwartz1, J. Vissing2; individuals showed that small normal alleles were stable. Sperm 1Department of Clinical genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, samples of DM1 patients revealed both different levels of mosaicism Denmark, 2Department of Neurology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, and patterns of distribution for the expanded allele, designing a Denmark. characteristic pattern in each clinical group. The comparison of these Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is thought to be strictly maternally results with those obtained from peripheral blood will allow us to inherited in mammalian species: Sperm mitochondria disappear in define, in accordance with age and clinical form, specific patterns of early embryogenesis, either through selective destruction, inactivation mosaicism in somatic and germline cells for DM1 individuals. or by simple dilution due to the surplus of oocyte mitochondria. A very small amount of paternally inherited mtDNA has been P0780. Mutation analysis of PAH gene among Latvian detected by PCR, identified after several generations of interspecific patients backcrosses. However, recent studies using microinjected sperm N. Pronina, R. Lugovska, P. Vevere, A. Kornejeva; into mouse oocytes support the hypothesis that sperm mitochondria Latvian State Medical Genetics centre, Childrens` Hospital are targeted for destruction by nuclear-encoded proteins, but the “Gailezers”, Riga, Latvia. underlying mechanism remains a mystery. In this report we show for Phenylketonuria (PKU), an autosomal recessive genetic disorder, the first time that paternally derived mtDNA can indeed survive and is caused by a deficiency of the hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase contribute substantially to the mtDNA pool in man. In a patient with enzyme (PAH). Sixty patients were detected from 1980 to 2001; the mitochondrial myopathy due to a novel two base pair (bp) deletion in approximate incidence of PKU is 1 of 8700 new-borns in Latvia. the ND2 gene, 90% of the muscle mtDNA was paternal in origin. The Fifty patients from 48 unrelated families were screened for the two mtDNA haplotypes were different at 18 positions. The mtDNA presence of six PAH gene mutations: R408W, R261Q, R252W, haplotype in muscle was identical to the haplotype found in the G272X R158Q and IVS10nt546 using ASO and PCR/RED methods. father, while that of blood was identical to the mtDNA haplotype in The mutation detection rate was 86,0% among the studied alleles. the mother. This phenomenon may be more common than generally Out of 100 alleles under study, 77 (77%) were identified as defective believed because mitochondrial haplotypes are often not investigated due to R408W. Twenty-eight patients were homozygotes for R408W, and because substantial differences are required in order to 21 were compound heterozygotes for R408W. Other five mutations distuguise the haplotypes in a routine analysis. had a very low incidence of PKU alleles: R158Q -4%, R261Q - 2%, G272X - 1%, R252W - 1%, IVS10nt - 1%. In 14 cases (14%) P0783. Haploinsufficiency of DYRK1A on chromosome probands were compound heterozygotes for different PAH locus 21q22.2 is associated with microcephaly mutations, one of them was unidentified. The location of unknown M. Hoeltzenbein1, A. Schröer1, J. Wirth1, B. Heye2, S. Stengel- mutations was found using the DGGE method. DNA sequence Rutkowski2, N. Tommerup3, H. H. Ropers1, V. M. Kalscheuer1; analysis of the exons which showed positive DGGE signals found out 1Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4 different mutations: E280K (5%), A104D (2%), E178G (1%), P281L 2Kinderzentrum, München, Germany, 3Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for (1%). The sequence analysis of second allele for other chromosomes Functional Genome Research, IMBG, The Panum Institute, University is in progress. of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Presence of severe R408W mutation in 77% of PKU alleles explains Recent studies of primary microcephaly are frequently based on the high rate of PKU patients with severe phenotype. homozygosity mapping in consanguineous families and have revealed 5 loci for recessive forms of microcephaly, but so far no P0781. Highly skewed X-inactivation pattern in a female gene has been identified by this approach. Examination of balanced with unique presentation of hypoxanthine-guanine phosp translocations is an alternative approach to identify genes involved in horibosyltransferase (HPRT) deficiency. microcephaly. We report on a 12-year old girl with prenatal onset of L. Dvorakova1, J. Hujova1, R. Dobrovolny1, L. Stolnaja1, E. microcephaly, a severe developmental delay including speech defect Tietzeova1, M. Hrebicek1, M. Kumsta2, I. Sebesta1,2; and seizures. Structural brain malformations were excluded by MRI. 1Inst. of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Prague, Czech Republic, Chromosome analysis revealed an apparently balanced translocation 2Inst.Clin.Biochem., Prague, Czech Republic. t(2;21)(q22;q22). Molecular cytogenetic techniques were used to find Partial deficiency of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltr breakpoint-spanning clones. Subsequent breakpoint analysis showed ansferase (HPRT) is an X-linked recessive disorder of purine that the chromosome rearrangement led to disruption of the DYRK1A metabolism characterised with onset of gout and/or urolitiasis gene. Semiquantitative RT-PCR experiments revealed a 50% often in adolescence. This phenotype occurs almost exclusively in reduction of DYRK1A expression in the patient’s lymphoblastoid cell males. We follow a girl who presents gouty arthritis of big toe and line compared to a control cell line. The chromosome 2 breakpoint hyperuricaemia from the age of 9 years. Normal activity of phosphorib maps within the putative tumor suppressor LRP1B, a member of the osylpyrophosphate synthetase, loss of HPRT activity, raised adenine low density lipoprotein receptor family. phosphoribosyltransferase activity and raised nicotinamide adenine Dyrk-related kinases belong to a new family of protein kinases that dinucleotide concentration in erythrocytes revealed partial HPRT have been suggested to be involved in the regulation of cellular deficiency. The loss of HPRT activity was found also in the patient’s growth and development. The Drosophila homolog minibrain (mnb) father, who presented with renal colics and gout since the age of 18 is required for normal postembryonic neurogenesis and mutations years. The sister of our female patient is asymptomatic and her HPRT in this gene lead to size reduction of the brain. We could show that activity is within normal limits. haploinsufficiency of DYRK1A is associated with microcephaly. This Mutation analysis revealed that both sisters inherited from their father is supported by the finding of microcephaly as a main feature in a previously described mutation in the 3rd exon of HPRT gene, patients with monosomy 21q22. We would suggest that other patients c.158T>C (V53A). X-inactivation study performed in peripheral blood with primary microcephaly should be screened for mutations in the leukocytes showed that the X-inactivation is highly skewed in both DYRK1A gene. sisters leaving the paternal mutated chromosome predominantly active in the symptomatic girl, while the second asymptomatic girl has almost exclusively active maternal non-affected chromosome. Conclusions: 1. The unusual description of phenotype shows Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 240 241 P0784. Current models of mutagenesis applied to virilizing form (SV) , 50 with nonclassic (NC) form and of 50 unrelated missense single-nucleotide substitutions in the human healthy donors. Significant decrease of DQA1 0401:0501 alleles was lamin A/C gene registered in SW patients compared to SV , NC patients and controls A. Todorova1, M. Dabauvalle2, C. R. Müller1; (15%, 25%, 40% and 36% respectively; p<0.05). About 39% of the 1Department of Human Genetics, Biozentrum of the University chromosomes in SW patients and 16% in SV patients had either of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 2Department of Cell and major deletion or large conversions modifying the CYP21B gene. These mutations were predominantly identified in chromosomes with Developmental Biology, Biozentrum of the University of Würzburg, DQA1 0101:0102/0201:0601 alleles. Another major mutation 656A -G Würzburg, Germany. was registered in 22% of SW and 16% of SV groups. This nucleotide Autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy is caused change corresponds to DQA1 0103/0401:0501 alleles. The frequency by mutations in the gene, coding the lamin A/C nuclear lamina of DQA1 alleles in NC group of CAH patients is not different from proteins. Surprisingly, mutations in the nuclear envelope proteins this one in the control group. DQA1 alleles typing may be used, as lead to muscular dystrophy. The pathological mutations in that case additional method in prenatal diagnosis of CAH. are mainly missense, which are most informative for understanding mechanisms of mutagenesis. P0787. Mapping of a Candidate Region for Autism on We analysed 27 missense substitutions of the lamin A/C gene, Chromosome 2q32. regarding their possible origin. Transitions account for 59.3% versus S. Ennis1,2, J. Ng Wanjing2, G. Kearney3, M. Fitzgerald3, R. transversions 40.7%. Nine transitions (33.3%) in CpG islands could Stallings1,2, D. E. Barton1,2, A. J. Green1,2, L. Gallagher3, M. Gill3; be explained by methylation-mediated deamination. We analysed 1Department of Medical Genetics, University College Dublin, Dublin, the mutability at dinucleotide level. As expected the CG dinucleotide Ireland, 2National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady’s Hospital was most frequently affected. Single-base mutability was assessed for Sick Children, Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland, 3Department of Psychiatry, on non-CpG mutations and the obtained order was: G=C>T>A. Trinity Centre for Health Sciences, St. James’s Hospital, Dublin, Other mechanisms of mutagenesis (e.g. slipped-mispairing during Ireland. replication) may require specific flanking sequences (arrest sites for Autism is a relatively common primary developmental disorder, with a polymerase a, direct repeats, palindromes and symmetric elements). significant genetic component. Routine investigations for the cause of We analysed 15 nucleotides upstream and downstream the mutation. autism, including chromosome and fragile X analysis, almost always Slipped-mispairing hypothesis is applicable in 37% of the cases. The are normal. There is a polygenic component to autism, and large sib- arrest site for polymerase a was associated with 25.9% of mutations. pair studies have been carried out by a number of groups worldwide. Direct repeats, palindromes and/or symmetric elements were almost Several groups have identified associations between autism and invariably present in all the analysed areas. a wide area of chromosome 2q, flanked by markers D2S364 and In conclusion, there is no a single mechanism, which can explain all D2S2188 (Buxbaum et al & the IMGSAC respectively) which shows the cases. Among the investigated mechanisms, the “environment”, the strongest evidence for linkage. These results strongly suggest a i.e. the presence of repeated motifs seems to play a major role. predisposing gene(s) to autism within the 2q region. We have recently identified a patient with high-functioning autism, P0785. Outcome of three donor splice site mutations who has a small but cytogenetically visible de novo deletion of accounting for congenital afibrinogenemia and order of chromosome 2q32 which falls within these linkage findings. This intron removal in the fibrinogen alpha gene (FGA). would appear to be the smallest known deletion of this part of M. Neerman-Arbez, A. David, C. Attanasio; chromosome 2, suggesting that the deletion includes a predisposing Division of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre, Geneva, gene(s) for autism. Switzerland. Fine mapping of the deleted region was carried out using markers Congenital afibrinogenemia (MIM # 202400) is a rare, autosomal from 2q32, to map the exact size of the deleted region. This recessive disorder characterised by the complete absence of reduces the very large linkage region by >75% to approximately 8.7 circulating fibrinogen. Our studies on the molecular basis of the megabases. The region contains approximately 16 known genes and disease showed that the most common genetic defect is a donor 16 ESTs, a number of which are potential candidates for autism. splice mutation in FGA intron 4, IVS4+1G>T. Two other FGA donor We present results of a wider study for the presence of splice mutations, in intron 1 (IVS1+3A>G) and in intron 3 (IVS3+1_ submicroscopic microdeletions, and of candidate genes, +4delGTAA) were identified in afibrinogenemia patients. Because incorporating both linkage disequilibrium and mutational screening it was impossible to directly study the effect of these mutations on approaches in a panel of 77 Irish families with autism within the mRNA splicing in patient hepatocytes we designed a transfected cell mapped region. approach. For the common IVS4 mutation, multiple cryptic donor Am J Hum Genet 2001 Jun;68(6):1514-20, Sep;69(3):570-81 splice sites in exon 4 and intron 4 were found to be utilised. One of these, situated 4 bp downstream of the normal site was used in P0788. Mutations of the PKD2 gene in families with 85% of transcripts resulting in a 4 bp insertion-frameshift leading autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease in Czech to premature truncation of FGA. Analysis of the IVS1+3 mutation Republic showed intron 1 inclusion in the majority of transcripts, while the J. Reiterová1, J. Stekrová2, V. Kebrlová2, M. Kohoutová2, M. Merta1, IVS3delGTAA mutation caused exon 3 skipping. The different J. Zidovska2; outcomes of these donor splice mutations appear to follow the model 1Dept.of Nephrology, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, proposed by Byers et al.(EJHG 2001, vol 9 suppl 1 p.80) in a study Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, of fibrillar collagen genes, where donor splice mutations occurring Prague, Czech Republic. in a rapidly-spliced intron with respect to upstream introns lead Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the preferentially to exon skipping, while mutations in later-spliced introns most common hereditary renal disease.The disease is caused by lead to intron inclusion or cryptic splice site utilisation. Indeed, we mutations of the PKD1 and PKD2 genes. DNA presymptomatic found that in FGA introns 2 and 3 were spliced first, followed by intron diagnosis is performed in our referential laboratory, using highly 4 and finally intron 1. polymorphic microsatellite markers for DNA linkage analysis of both genes. Presymptomatic DNA diagnosis was performed in P0786. DQA1 polimorphism analysis in Congenital 186 unrelated ADPKD families. Detection of PKD2 mutations was Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) patients from Russia. established in 39 families (in 9 families the disease was clearly linked N. Osinovskaya, T. Ivaschenko; to PKD2 gene and in 30 families with mild clinical course was not Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. possible to exclude the linkage to PKD1 gene) and in 27 patients with Virilizing congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is the most common end stage renal failure later than in 63 years.An affected member cause of genital ambiguity. 90-95% of CAH cases are caused by from each family was analyzed by heteroduplex analysis (HA). 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Particular forms of 21-hydroxylase Samples which exhibited shifted bands on HA were amplified and deficiency are associated with particular combinations of HLA- after purification sequenced in both directions. Twelve mutations antigens or haplotypes. Typing of DQA1 alleles (0101:0102, 0103, were identified, nine mutations unique for Czech population and 0201:0601, 0301, 0401:0501) was carried out in DNA samples of four mutations from unique mutations were not presented. Four 86 CAH patients (23 with salt wasting (SW) form , 13 with simple new unique mutations are the following: 1.nonsense mutation in 240 Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 241 exon 1, 145 C>T (Q49X), 2.missense mutation in exon 4, 917 P0791. Easy detection methods for recurrent GJB2 G>A (R306Q), 3.frameshift mutation in exon 4, 1078-1081 del C, mutations in the Greek population 4.missense mutation in exon 5, 1258 A>G (R420G).Segregation T. Antoniadi1, A. Hatzaki1, A. Pampanos2, T. Iliades3, N. Voyatzis3, of the mutation with the disease in each family was tested by HA J. Economides4, P. Leotsakos4, P. Neou5, M. Tsakanikos5, M. or sequencing. Establishment of localization and type of mutations Grigoriadou2, A. Skevas6, M. B. Petersen1,2; and genotype/phenotype correlation in affected families will improve 1”MITERA” Maternity &Surgical Center, Athens, Greece, 2Institute of presymptomatic DNA diagnosis and could help to assess the clinical Child Health, Athens, Greece, 3Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, prognosis of ADPKD patients. Thessaloniki, Greece, 4”Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Supported by the grant project IGA MZ CR NE/5996-3. Greece, 5”P.&A. Kyriakou” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 6University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece. P0789. Type VII collagen gene (COL7A1) mutations Mutations in the GJB2 gene encoding the gap-junction protein survey in Italian patients affected by epidermolysis connexin-26 (Cx26) on chromosome 13q11 have been shown as a bullosa dystrophica major contributor to prelingual, non-syndromic recessive deafness. M. Colombi1, R. Gardella1, D. Castiglia2, P. Posteraro2, N. Zoppi1, E. A variety of techniques has been developed for screening the GJB2 Nebuloso2, M. Paradisi2, G. Tadini3, J. A. McGrath4, G. Zambruno2, S. gene for known and unknown mutations, especially the most frequent Barlati1; mutation in the Caucasian population, the 35delG. However, as there 1University, Brescia, Italy, 2Istituto Dermopatico are almost a hundred sequence alterations identified so far, and their dell’Immacolata,IRCCS, Roma, Italy, 3Policlinico, IRCCS, Milano, geographic distribution differs a lot, there is great interest for a rapid Italy, 4Guy’s King’s College and St Thomas’Hospital, London, United and easy method of identifying other mutations. Here we present Kingdom. easy screening techniques for the 3 recurrent GJB2 mutations in the Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB) is a rare skin disorder Greek population, besides the 35delG. These mutations, K224Q, showing clinical heterogeneity and transmitted either in dominant W24X and L90P, were originally identified by DGGE and/or direct (DDEB) or recessive (RDEB) mode. All variants of DEB have been genomic sequencing of the coding region. We developed ARMS-PCR associated to mutations in type VII collagen gene (COL7A1). More for detecting the L90P and K224Q mutations and PCR-RFLP for the than 200 mutations, often specific to individual families, have been W24X mutation, using 6 previously genotyped samples. Additionally, disclosed in this gene and some of them have been shown to be 25 unrelated Greek patients (21 familial and 4 sporadic cases) with characteristic of certain ethnic populations. non-syndromic hearing impairment (NSHI), previously screened for We report the survey of COL7A1 mutations in Italian DEB patients. the 35delG mutation and found to be negative (20 familial cases) From the analysis of 51 DEB families 42 mutations were identified, 18 or heterozygotes (1 familial and 4 sporadic cases), were screened of which are novel. Genotype-phenotype correlations were in line with for the 3 mutations. We found the L90P mutation in compound the general rules already drawn in DEB. In the characterised families, heterozygosity with the 35delG in a sporadic case using the newly we performed 70 analyses of the carriers of mutations and 3 prenatal standardized method. diagnoses. The fast and easy detection of recurrent mutations can significantly Six frequent mutations were identified in Italian RDEB patients, contribute to the diagnosis of deafness, carrier detection and genetic i.e. the 497insA, the 4783-1G→A, the 7344G→A, the 425A→G, counseling. the G1664A, and the 8441-14del 21. While the 7344G→A and the 425A→G mutations have been found in different populations, the P0792. Intragenic deletion of the STS gene involving remaining have been identified prevalently or only in Italian patients. exon 9 in X-linked ichtyosis The haplotype analysis, together with the common geographic origin A. L. Jimenez1, M. Valdes2, M. Rivera3, S. Kofman-Alfaro3, S. of the patients carrying the frequent Italian COL7A1 mutations, Cuevas3; has evidenced an ancestral common origin of the mutated alleles. 1Hospital General de Mexico, México DF, Mexico, 2Centro Nacional Altogether the 6 frequent mutations cover about 43% of RDEB alleles de Rehabilitacion (INO), Mexico DF, Mexico, 3Hospital General de in Italian patients and therefore they should be screened firstly in the Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico. patients not yet characterised at molecular level. X-linked ichthyosis (XLI) is an inherited disease characterized by dark, adhesive and regular skin scales present at birth or early after P0790. Albright’s Hereditary Osteodystrophy: Screening birth. The primary defect of XLI is the deficiency of steroid sulfatase for GNAS1 mutations by DHPLC and expansion of the enzyme (STS), which hydrolyzes 3-beta-hydroxysteroid sulfates. mutation and polymorphism spectrum. The STS gene locus is located on Xp22.3. Reports in the literature S. J. Rickard1, L. C. Wilson2; indicate a complete deletion of STS gene and flanking sequences in 1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Child 85-90% of XLI patients, while only 8 intragenic deletions and 11 point Health & Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom. mutations have been reported. This study reports a Mexican patient Albright’s Hereditary Osteodystrophy (AHO) results from with XLI and a novel partial deletion of the STS gene. XLI diagnosis heterozygous deactivating mutations in the GNAS1 gene and is was confirmed through STS assay in leukocytes using 7-[3H]- associated with short stature, obesity, brachymetaphalangia, ectopic dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate as a substrate. The STS gene was ossifications and learning disability. The inheritance is autosomal analyzed by PCR. STS activity was undetectable in the XLI patient dominant but modified by genomic imprinting. Additional endocrine (0.0 pmol/mg protein/h) and very low in his mother (0.32 pmol/mg abnormalities, known as pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP1a), are protein/h vs 0.84 pmol/mg protein/h of normal control). PCR analysis associated with mutations of the maternal but not the paternally showed no amplification of exon 9 and normal amplification of exons derived GNAS1 allele. The AHO phenotype is heterogeneous and 1-8 and 10 of the STS gene. We have analyzed more than 120 the diagnosis is difficult to confirm in the absence of PHPIa without XLI patients and this is the first deletion in exon 9 of the STS gene access to GNAS1 mutation screening. reported in the literature. GNAS1 lies within a complex imprinting cluster at chromosome 20q13. It comprises 13 exons spanning 20kb and encodes the 394 P0793. Novel mutations in two Mexican families with amino-acid alpha subunit of the adenylyl cyclase stimulatory protein, Norrie Gs. M. R. Rivera1, A. L. Jimenez2, S. Chiñas1, M. Arenas3, S. A. Cuevas1, We have screened over 80 patients with features of AHO for GNAS1 S. H. Kofman-Alfaro1; mutations using DHPLC for exons 2-13, and sequencing for exon 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico, 2Hospital General 1. To date we have identified fourteen mutations spread throughout de Mexico servicio de Genetica, Mexico DF, Mexico, 3Centro nacional the gene and two novel exonic variants, V36V and S54G which are de Rehabilitacion (INO), Mexico DF, Mexico. likely to be polymorphic. In addition, we have identified a small GCC Norrie disease (ND) is an uncommon X-linked recessive expansion in the 5’UTR of an affected patient, a common intronic neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by bilateral congenital deletion polymorphism close to a splice site, and five further intronic blindness, one half of the cases present mental retardation and one variants. These findings together with evidence for and against third have sensosorineural deafness. pathogenicity will be presented in more detail. The ND gene is localized in Xp11.3 and has three exons, one untranslated and it encodes a polypeptide of 131 a.a. called norrina, Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 242 243 that has an important function in vascularization and differentiation of P0796. Molecular analysis of the TBX5 gene in patients the inner retina. with Holt-Oram syndrome More than 70 nonsense and missense mutations, a translocation, A. Moschik1, A. Kujat1, S. Spranger2, C. Grünauer-Kloevekorn1, U. G. an inversion, and several deletions in the spectrum of ND have been Froster1; reported. The high number of pathological changes in this small gene 1University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 2Praxis für Humangenetik suggests that norrina conformation is extremelly prone to disruption Dr.S.Spranger/PD Dr.B. Kazmierczak, Bremen, Germany. from changes ocurring anywhere in its structure. Holt-Oram syndrome (OMIM #142900, McKusick 1986, syn: Heart- We describe 2 novel mutations in the ND gene in two mexican Hand syndrome) is a rare disorder involving developmental defects families. The affected individuals, showed typical ocular features of of heart and upper limbs. Main symptoms include ASD, VSD and ND with deafness and mental retardation. Exons 2-3 of the Norrie defects of the thumb and radius. Malformations of the lower limbs gene were analyzed through PCR and DNA sequencing. Family 1, never were described. The syndrome follows an autosomal dominant showed a missense mutation (A97P) within exon 3 in the patien and pattern of inheritance with complete penetrance and variable heterozygocity in the mother and sister. Family 2, present a deletion expression. This developmental disorder is associated with mutations of 246 pb within exon 3 observed only in the patient. in theTBX5 gene which plays an important role in the morphogenesis of heart and limbs in vertebrates. The TBX5 gene contains a highly P0794. Clinical and molecular characterisation of conserved T-box DNA binding domain. The Holt-Oram phenotype Osteogenesis imperfecta in patients from Lithuania results from haploinsufficiency of TBX5. E. Benusiene, V. Kucinskas, R. Slibinskas, D. Kasperaviciute; We performed the mutation analysis of the TBX5 gene by direct Human Genetic Centre, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. automated sequencing of the coding region (exons 2 to 9) and Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable connective tissue disorder the exon-intron boundaries in 20 unrelated patients with various caused in >90% cases by dominant mutations in the genes COL1A1 malformations of the upper limbs and heart, clinically diagnosed and COL1A2, which encode the proα1(I) and proα2(I) chains of type I as Holt-Oram syndrome. In three cases a familiarity of the heart- procollagen respectively. The severity of the OI phenotype is strongly hand defects occured. This analysis of the TBX5 gene identified associated with the polypeptide chain type, mutation site, flanking four different mutations in five unrelated families. Three mutations sequences, and residue substituted for glycine. The aim of the study were identified for the first time, only one mutation was described was to evaluate clinical manifestation of OI on the molecular basis of previously. All patients with disease related mutations in the TBX5 disease. gene presented variable defects of the heart and upper limbs. Further Probands from 16 OI families (type I) and 22 sporadic patients with studies involving clinical and genetic investigations are necessary OI type I (11), type II (3) and type III (8) were screened for mutations to correlate specific mutations in the TBX5 gene with phenotype in 40 exons of the COL1A1 gene using DNA heteroduplex analysis. expression of the heart and hand defects. Direct DNA sequencing revealed 10 OI (type I, III) causing mutations in 12 unrelated patients. Out of them, 8 (E500X, R183X, c.2165- P0797. Paternal 11p15.1-pter heterodisomy associated 2166insCTCTCTAG, c.1787delT, c.1786-1787insC, IVS19+1G>A, with the Beckwith-Wiedemann phenotype resulting from IVS20-2A>G, IVS22-1G>T) were null mutations (due to a premature malsegregation of criptic familial translocation stop codon arising either directly from a point mutation or indirectly S. Russo1, B. Dossena2, M. Mencarelli1, A. Bergo1, F. Cogliati1, F. from a frameshift mutation, or from a mutation causing an abnormality Cavalleri1, M. Tibiletti2, L. Larizza3,1; in mRNA splicing) leading to mild OI phenotype. OI was differently 1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2Ospedale Circolo, Insubria manifested in related patients with identical genotype and ranged University, Varese, Italy, 3Department of Biology and Genetics, from mild to severe phenotype in two families. This finding suggests University of Milan, Milano, Italy. that the phenotypic expression of the disease may be influenced Beckwith-Wiedemann (MIM#130650) is a developmental disorder by other factors (genetic or epigenetic), which may be important in with variable phenotype and genetic heterogeneity. Pre and postnatal the process of bone formation. The relation between location and overgrowth, macroglossia, and anterior abdominal wall defects nature of the glycine substitution and severity of OI was observed for represent the main clinical signs of the syndrome associated with expressed point mutations (G79R, G481A). an increased susceptibility (7.5%) to a variety of embryogenetic tumors such as Wilms’ tumors, adrenocortical carcinoma and P0795. A new mutation in ferroportin 1 gene causes hepatoblastoma. The BWS locus is subjected to genomic imprinting, dominant inherited hemochromatosis with lesions involving a cluster of genes on 11p15.5. A small A. Roetto; fraction (2%) of patients carry chromosome 11p15.5 abnormalities, University of Torino, Orbassano-Torino, Italy. duplications of paternal origin and balanced translocations or Ferroportin 1 (FP1) is a human iron exporter expressed inversion with breakpoints on the maternal chromosome. Paternal in enterocytes, macrophages, hepatocytes and placental uniparental disomy (pUPD) (20%), point mutations in the p57 gene syncytiotrophoblasts. FP1 coding gene, SCL11A3, consists of 8 (5-20%) and alteration in the methylation pattern of H19 and IGF2 exons and maps to 2q32. imprinted genes are the most common pathogenetic mechanisms. Heterozygous mutations of FP1 cause hemochromatosis type We refer on a patient displaying features such as gigantism, 4 (HFE4). At variance with classic hemochromatosis HFE4 macroglossia, anterior abdominal wall defects and nephromegaly, shows dominant inheritance, high serum ferritin before increased consistent with BWS. The family records signaled two spontaneous transferrin saturation and iron accumulation both in hepatocytes and abortions and a brother presenting with BWS features and macrophages. Two mutations of FP1 have been reported: (N144H) in nephroblastoma who deceased at four weeks. Standard karyotyping exon 5 and (A77D) in exon 3. did not evidence chromosomal abnormalities. Microsatellite We report the finding of a new FP1 mutation in 2 female patients segregation analysis carried on to assess 11pUPD revealed paternal (mother and daughter) with high serum ferritin, normal transferrrin heterodisomy within 11p15.4-pter. By using the multiprobe telomeric saturation and signs of hepatic iron overload at liver biopsy and FISH method the suspicion of a criptic translocation involving 11p15 SQUID. Direct sequencing of the 8 exons of FP1 gene in both was confirmed by the finding of an unbalanced translocation with patients identified an heterozygous GTT deletion in exon 5, derivative 21/11 in the proband and a balanced t(11;21)(11p15.4;21q corresponding to a valine deletion in a valine triplet at position 160- 22.3) in proband’s normal brother and father. Microsatellite analysis 162 (V162del) in the protein. The same mutation was not present in of 21q22.3-qter region allowed to map the 21q monosomy between 50 normal controls. D21S890 and qter. The contribution of 21q monosomy to the proband The deletion occurs close to N144H in the highly conserved putative phenotype is under study. transmembrane domain involved in iron binding/transport. The finding of two different mutations in this domain provides further evidence P0798. ALK1 gene and Hereditary Hemorrhagic of its relevance for FP1 function and suggests a loss of function as Telangiectasia (HHT): preliminary results of a screeening the mechanism of the disease. Our results add further support to the on 52 Italian families identify 13 new mutations. heterogeneity of hemochromatosis in Italy. C. Olivieri1, E. Buscarini2, G. Delù3, L. Malvezzi3, F. Pagella3, E. Mira3, C. Danesino1; 1Medical Genetics, University Of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 242 Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 243 2Gastroenterology, “Ospedale Civile di Crema”, Crema, Italy, (NSHL) after aminoglycoside treatments and 29 sporadic patients 3Otorinolaringoiatric Clinic, IRCCS “S.Matteo”, Pavia, Italy. with NSHL have been collected. For each proband the deafness Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT) (OMIM 187300) is an was documented : age of onset, audiometry, temporal bones CT autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in either one of scan. ARNr 12S, ARNt leucine and ARNt serine were analysed by two genes: Endoglin (ENG, OMIM #131195) (HHT1) and Activin Like denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and sequencing. The A1555G Kinase1 (ALK1, OMIM #601284 ) (HHT2). Evidence for a third locus mutation was present and homoplasmic in a large family (19 affected has also been reported. patients).The affected subjects presented a congenital bilateral and The clinical presentation typically includes epistaxis and sensorineural hearing loss. The deafness was severe to profound telangiectasies; a diagnosis can be held for confirmed if 3 of the 4 and age-stable. T7511C mutation was observed homoplasmic suggested diagnostic criteria (epistaxes, telangiectasies, visceral or heteroplasmic in two large french families.The age at onset of lesions, positive family history) are present. The phenotype is deafness was variable. The bilateral and sensorineural hearing loss highly variable and penetrance is complete by the age of 40 years. was stable or progessive. The A3243G mutation, usually observed in Arterovenous fistulae are frequently observed in liver, lungs and brain syndromic deafness (MELAS and MIDD), was founded in one family and may cause severe life threatening complication. with an isolated sensorineural hearing loss (4 affected patients). The The number of mutations identified so far is limited; in particular hearing impairement was postlingual and evolutive with variable for ALK1 only 24 mutations have been reported, studied in single severity (mild to severe). No diabetes mellitus, cardiomyopathy or patients or in very small samples. Here we report the preliminary neurologic symptoms were associated. No mt mutation was observed results of the first screening conducted on 52 Italian families in which in sporadic cases. In conclusion, we have observed a mitochondrial at least one subject results clinically affected by HHT. We analysed mutation in 7.2% of non syndromic MIHL patients with a low exons 3, 7 and 8 of the ALK1 gene by either SSCP or dHPLC prevalence of A1555G (1.8%). A3243G was observed for the first techniques. We were able to identify 16 mutations, 13 of them are time in a family with NSHL. These results suggest that many different previously unrepoeted; 2 of them were found in 2 unrelated families mitochondrial mutations could be involved in non syndromic MIHL. with the same geographic origin. 6 mutations have been found in exon 3, which codifies for the extracellular receptor domain; 4 P0801. Brain Asymmetry In Beckwith-wiedemann mutations in exon 7 and 4 in exon 8 which codify for the intracellular Syndrome, A Marker For Paternal Isodisomy ? Tyrosin-kinase domain. Six of these patients (37,5%) present liver P. BITOUN1, F. Rigaudiere’2, C. Junien3, I. Henri3, J. Gaudelus4; involvement. 1C.H.U. Paris-Nord,Hopital Jean Verdier, Genetique Medicale, Bondy, France, 2Hopital Lariboisiere, Paris, France, 3Inserm U 383, Paris, P0799. Novel SCN5A Mutation Leading Either to Isolated France, 4Hopital Jean Verdier; Pediatrie, Bondy, France. Cardiac Conduction Defect or Brugada Syndrome in a Hemihypertrophy is acommon finding of the Beckwith-Wiedemann Large Family syndrome (BWS) particularly in limbs and occasionally in the face or J. Schott1, F. Kyndt1, V. Probst2, F. Potet1, J. Chevallier2, S. jaw. Brain hemihypertrophy is not commonly reported. Demolombe1, I. Baro1, J. Moisan2, D. Escande1, H. Le Marec2; We describe a female patient with right hemihypertrophy noted 1INSERM U533, Nantes, France, 2CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France. at birth by right facial hemihypertrophy and jaw asymmetry. Limb The SCN5A gene encoding the human cardiac sodium channel α involvement was also noted in lower more than in upper limbs. Right subunit plays a major role in cardiac electrophysiology. Mutations brain hemihypertrophy was found using visual evoked potentials in SCN5A lead to a large spectrum of phenotypes including the (VEP) and persists after 14 years of follow-up. long-QT syndrome, the Brugada syndrome and isolated progressive Paternal isodisomy was demonstrated using molecular markers cardiac conduction defect (ICCD or Lenègre disease). In the present for the BWS critical region as published in 1993*. This patient has study, we report the identification of a novel SCN5A missense developed normally albeit with recurrent ear infections , right leg mutation causing either Brugada syndrome or ICCD in the same hypertrophy requiring 1cm sole on left leg and slight scoliosis. She pedigree. In a large French family, we identified a G-to-A mutation at has otherwise normal growth and development. position 4372 that was predicted to change a glycine for an arginine The question raised is whether this brain asymmetry reflected by (G1408R) between the DIII-S5 and DIII-S6 domains of the sodium the asymmetric VEP is simply a marker for the BWS or a marker channel protein. Among 45 family members, 13 were carrying the for the isodisomy. The evidence on this issue will be discussed and G1408R mutation. Four patients from 2 family collateral branches recommendations made to routinely study the VEP in BWS patients. showed typical Brugada phenotype including ST segment elevation *Henry I, Puech A, Riesewijk A, Ahnine L, Mannens M, Beldjord C, in the right precordial leads and right bundle branch block. One Bitoun P, Tournade MF, Landrieu P, Junien C. Somatic mosaicism for symptomatic patient with Brugada phenotype required implantation partial paternal isodisomy in Wiedemann-Beckwith syndrome: a post- of a cardioverter-defibrillator. Seven patients from 3 other family fertilization event. Eur J Hum Genet. 1993;1(1):19-29. collateral branches had ICCD but no Brugada phenotype (negative flecainide test). One patient with ICCD had episodes of syncope and P0802. Analysis of large structural changes of the factor required a pacemaker implantation. Expression study of the G1408R VIII gene involving intron 22 in severe haemophilia A mutated SCN5A showed no detectable Na+ current but a normal A. Bors1, H. Andrikovics1, L. Kalmar1, I. Klein2, A. Varadi2, L. Nemes1, protein trafficking. We conclude that the same mutation in the SCN5A A. Tordai1; gene can lead either to Brugada syndrome or to ICCD. Our findings 1Institute of Hematology and Immunology, National Medical Center, suggest that the consequence of the same SCN5A mutation may be Budapest, Hungary, 2Institute of Enzymology of the Hungarian individual or branch specific. Cosegregation of a modifier gene could Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary. explain these branch-specific phenotypic differences. Haemophilia A (HA), the deficiency of the coagulation factor VIII (fVIII), is the most common severe, sex-linked inherited bleeding P0800. Mitochondrial mutations in non syndromic disorder. In approximately 50% of the patients with severe HA (fVIII sensorineural hearing impairement : A large spectrum of level<1%), the disease is caused by fVIII gene intron 22 (IVS22) mutations. inversions, generally occuring as a result of an intrachromosomal S. Marlin1, D. Feldmann2, E. Chapiro2, F. Denoyelle3, D. Sternberg4, recombination between the F8A gene located in IVS22 and one of D. Weil5, C. Petit5, E. N. Garabédian3, R. Couderc2; its two extragenic homologous copies located telomeric from the 1Genet Dept, A.Trousseau Hosp, APHP, Paris, France, 2Biochemistry fVIII gene. We studied 101 unrelated, severe HA-patients or obligate and molecular biology Dept, A. Trousseau Hosp , APHP, Paris, carriers by Southern blotting. We found known, altered inversion France, 3ORL Dept, A.Trousseau Hosp, APHP, Paris, France, patterns in 54 (53%) cases: 38 (70%) distal, 12 (22%) proximal 4Biochemistry Dept, Pitié-Salpétriêre Hosp , APHP, Paris, France, types and 4 (8%) unusual patterns. We observed loss or exclusively 5Unit Génétique des déficits sensoriels, CNRS URA 1968, Institut altered intronic bands in two cases of the latter group. We proved the Pasteur, Paris, France. existence of large deletions involving IVS22 and exon 22 or 23 by Mitochondrial (mt) DNA mutations identified in maternally inherited exon-specific amplification. The remaining two patients showed extra hearing loss (MIHL) suggest an important role for mitochondria in homologous F8A copies (4 bands in affected males) on Southern the function of the inner ear. Fifty five families with non syndromic analysis that were not corresponding to type 3A or B inversions. To MIHL, eight sporadic patients with non syndromic hearing loss further analyse these two cases, “long-distance” PCR (LD-PCR) was Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 244 245 performed for separate amplifications of the intronic and extragenic P0805. Identification Of A Novel Missense Mutation copies of F8A. In both cases, LD-PCR showed a normal and an (q283p) In A C282y Heterozygote Hemochromatosis inversion-affected intronic copy of F8A and normal extragenic Proband From Brittany (western France) copies, suggesting that an extra (possibly inserted) intronic fragment G. Le Gac1,2,3, C. Mura2,3, S. Jacolot2,3, G. Esnault4, V. Scotet1,3, M. C. participated in the inversion process. The present cases further Merour1, F. Y. Dupradeau5, J. Rochette5, C. Férec1,3; support the theory that, the structure of fVIII IVS22 represents a hot 1Etablissement Français du Sang - Bretagne, Brest, France, spot for large gene rearrengements and emphasize the importance of 2Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Brest, France, 3Inserm (emi alternative mutation mechanisms. 01-15), Brest, France, 4Université de Nantes, Nantes, France, 5Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France. P0803. Results of mutation testing in >400 families Introduction : Depending on the population studied, between 4 and affected by Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia due to 21- 35% of hemochromatosis probands have a least on chromosome hydroxylase deficiency without an assigned HFE mutation (i.e. C282Y, H63D and S65C). M. M. Coleman1, A. Wallace1, S. Ramsden1, D. A. Price2, P. E. In the present study, we have performed a D-HPLC scanning of the Clayton2, R. Elles1; HFE coding region in twenty HC probands from Brittany to define if 1NW Regional Molecular Genetics Lab, St Mary’s Hospital, they carry uncommon mutations liable to explain their iron overload Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Endocrinology Dept, Royal phenotype. Material : The 20 HC probands were selected because Manchester Children’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. a transferrin saturation above the threshold (³ 60% in men ³ 50% in 21-hydroxylase deficiency is an autosomal recessive disease that women) in absence of others known cause of iron overload. Results presents with a range of symptoms. The late onset form is often : D-HPLC scanning had allowed us to detect a novel missense so mild that it may be undiagnosed in affected individuals (cryptic mutation in exon 4 of the HFE gene from one proband who was CAH). Symptoms of classical CAH ranges from simple virilisation to also C282Y heterozygous. Subsequent sequencing analysis a potentially life threatening inability to retain salt. There is a strong identified an adenine to cytosine transversion at position 848 which demand for prenatal diagnosis from couples who have already had changes amino acid 283 from glutamine to proline (Q283). Another an affected child. Prenatal diagnosis is usually carried out by linkage family member (sister) was also found C282Y/Q283P compound analysis with microsatellite markers closely flanking the functional heterozygote , presenting with a transferrin saturation level of 74%. 21-hydroxylase (CYP21) gene. Couples may opt for an in-utero Theoritical structural analysis shows that folding of HFE is blocked treatment regime for affected female pregnancies. by a proline in position 283 which cannot complete the H-bonding The majority of the mutations causing 21-hydroxylase deficiency network and could have a deleterious effect on the key disulphide are known but testing for them is complicated by the complex bridge in the a3 domain. Conclusion : With the description of ten arrangement of the genes responsible. We currently carry out testing other rare or private causative mutations, our study confirms that it for large scale deletions/conversions of the CYP21 gene by Southern may be of particular interest to perform a complete analysis of the blot analysis. We also screen for a common form of deletion and HFE coding region in HC probands with at least one chromosome eight other mutations using direct ARMS tests. The CYP21 genes of lacking the C282Y, H63D and S65C mutations. affected individuals with one or more mutations undetected following these tests are sequenced in four overlapping fragments. P0806. Fabry disease: Exclusion of D313Y as a disease This strategy has identified both mutations in approximately 95% causing mutation of the alpha-Galactosidase A (GLA) of >400 families tested and enabled us to assess the frequency of gene. each mutation in British patients with 21-hydroxylase deficiency. T. Neumann, A. Eigel, M. Herrmann, N. Bogdanova, J. Horst; In addition, this study has highlighted a number of interesting Institut für Humangenetik, Westf. Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, cases where for example there is evidence of mosaicism, de novo Germany. mutational events and parents with cryptic CAH. These observations Fabry disease is a X-linked recessive metabolic disorder caused by indicate the need for mutation screening prior to prenatal diagnosis mutations in the alpha-Galactosidase A (GLA) gene. The identification by linkage analysis wherever possible. of the disease causing mutation in a given Fabry family permits precise genetic counselling, heterozygote detection of female family P0804. Further evidence for locus homogeneity in the members and prenatal diagnosis. Marfan syndrome (MFS) We present a large pedigree of a German Fabry family with mutation B. L. Loeys1, J. De Backer1, S. Symoens1, P. Coucke1, G. Pals2, A. analysis in more than thirteen individuals. All affected males had De Paepe1; died. Mutation analysis in a putative female carrier (suspected by 1Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Vrije Universiteit biochemical GLA measuring) showed the sequence variant D313Y of Medisch Centrum, Amsterdam, Netherlands. the GLA gene. D313Y was previously described as a disease causing The clinical diagnosis of MFS, an autosomal dominant multisystemic mutation by Eng et al. in 1993. In a prenatal diagnosis (CVS) of a disorder, is based on a set of major and minor criteria, known as male pregnancy we detected the D313Y sequence variant. In order to the “Ghent nosology”. MFS is caused by mutations in the fibrilline-1 confirm our results, we performed a biochemical GLA measurement. gene (FBN1). More than 200 FBN1-mutations have been identified. Unexpectedly the CVS cells showed an alpha-Galactosidase A However, due to incomplete mutation uptake and the suggestion of a activity in the normal range. second locus on chromosome 3p, the issue of locus heterogeneity in Molecular genetic investigations in further family members (i) MFS remains under debate. identified the D313Y variant in a healthy 49 year old male and (ii) We present results on a cohort of 103 patients fulfilling the clinical excluded this sequence variant in an obligate female carrier, whose diagnosis of MFS according to the Ghent nosology, in which a DNA became meanwhile avaible for genetic analysis. Genomic DNA thorough mutationanalysis was done by CSGE/SSCP followed by sequencing in this individual revealed the nonsense mutation W348X DHPLC or sequencing. Initial mutationscreening allowed to identify in exon 7 of the GLA gene. Pedigree analysis confirmed that W348X, an FBN1-mutation in 74 patients. Next, sequencing of all FBN1- as distinct from D313Y, cosegregates with the disease in the family. exons was performed in 16 patients and screening by DHPLC in 13 Our results show that the D313Y sequence variant of the GLA gene is patients, identifying respectively 7 and 5 additional mutations. In 5 an amino acid substitution, whose influence -if at all- on the severity more patients with a positive family history of MFS, but no mutation of the Fabry phenotype remains to be clarified. identified, segregation analysis showed linkage to the FBN1-locus. In 12 patients (~10%) the involvement of FBN1 could not be proven P0807. Spectrum of mutations found in 86 cases with by this approach. The phenotype of these patients did not differ Noonan syndrome (NS) from the others with respect to the distribution of major clinical L. Musante1, H. G. Kehl2, F. Majewski3, P. Meinecke4, S. Tinschert5, manifestations. Southern blot analysis to exclude large deletions G. K. Hinkel6, S. Schweiger1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach7, D. Wieczorek7, in the FBN1-gene is in progress. Most likely, a portion of FBN1- M. Hoeltzenbein1, H. H. Ropers1, V. M. Kalscheuer1; mutations remains undetected because of technical limitations. 1Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Klinik In conclusion, the involvement of the FBN1-gene could be und Poliklinik für Kinderheilkunde-Kardiologie, Universitätsklinikum demonstrated in ~90% of all MFS patients, which strongly suggests Münster, Münster, Germany, 3Institut für Humangenetik und that this gene is the predominant if not the sole locus for MFS. Anthropologie, Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 244 Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 245 4Abteilung für Medizinische Genetik, Altonaer Kinderkrankenhaus, healthy members of their families and assayed for a panel of primary Hamburg, Germany, 5Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Charite, LHON-associated mtDNA mutations by polymerase chain reaction Humboldt-Universität, Berlin, Germany, 6Institut für Klinische (PCR)-based methods. We studied four well-known LHON-associated Genetik, Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany, 7Institut für primary mutations (at nucleotide positions 11778, 3460, 14484, and Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. 14459) in all 23 probands. RESULTS: Among the 23 probands tested †Deceased. for four common LHON mutations, 3 carried the 11778 mutation, 1 Noonan-syndrome (NS, MIM 163950) is a well recognized carried the 14459 mutation, 1 carried the 3460 mutation and no one autosomal dominant multiple malformation syndrome with an carried the 14484 mutation. The phenotype of female of members of estimated incidence of 1 in 1,000 to 2,500 live births. Affected family who carried 11778 mutation showed the normal variant even individuals have proportionate short stature and a characteristic they had the same level of this mutation. Beside one patient who facial appearance with hypertelorism, ptosis, downward slanting carried 3460 mutation all of our patients were male. We could not find palpebral fissures, and low set posteriorly rotated ears. In addition, any new point mutation in ND6 gene of other patient even this gene cardiac involvement, most commonly pulmonary valve stenosis and is hot spot for LHON. CONCLUSION: The results of mtDNA analysis hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, is frequently seen. NS is genetically of the Iranian LHON patients appear to be the same from those of heterogenenous. Linkage to a 5 cM region on chromosome 12q24 previous reports. has been reported previously and only recently, mutations in the protein tyrosine kinase gene PTPN11, have been described. In a P0810. Mutations in the GJB-2 gene in patients with non- small sample, missense mutations were found in more than 50% syndromic hearing loss from endogamous population of of NS cases (Tartaglia, M et al., Nat. Genet. 29: 465-468, 2001). Roms (Gypsies) We have screened PTPN11 for mutations in 86 clinically well G. Minarik1, V. Ferak1, E. Ferakova1, A. Ficek1, H. Polakova2, A. characterized familial and sporadic NS cases and identified 14 Zatkova2, L. Kadasi2; different missense mutations in 29 (34%). Seven mutations, 5 in the 1Faculty of Natural Sciences Comenius University, Bratislava, N-SH2 domain, 1 in the C-SH2 domain and 1 in the PTP domain, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics SAS, are novel and have not been described before. In addition, we found Bratislava, Slovakia. 4 of 7 mutations described by Tartaglia et al (Asp61Gly, Tyr63Cys, Mutations in the connexin 26 gene (GJB-2) represent a major Ala72Ser, Asn308Asp) repeatedly in apparently unrelated cases. cause of autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) Most mutations cluster in the SH2 domain at the N-terminus (N-SH2), worldwide. In most Caucasian populations, the 35delG mutation which acts as a molecular switch between the inactive and active in this gene was found to account for up to half of the genetic non- protein form. No PTPN11 mutations were detected in 4 patients syndromic childhood deafness. In populations of non-European with cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC), which shares many ethnic background, other GJB-2 gene mutations are occasionally phenotypic similarities with NS. common, e.g. 167delT in Ashkenazi Jews, R143W in Africans, 235delC in Koreans. P0808. Mutation screening of the BIGH3 gene in patients DNA samples from 54 unrelated NSHL patients from endogamous with Keratoconus. and inbred population of Roms (Gypsies) from Eastern Slovakia N. S. Udar1, C. Kenney2, M. Chalukya1, T. Anderson1, V. Yellore1, S. were screened for two GJB-2 mutations: 35delG and W24X. A single Yelchits1, D. Brown2, A. B. Nesburn2, K. W. Small1; patient was found homozygous for 35delG, 8 were homozygous for 1University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, W24X, 5 compound heterozygotes 35delG/W24X, 3 heterozygous 2Ophthalmology Research Laboratories Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, for W24X (and an unidentified mutation), and one heterozygous for Los Angeles, CA. 35delG (and an unidentified mutation). In remaining 36 patients, no Keratoconus has an approximate incidence of 50-230/100,000 GJB-2 mutation was found. Thus, in Slovak Roms, W24X accounts in the general population. Progressive non inflammatory corneal for 23,52 %, whereas 35delG for only 5,88 % of all GJB-2 gene thinning is a characteristic feature of this disease. The age of onset mutations in NSHL patients. So far, the W24X mutation was observed is at puberty and the disorder is progressive until the third to fourth in two Pakistani NSHL families, which is in accordance with the decade of life when it usually arrests. It is a major cause of cornea hypothesis of Indian origin of European Roms. transplantation in developed countries. Genetic factors have been suggested as a cause of keratoconus. Both autosomal dominant and P0811. Analysis of polymorphism for UGT1*1 exon 1 autosomal recessives forms of vertical transmission/inheritance have promotor in neonates with pathologic and prolonged been suggested. There are many reports suggesting involvement of jaundice BIGH3. The BIGH3 gene is expressed in the cornea and localizes A. Ulgenalp, .1, N. Duman1, F. Schaefer2, L. Whetsell2, E. Bora1, H. to human chromosome 5. Mutations in this gene are responsible for Gülcan1, A. Kumral1, H. Ören1, Ö. Giray1, D. M. Erçal1, H. Özkan1; causing corneal dystrophies. In addition, the protein levels of BIGH3 1Dokuz Eylül University, Izmir, Turkey, 2H. A. Chapman Institute of are reported to be altered in keratoconus tissues. We screened 16 Medical Genetics, Tulsa, OK. individuals, representing different families with keratoconus and for The role of Gilbert’s syndrome, which is associated with mutations within the BIGH3 gene. Although we found more than 6 unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia and decreased bilirubin UDP- sequence variations we did not find any protein altering changes. glucuronosyltransferase activity, in neonatal jaundice is still not well We concluded that the BIGH3 gene is not responsible for causing known. We aimed to investigate whether a TATA box polymorphism keratoconus in this patient population. in the promoter of the UGT1*1 exon I, the most common detected DNA polymorphism in Gilbert’s syndrome, is a contributory factor in P0809. Investigation of LHON Primary Point mutations in unexplained pathologic or prolonged jaundice. 38 neonates who had Iranian Patients unexplained pathologic jaundice, 37 neonates who had unexplained M. Houshmand1, E. Sharifpanah1, M. Sanati1, A. Tabasi2, Y. prolonged jaundice, and 35 healthy, nonjaundiced neonates were Shafeghati1; enrolled in the study. Genomic DNA was isolated from blood and 1National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and polymerase chain reaction amplification was used to examine Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Farabi hospital, sequence variation of the promoter upstream of UGT1*1 exon I. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Genotypes were assigned as: 6/6 (homozygous for a normal allele Abstract bearing the sequence (TA)6TAA), 7/7 (homozygous for an abnormal PURPOSE: To define the prevalence of a panel of mitochondrial allele with the sequence (TA)7TAA), and 6/7 (heterozygous with one DNA (mtDNA) mutations associated with Leber’s hereditary optic of each allele). Of the 110 infants, 10 (9%) had 7/7, 51 (46%) had 6/7, neuropathy (LHON) in the Iranian LHON population. LHON- and 49 (45%) had 6/6 genotype. Although the percentage of 7/7 was associated mtDNA mutations have been found in LHON patients higher in the group with pathologic jaundice (13%) than in the group from around the world, but the Iranian LHON population has not with prolonged jaundice (8%) and in the control group (6%), the been studied. METHODS: 23 Iranian patients were defined clinically difference between three groups were not statistically significant. Also as having LHON on the basis of painless, subacute, bilateral optic no differences were observed among different genotypes and mean neuropathy and the exclusion of other causes of subacute optic serum total bilirubin concentrations. In conclusion, we showed that neuropathy. MtDNA was extracted from blood of the probands and TA 7/7 and TA 6/7 genotypes are not rare in our population and the Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 246 247 presence of those polymorphisms alone does not play a significant 5Klinikum, Minden, Germany, 6University, Münster, Germany, role in the etiology of unexplained pathologic or prolonged neonatal 7University, Erlangen, Germany. hyperbilirubinemia Mal de Meleda (MDM), or keratosis palmoplantaris transgrediens of Siemens, is a hereditary skin disorder characterised by diffuse P0812. An efficient strategy for molecular diagnosis of palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) and transgressive keratosis. There Wilson disease in the Sardinian population. is no associated involvement of other organs, however, a rather M. Lovicu1, A. Cao1, G. Loudianos2; broad spectrum of clinical presentations with other variable features 1IRTAM-CNR, Cagliari, Italy, 2Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie, is characteristic. MDM was first described in patients from the isle of Cagliari, Italy. Mljet (Meleda) in Croatia. Recently, mutations in the ARS (component Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper B)-81/s gene on chromosome 8q24-qter were identified in patients transport resulting from mutations in the ATP7B gene. Mutation with MDM. We have shown lately that a very similar phenotype analysis of the ATP7B gene carried out in 76 unrelated WD Sardinian of transgressive PPK is not linked to chromosome 8q24-qter in families allowed the characterization of 94% of the chromosomes several families from the United Arab Emirates. Here we present analyzed and led to the identification of 16 WD causing-mutations further families with transgressive PPK. Three novel mutations in ( Hum Mut .14: 294-303, 1999). Six of the mutations identified ARS (component B)-81/s were identified in consanguineous families are frequent and account for the molecular defect 85% of WD from Turkey, Palestine, and the United Arab Emirates: two different chromosomes. In an effort to increase our capability of molecular mutations affecting the same codon, both resulting in the amino acid diagnosis of WD in Sardinians we have set up a multiplex PCR change G86R, and a mutation that alters the translation initiation method for the detection of the 6 most frequent mutations, coupled codon. In a German family without known consanguinity, which was with reverse dot blot analysis. Primers and ASO probes sequences originally supposed to have a dominant form of transgressive PPK, were designed to permit common experimental conditions during the we demonstrated a pseudo-dominant inheritance. Three children and multiplex PCR and reverse dot blot analysis respectively. their affected mother were homozygous for the mutation W15R while Using this procedure, we confirmed the results obtained in the the unaffected father was heterozygous. Pseudo-dominance was patients previously characterized by SSCP analysis. Molecular confirmed by the analysis of several neighbouring microsatellites. diagnosis of an additional group of 51 DNA samples of Sardinian Our findings show that the MDM type of transgressive PPK may origin revealed again concordant results using both reverse dot blot be caused by SLURP-1 mutations in patients from various origins. and SSCP methods. On the basis of these data we conclude that the A founder effect is supposed to be responsible for MDM on Mljet, most efficient strategy for molecular diagnosis of WD in Sardinian however, here we demonstrate allelic heterogeneity for mutations in population consists in a preliminary mutation screening for the six SLURP-1. most common mutations using multiplex PCR followed by reverse dot blot analysis. Samples not characterized by this first step of analysis P0815. A frequency of Cx26 mutation 35delG in patients will be subsequently analyzed using SSCP analysis for all the exons with hearing loss. and the promoter region of ATP7B gene. N. Nekrasova, I. Shagina, A. Petrin, A. Polyakov; Research center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. P0813. Holoprosencephaly : functional analysis of human Mutations in the gene for connexin 26 are the major cause of SHH missense variants autosomal recessive inherited non-syndromic congenital hearing loss. C. Dubourg1,2, L. Pasquier3, M. Blayau1, M. Durou1, L. Lazaro3, S. A single mutation 35delG is responsible for the majority of affected Odent3, V. David1,2; alleles in different populations. In several Russian populations 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, average carrier frequency of 35delG mutation is 1/46.7. We have France, 2Umr 6061 cnrs, Rennes, France, 3Service de Génétique analyzed 109 unrelated patients affected by sensoneural hearing Médicale, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France. loss for 35delG mutation. All of ours patient had early onset deafness Holoprosencephaly (HPE ; 1,2/10.000 live births ; 1/250 conceptuses) with various degree of hearing loss. First group consisted 87 patients is a common development defect affecting both the forebrain and the with normal hearing parents, in second group19 patients had both face. Clinical expressivity is variable, ranging from a single cerebral parents with hearing loss, in 3 patients only one parent had hearing ventricule and cyclopia to clinically unaffected obligated carriers in loss (third group). In the first group we have found 33 families (38%) familial HPE. The disease is genetically heterogeneous but additional with mutation 35delG. In 22 patients mut 35delG was in homozygous environmental agents also contribute to the aetiology of HPE. This state, in 11 patients it was in heterozygous state. In the second group study includes 126 unrelated nonchromosomal HPE cases (76 typical all the patients had mut 35delG. Sixteen patients (84%) had mut HPE, 25 atypical cases, 25 polymalformative cases). We provide 35delG in homozygous state; others had mut 35delG in heterozygous clinical data regarding the subgroup of typical HPE and report 21 state. In the third group mut 35delG have been found in one patient novel heterozygous mutations (16% for all the cases, 25% for typical in heterozygous state. We have accounted these results on a percent HPE), 12 in Sonic hedgehog gene (SHH), 5 in ZIC2, 3 in SIX3, and of chromosomes affected by mut 35delG. In the group of patient with 1 in TGIF. Ten mutations were found in familial cases whereas 11 normal hearing parents quota of injured chromosomes was 31.6%, mutations were identified in apparently sporadic cases. In addition to in group of “deafness” families it was 92%. Summer percent of clear loss-of-function mutations conferred by nonsense or frameshift chromosomes with mut 35delG was 41.7. alteration in the coding sequence, genetic screening has revealed missense codons with less obvious functional consequences. The P0816. Emilin Family Genes Are Not Involved In Marfan- ability to discriminate between a loss-of-function mutation and a silent like Phenotype polymorphism is important for genetic testing for inherited diseases S. Tartaglia1, R. Doliana2, D. Volpin3, S. Mason1, R. Tenconi1, M. like HPE where the opportunity for prenatal diagnosis may be Clementi1; considered. We report here a functional test where the significance of 1Genetica Clinica Epidemiologica, Padova, Italy, 2Centro Oncologico, SHH aminoacids replacements observed in the human population is Aviano, Italy, 3Diaprtimento Istologia, Padova, Italy. tested by the C3H10T1/2 osteoblast transformation and phosphatase Elastic fibers are major constituents of the extracellular matrix alcaline production under the Sonic Hedgehog action. and confer to connective tissues the properties of resilience and elastic recoil. Recently EMILIN1 and EMILIN2, largely distributed in P0814. Mutations in the gene for SLURP-1 in patients connective tissues, have been isolated. The structural components with Mal de Meleda (MDM) with recessive and pseudo- of elastic fibers have been found to be defective in some heritable human diseases, such as Williams syndrome and familial dominant inheritance supravalvular aortic stenosis for elastin and Marfan’s syndrome H. C. Hennies1, K. M. Eckl1,2, H. P. Stevens3, G. G. Lestringant4, M. and congenital contractural aracnodactyly for fibrillin. . However, Westenberger-Treumann5, H. Traupe6, P. M. Frossard4, R. Stadler5, I. no mutations responsible for many diseases due to anomalies of M. Leigh3, A. Reis7, P. Nürnberg1; elastic fibers/connective tissue have been detected. Since EMILIN1 1Max-Delbrück-Centrum, Berlin, Germany, 2Free University, Berlin, and EMILIN2 are found only within elastic fibers, and they co- Germany, 3St Bartholomew’s and the Royal London School of react, mutations of these gene family are expected to give rise to Medicine, London, United Kingdom, 4Tawam Hospital and Faculty of alterations of this extracellular matrix component. We have searched Medicine and Health Sciences, Al Ain, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, 246 Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 247 for mutations of EMILIN1 and EMILIN2in 8 families with Marfan-like the Algerian family, we identified the first homozygous missense phenotype. mutation (P3527S) in the central part of RYR1. New muscle biopsies For each family a three-generation pedigree, physical examination of at adulthood revealed typical CCD with rods in the 3 patients and all probands and their first degree relatives has been performed. DNA absence of cores in the healthy parents. was obtained after informed consent of probands and first degree This subgroup of families linked to 19q13 constitute the first variant relatives. of CCD with genetically proven autosomal recessive inheritance A mutation analysis has been performed using SSCP and CSGE and transient presentation as MmD. This work also illustrates the techniques. age-related modification of the morphological lesions in congenital At present no mutations have been identified in the families. Although myopathies, and represents the first description of a genetic defect the low number does not allow us to make final conclusions, EMILIN underlying the MmD phenotype. family genes seem not to be involved in Marfan-like phenotypes. P0819. Mutation analysis in Crouzon and Pfeiffer P0817. Four new mutation and neutral polymorphisms syndromes identifies novel substitutions in the tyrosine of the low density lipoprotein receptor gene in St. kinase regions of the fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 Petersburg familial hypercholesterolemia. (FGFR-2) Y. A. Tatishcheva; V. El Ghouzzi1, S. Heuertz1, J. Bonaventure1, M. Le Merrer1, A. Institute for Experimental Medicine, St. Petersburg, Russian Munnich1, D. Renier2, E. Lajeunie1,2; Federation. 1INSERM U393, Paris, France, 2Dept of neurosurgery, Necker Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an inherited metabolic disease hospital, Paris, France. with a dominant mode of inheritance. It is quite common in most Crouzon and Pfeiffer syndromes are autosomal dominant human populations (1:500) and results in reduction of low-density craniosynostoses characterised by premature fusion of one or more lipoprotein (LDL) catabolism followed by premature coronary heart cranial sutures and dysmorphic facial features with or without limbs disease. The disease is caused by mutations in the LDL receptor abnormalities. These conditions are associated with heterozygous gene. mutations in three members of the fibroblast growth factor-receptor In order to develop presymptomatic diagnostic tools for management family (FGFR1-3) but the great majority of them are missense of the FH we aimed to study the LDL receptor gene mutation substitutions exclusively located in the extracellular domain of spectrum in St.-Petersburg (Russia). We have created a DNA bank FGFR2. Studying a large series of 73 unrelated patients, we found from 100 unrelated patients with clinical picture of FH. Earlier, seven 28 different heterozygous mutations in 66 cases (90%). This included mutations in the LDL receptor gene were found in some of the 22 “conventional” mutations in 59 individuals (the P252R mutation in probands. In view of the growth of the collection of DNA samples, FGFR1, the A391E mutation in FGFR3, and 20 different mutations in we continued the search for genetic abnormalities in exons 4 and exons IIIa and IIIc of FGFR2) and 6 novel FGFR2 substitutions in 7 10 of this gene. This exons were amplified by polymerase chain patients. Interestingly, two of these (N549H and K641R) were found reaction (PCR) and screened for presence of the mutations via in the intracellular domain of FGFR2, within the two tyrosine kinase combined single-strand conformation polymorphism -heteroduplex regions of the receptor and were associated with Crouzon syndrome analysis (SSCP-HA). The fragments showing shifted mobility in (2 cases) and Pfeiffer syndrome (1 case), respectively. Sequence polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis were sequenced by method of alignments of FGFR2 and FGFR3 showed that asparagin 549 in Sanger. Up-to-date, we have identified four new mutations - A130P, FGFR2 corresponds to asparagin 540 in FGFR3 which is mutated in G128G, C146R, C188Y. Rapid methods for mutation detection hypochondroplasia (N540K) suggesting that the N549H substitution were developed. Cosegregation of mutations and high cholesterol may be an activating mutation of FGFR2. Extensive screening levels proves the role of mutations in disease development. Two of intracellular domains of FGFR1 and FGFR2 are now being polymorphic sites in exon 10 of the LDL receptor gene (1413G/A investigated for the 10% remaining cases of our series. These results and 1545C/T) were found in the Russian population for the first show that FGFR2 mutational spectrum is not restricted to the Ig-loops time. Based on the data obtained, familial hypercholesterolemia was of the extracellular region as previously thought and suggest that all confirmed in seven patients. Crouzon and Pfeiffer cases are associated with FGFRs mutations. P0818. First description of a recessive form of Central Core P0820. Molecular analysis of the RET proto-oncogene on Disease, transitorily presenting as Multi-minicore Disease and MEN II patients associated with a homozygous mutation in RYR1. E. V. Vasil’ev1, E. Y. Polyakova2, V. A. Peterkova2, P. O. A. Ferreiro1, N. Monnier2, N. B. Romero1, J. P. Leroy3, C. Rumyantsev3, D. V. Zaletayev1; Bönneman4,5, V. Straub6, C. A. Haenggeli7, T. Voit6, J. Lunardi2, M. 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Fardeau1, P. Guicheney1; Federation, 2Research Centre for Endocrinology, RAMS, Moscow, 1INSERM U523/Institut de Myologie, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire Russian Federation, 3Research Centre for Medical Radiology, RAMS, Biochimie de l’ADN, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 3Service Obninsk, Russian Federation. d’Anatomie Pathologique, CHU Brest, Brest, France, 4The Children’s Multiple endocrine neoplasia type II syndromes (MEN IIA and IIB Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, 5Georg August Universitat, Göttingen, ) are an autosomal, dominantly inherited disorders characterized Germany, 6Department of Pediatrics, University of Essen, Essen, by the occurrence of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid (MTC), Germany, 7Hôpital des Enfants, Geneva, Switzerland. hyperparathyroidism and pheochromocytoma. These syndromes Multi-minicore Disease (MmD) is an autosomal recessive congenital result from mutations of the RET proto-oncogene on chromosome 10. myopathy characterized by the presence of multiple small zones of Germ line mutations are also seen in patients with familial medullary sarcomeric disorganization and mitochondria depletion (“minicores”) carcinoma of the thyroid (FMTC). MTC is associated with high in muscle fibers. Its clinical phenotype is heterogeneous. To identify morbidity and mortality. The use of direct DNA testing is an attempt to the genetic basis of the disease, we performed a genome-wide improve the cure rate because in more than 90% of individuals with a screening in a consanguineous Algerian family in which 3 children RET proto-oncogene mutation, MTC will develop. presented in infancy with generalized muscle weakness, more The aim was detection of RET protooncogene molecular anomalies evident in pelvic girdle and hands, and joint hyperlaxity (“distal causing MEN II syndromes. We have studied 5 familial and 7 involvement” phenotype). Their first muscle biopsies (at 2 and 4 sporadic cases of the MEN IIA syndrome and 19 sporadic MTC years of age) showed multiple minicores. By homozygosity mapping, cases. In all of these familial, 5 sporadic cases of MEN II A and 6 linkage of the disease to the 19q13 region was identified in this family MTC cases direct sequence and restriction analysis of the exon 11 and, subsequently, in 3 additional MmD families showing a similar revealed the most common cysteine-to-arginine change in the codon phenotype (LS=5.19 for D19S570 at θ=0.00). 634 (TGC&rarr;CGC). Results of SSCP and heteroduplex analysis A gene encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor, RYR1, of the 10 and 11 exons in 2 remaining patients with sporadic MEN is located in this region. Heterozygous RYR1 mutations cause II A and 13 individuals with sporadic MTC were negative, but some 2 autosomal dominant entities: the congenital myopathy Central of them have shown mobility shifts at 12-14 exons. Anomalies are Core Disease (CCD) (C-terminal domain mutations) and Malignant characterized. In 2 families with MEN IIB syndrome a common germ Hyperthermia Susceptibility (N-terminal domain mutations). In line mutation of codon 918 was detected.Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 248 249 Early diagnosis by direct DNA testing led to early treatment with Neuropathology, Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, Université catholique curative total thyroidectomy in two children from MEN IIA families and de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques make possible prenatal diagnostics. universitaires St-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 4Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Christian de P0821. Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology, Université catholique de Louvain, Molecular characterisation of X-linked properdin Brussels, Belgium. Paragangliomas (OMIM# 168000), (carotid body tumours) are deficiency in a large French family vascularized tumors of the head and neck. They may be unilateral, E. Bieth1, F. Fortenfant1, J. Enjalran1, A. Sanchez2, P. Calvas1, A. although with inherited predisposition, they tend to be bilateral. It Blancher1; has been observed that paragangliomas are often inherited via 1Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 2Hôpital, Albi, France. the paternal line; thus maternal imprinting occurs. This helped in Properdin deficiency type I, is a rare X-linked disorder (MIM finding linkage to 11q23-qter (Heutink et al. 1992), which led to the 312060) strongly predisposing to meningococcal disease. Properdin identification of a mutated gene, SDHD, which encodes the small stabilises the labile C3 convertase of the alternative pathway of subunit of cytochrome b in the succinate-ubiquinone oxidoreductase the complement system. We report a large French family with four complex (PGL1) (Baysal et al. 2000). This enzyme complex, properdin deficient males in three generations: an affected grand- constituted from SDHA, B, C and D, is important for the tricarboxylic father with four daughters and three diseased grand-sons. All but one acid cycle and the aerobic respiratory chains. Thus, loss of SDHD developed meningitis caused by Neisseria meningitidis serogroup Y may lead to chronic hypoxic stimulation of cellular proliferation that or serogroup B. No functional activity of properdin was detected in leads to tumorous growth. Mutations in the SDHB and C genes the affected males. The properdin level was bellow the detection limit (PGL3 and PGL4) have also been identified, but in families with non- in two of them and deeply decreased in the others. In three obligate imprinted inheritance of paragangliomas (Niemann, and Muller, 2000; carriers, the properdin level was reduced near half of the standard Astuti et al., 2001). Interestingly, another PGL locus was mapped value (14, 15, 17 mg/l; controls = 22-38 mg/l). One expressed a more telomerically on 11q (PGL2). normal rate (25,3 mg/l). By sequencing long-PCR products of the We report a family with three generations affected with properdin gene (PFC gene) we found a base change at the 3’end paragangliomas. Generation skipping of phenotype was noted once, of the consensus sequence of intron 8 (namely 1205-1G>T). This when the disorder seemed to be inherited from the mother. Thus, the mutation inactivates a splice site in the PCF gene as demonstrated SDHD gene became the most likely candidate. In fact, we identified by analysis of the leukocytes transcription products in affected a novel splice site mutation that co-segregated with the phenotype. patients. It is to date the first splice mutation demonstrated in this Interestingly, six non-affected carriers were observed, all of which gene. Interestingly, one among the four female carriers developed had inherited the mutant allele from their mother. The identification meningitis, and shared with her two carrier sisters, chronic rheumatic of carriers enables genetic counseling, an important aspect for these diseases associated to marker HLA-B27. HLA-B locus and properdin usually treatable vascular tumors. (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be) factor B (C3 proaccelerator) being closely linked on chromosome 6, relationship between properdin deficiency and chronic rheumatic diseases will be discussed. P0824. Molecular pathologies of genes in the Hedgehog signalling pathway P0822. A non-glycine mutation in the C-propeptide of N. Boutet1, G. Chartier2, D. Lafon2, V. Drouin-Garraud3, P. Sarda4, D. Griffiths2, M. Longy5, D. Lacombe6, P. Gorry5,6; the alpha1(I) collagen chain causes mild Osteogenesis 1Institut Bergonie, Bordeaux, France, 2Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, imperfecta and EDS-like features France, 3Unité de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital. Ch. Nicolle, Rouen, S. Symoens1, L. Nuytinck2, P. J. Coucke1, B. Loeys1, E. Legius3, A. France, 4Unité Génétique Médicale, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, De Paepe1; France, 5Laboratoire de Génétique Oncologique, Institut Bergonié, 1University Hospital - Center of Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, Bordeaux, France, 6Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Pellegrin- 2Innogenetics, Ghent, Belgium, 3K.U.L. - Center for Human Genetics, Enfants, Bordeaux, France. Leuven, Belgium. “Hedgehogopathies” is a term which designates a group of Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable connective tissue disorder hereditary dysmorphic syndromes where an alteration of the characterized by a wide range of mutations occurring in the genes Hedgehog signalling pathway in vertebrates occurs. Many actors in encoding type I collagen (COL1A1-COL1A2). These mutations mainly this transmission pathway have been identified by genetic studies represent single-base changes resulting in the substitution of critical in Drosophila ; their homologues in man are candidate genes for glycine residues but also deletions and insertions are reported. dysmorphic syndromes. We studied a 10-year-old girl with mild type I OI. The proband’s In humans, Sonic Hedgehog is mutated in Holoprosencephaly, delivery was complicated by fracture of the clavicle and Patched in Gorlin syndrome, and GLI-3, the homologue of the pneumothorax. Postnatally, no further fractures occurred. To date, the Cubitus interruptus gene in Drosophila, is implicated in Greig patient has blue sclera and suffers from mild hyperlaxity of skin and syndrome and in Pallister-Hall syndrome. Its co-activator, the joints. transcription factor CBP is mutated in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. We analyzed type I collagen production at the protein and molecular Finally, one of the target genes of SHH, Pitx2, is responsible for level. Although no abnormalities were observed on protein analysis, Rieger syndrome. we identified a de-novo c3890A>G transition within exon 49 of We have implemented genetic diagnosis of Gorlin syndrome (OMIM the COL1A1 gene, resulting in a M1264V substitution in the C- 180500), of Greig (OMIM 175700) and Pallister-Hall syndromes propeptide. This transition causes the activation of a cryptic splice and also of Rieger syndrome (OMIM 180500).This work allowed site inside the exon. As a result, the last 25 bp of exon 49 are spliced us to consider phenotype-genotype relationships of these different out, and due to a frameshift, a premature stopcodon is created in hereditary diseases. We identified 9 novel mutations of the Patched exon 50. The normal and both aberrant cDNA transcripts (11/ 20 gene, 4 novel mutations of the Gli3 gene and one new mutation of the clones carry the 25-bp deletion, 2/20 clones M1264V substitution) are Pitx2 gene. While a correlation exists between the mutation spectrum detected. and Greig and Pallister-Hall syndromes, no correlation is found in At the protein level, the frameshift mutation results in the removal of Gorlin syndrome. Finally, the Reiger syndrome is characterized by 5 of the 6 critical cysteine residues in the C-propeptide, necessary major genetic heterogeneity. Clinical data and molecular results are for the incorporation of the chain in collagen type I molecules. The discussed in the light of our understanding and knowledge of the mild phenotype of this patient suggests that this latter protein defect Hedgehog signaling pathway in vertebrates. is predominant and causes haploinsufficiency. Further biochemical characterization will be performed. P0825. Clinical heterogeneity in a family with M34T variant in the GJB2 gene. P0823. A novel mutation in the SDHD gene in a family E. L. Sartorato1, F. Alexandrino1, C. A. Oliveira1, A. T. Maciel-Guerra2; with inherited paragangliomas 1UNICAMP/CBMEG, Campinas - SP, Brazil, 2UNICAMP/FCM-Depto. L. Renard1, C. Godfraind2, L. Boon3, M. Vikkula4; Genética Médica, Campinas - SP, Brazil. 1Department of Radiotherapy, Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, Mutations in the GJB2 gene have been found in a great number of Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Laboratory of 248 Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 249 familial and sporadic cases of congenital deafness. This gene is and one RFLP spanning the RP2-RP3 region, plus an additional responsible for more than 20% of prelingual recessive hearing loss microsatellite strongly linked to RP24 were used. An ABI PRISM 310 in Caucasian populations, mainly due to mutations 35delG, and Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) was the tool of choice for the 167delT. Furthermore, the involvement of GJB2 gene in autosomal genotyping process. dominant deafness is also proposed but remains uncertain. One of After haplotype analysis we could rule out RP24 in 7 families, RP2 the more controversial allele variants, M34T, has been hypothesized in 1 family and RP3 in another family. We found no informative to cause as well an autosomal recessive, as a dominant meioses for RP24 in 5 families and for RP2/RP3 in the vast majority nonsyndromic hearing loss, and even a null allele in the GJB2 gene. of cases. Excluding obligate carriers, we found 14 female carriers of Recently, studies extending the analysis of the genetic background in the disease, 12 non-carriers and 5 non-informative females, out of 31 the allele with the M34T mutation have identified a 10bp deletion (- women at risk of being carriers. 493del10) in the non-coding region upstream of exon 1. In this study, In conclusion, this seems not to be an informative method of we present a family with three sibships compound heterozygotes distinguishing between the main XLRP loci, but it is worth doing M34T/V95M with different degrees of hearing impairment. The because it permits a rapid and effective early detection of carriers, proband has a mild hearing loss. His sister and his brother have a which is of paramount importance for genetic counselling. moderate hearing loss but presenting different audiometric data. Moreover, his mother has normal hearing but his father who is P0828. Expression profiling in patients with complex IV heterozygous for M34T mutation has a mild hearing loss. The respiratory chain deficiencies effect of M34T mutation remains to be deciphered, and certainly its K. Hörtnagel1, M. Jaksch2, J. Landgrebe3, E. Botz1, T. Meitinger1; interpretation becomes more difficult in terms of genetic counseling. 1Institute of Human Genetics, GSF National Research Center for We understand that presenting different clinical situations, the Environment and Health, Neuherberg / Munich, Germany, 2Metabolic correlations of genotypes/phenotypes may lead to new prospects and Disease Centre Munich-Schwabing and Institute of Clinical comprehension of patophysiology of the mutation. Chemistry, Molecular Diagnostics and Mitochondrial Genetics, Munich, Germany, 3Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Molecular P0826. First report on the genetics of prosopagnosia Neurogenetics, Munich, Germany. I. Kennerknecht1, M. Grüter1, T. Grüter2, S. Otte3, T. Neumann1, B. In patients with respiratory chain deficiencies expression profiling of Meyer4, K. Sperling5, P. Nürnberg4, W. Laskowski6; genes involved in mitochondrial biology should provide insight into 1Institut für Humangenetik, Westfälische Wilhelms Universität, regulatory mechanisms and possibly affected pathways. To this end Münster, Germany, 2Nottulner Landweg 33, Münster, Germany, 3Am we have designed a DNA microarray covering ~1000 human cDNAs Simmler 50, Wiesbaden, Germany, 4Max-Delbrück Centrum für which are known to encode mitochondrial proteins (~400) or which Molekulare Medizin, Berlin, Germany, 5Institut für Humangenetik, represent candidate genes (~600) according to homology criteria. Charité, Berlin, Germany, 6Atrium 7, Linsengericht, Germany. PCR products of these cDNAs were arrayed onto nylon filters and Prosopagnosia (PA), a term introduced by Bodamer (1947, Arch hybridised with radioactively labelled cDNAs from patients fibroblasts Psych Nerven 179:6ff), defines the inability to associate a face and age matched controls. Characterisation of expression patterns with a certain person, while a face is still recognized as such. The was performed in nine patients with biochemically defined complex IV specifity of this deficiency is supported by double dissociation deficiencies, including patients with mutations in SURF1 (2), SCO2 between probands with impairment of e.g. object agnosia but not (3), mt tRNASer (2) or no mutations in any of these genes (2). prosopagnosia and vice versa. Almost all reports (#259 citations in At least 50% of the sequences investigated showed background medlineR) are single casuistics or collections of unrelated patients level signals indicating low expression of the corresponding genes. who acquired prosopagnosia after brain injuries, strokes, or atrophy However, significant differences between control group and patients of at least the right occipito-temporal area. were observed with preponderance of a substantial downregulation There are only a few reports of congenital PA – all of them sporadic (10-30 fold) of at least 5% of the genes, including subunits of cases (#4 citations in medlineR). The only hint of familial recurrence the respiratory chain complexes e.g. COX1, COX2, COX3, H+- is found in a report of McConachie (1976, Cortex 12:76ff) with PA transporting ATP synthase proteins 5A1, 5B and 8 as well as proteins in mother and daughter. There is no hint in this publication that the involved in mitochondrial protein synthesis such as transcription author examined the family tree in any more detail. No entry was elongation factor TUFM and numerous ribosomal proteins. This added to V. McKusick´s database (MIM). Later, Farah et al. (2000, suggests that on the transcriptional level downregulation of oxidative Cognit Neuropsychol 17:117ff) hypothesized that PA and other phosphorylation rather than overcompensation may be a common agnosias are “... explicitly specified in the genome”. phenomenon in mitochondrial disease. Thus DNA microarrays may We have found 3 distinct families of at least 5 persons each with help to classify patients with mitochondrial dysfunction, providing both congenital PA ascertained in 4 generations. This indicates a much a diagnostic tool and a way to map mitochondrial disease genes. higher prevalence than represented by literature data. The subjects do not show associated disorders such as impairment of object P0829. Molecular cloning of a de novo reciprocal recognition. The cumulation segregation ratios are compatible with a translocation t(4;12)(q26;p12) in a patient with Andersen simple autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Linkage analyses syndrome (periodic paralysis and long QT syndrome) have been started and will be reported. S. Pereira1, D. Depetris1, A. Massacrier1, M. G. Mattei1, N. Levy1, P. Cau1, J. Y. Pouget2, P. Szepetowski1; P0827. Haplotype and linkage analyses in twelve XLRP 1INSERM U491, Marseille, France, 2CHU Timone, Marseille, France. Spanish families Most paroxysmal neuromuscular and cardiac disorders are D. Cantalapiedra1, A. Giménez1, M. J. Trujillo1, M. García-Hoyos1, channelopathies. Andersen syndrome is a condition in which cardiac J. Gallego1, C. Arroyo1, M. Beneyto2, M. Carballo3, M. Baiget4, C. arrythmias (long QT) and periodic paralysis are associated, thus Ramos1, C. Ayuso1; representing a powerful tool to identify possible common pathways. 1Genetics Dept. Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Genetics A de novo reciprocal translocation t(4;12)(q26;p12) was detected in Dept. Hospital Universitari La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 3Genetics Dept. one patient with Andersen syndrome. Both parents were unaffected. Hospital de Terrasa, Terrasa, Spain, 4Genetics Dept. Hospital de la Several long QT syndromes (LQT) have been defined. The LQT4 Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. gene maps to 4q25-q27 ; the critical region extends over 18 cM and X-linked retinitis pigmentosa (XLRP) is regarded as being the the gene remains unknown. Colocalization of the 4q26 breakpoint most severe form of RP because of its early onset and its rapid with the LQT4 region suggested that both syndromes could be progression, which leads to legal blindness before the age of 25. Four sustained by the same gene. XLRP loci have been demonstrated (RP2, RP3, RP23 and RP24), FISH experiments showed that the breakpoint at 4q26 lied in a 120- but only two genes have been cloned so far (RP2 and RPGR). The kb area entirely comprised within the LQT4 critical interval. PAC and RP2 locus accounts for 20% of the XLRP forms and the RP3 locus cosmid clones were identified that encompassed the breakpoint. All (RPGR) is the most prevalent with 70-80% of cases. The other two clones are situated within a gap of the human genome sequence loci are very rare. KCNJ2 (chr.17) was identified as one Andersen syndrome gene while Haplotype and linkage analyses were carried out in twelve Spanish this analysis was underway. A previously reported missense mutation XLRP families. Six dinucleotide repeat microsatellite markers C880T was detected in the patient’s DNA but the same mutation was Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 250 251 also detected in her father’s DNA. The father was unaffected and P0832. High incidence of Arg 531→Cys mutation in even had a normal muscular biopsy. These results indicated that, at the factor VIII gene among hemophilia A patients from least in one case, the C880T mutation might not be pathogenic. The Republic of Bulgaria translocation bored by the patient could alter the LQT4 gene, which E. P. Sukarova-Stefanovska1, P. Tchacarova2, G. H. Petkov2, G. D. in turn would generally act as a modifier gene in Andersen syndrome. Efremov1; Consistent with this latter hypothesis is the fact that the LQT4 locus 1Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, could contribute the QT-interval variability (Busjahn et al, 1999). Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, P0830. Molecular genetic analysis of LQT syndromes in Stara Zagora, Bulgaria. Russian families Hemophilia A is an X-linked bleeding disorder affecting approximately E. Zaklyazminskaya1, T. Kovalevskaya1, S. Chuprova2, S. Kozlova3, 1 in 5.000 males. It is caused by mutations in the factor VIII gene, A. Polyakov1; leading to a deficiency of factor VIII, a cofactor for the activation of 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian factor X by factor IXa. Factor VIII gene is located on Xq28, spanning Federation, 2Federal Child Center of Arrhythmias, Moscow, Russian 186 kb. It consists of 26 exons and encodes a 9 kb mRNA. Federation, 3Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Edication, A variety of molecular defects are identified as a cause of hemophilia Moscow, Russian Federation. A. An inversion in intron 22 is the cause of 45% of severe cases with Congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is an inherited cardiac disorder hemophilia A. Most of the other molecular defects in the factor VIII characterized by a prolonged QT interval (rate-corrected QT>440 ms, gene are point mutations, that are peculiar to the individual families. syncope due to polymorphous ventricular arrhythmias (“torsade de Using SSCP as a screening method, we have identified an Arg 531→ pointes”) and high risk of sudden death. At least the six genes, when Cys (CGC→TGC) point mutation in exon 11 in six out of 60 (10%) mutated, produce this phenotype: KCNQ1 (LQT1), HERG (LQT2), unrelated patients with mild to moderate hemophilia A patients from SCN5A (LQT3), KCNE1 (LQT5), KCNE2 (LQT6). the Republic of Bulgaria. The mothers of all the patients were found Here we present the results of genetic screening (PCR-SSCP- to be carriers for this mutation. analysis combined with sequencing of abnormal conformers) 2, 4, 5, The Arg 531→Cys amino acid substitution is relatively rare mutation. 6, 7, 14 exons of the gene KCNQ1, exons 2, 6, 7, 10 of the HERG, It was described for the first time in 1991 by Higuchi et al. (Proc Natl minK and MiRP1 genes. We have screened 60 unrelated families Acad Sci USA, 88:7405-09; 1991) in two patients of a Japanese (132 patients with Romano-Ward syndrome and 3 patients with family. According to the database (http://europium.csc.mrc.ac.uk) this Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome). Diagnosis was confirmed mutation has been observed in 12 out of 2.000 unrelated patients. using criterias according Schwartz et al. (1993). None of our 50 hemophilia A patients from the Republic of Macedonia We have identified 32 mutations in 35 unrelated families and 3 SNP. had this mutation. This is the first observation that this point mutation Distribution of mutations among these 4 genes was followed: 22 has a high prevalence among one ethnic group. in KCNQ1( 68,7%), 6 in HERG (18,7%), 3 in minK (9,3%) and 1 in MiRP1(1,9%) genes. Missense mutations represented the majority P0833. Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay explains protein of genetic defects (90,6%). Other abnormalities were splice errors. S deficiency in patients carrying a PROS1 mutation that We identified 17 novel mutations, the others have been reported. We introduces a premature stop codon don’t found any mutations in 2 and 10 exons of HERG although it X. Muñoz, Y. Espinosa-Parrilla, N. Sala; consist about 25% of all known mutations in this gene by published Institut de Recerca Oncològica (IRO), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. date. The W585C substitution in 7 exon of HERG and the V107I This study was designed to analyse the effect on mRNA expression substitution in MinK were detected in the same proband with LQT1 of 11 protein S gene (PROS1) mutations that segregate with and LQT2 both clinical phenotype. protein S (PS) deficiency in Spanish thrombophilic families. Two of the mutations are missense (L-27H and M599T); 5 are nonsense P0831. Part of the GLI3 transcripts with premature (E19X, Q238X, S293X, R410X, W465X), two are frameshift termination codons undergo nonsense mediated mRNA deletions (333,334delTG and 1877delT); one alters a splice site decay (1301+5G>A) and the last one is splice site and missense (V46F or K. Grzeschik, S. Thieltges, M. Wessling, S. Driess, D. Bornholdt, M. 404,405AG>GT). PROS1 cDNA fragments covering exons 1 to 15 Kalff-Suske; were obtained by RT-PCR from platelet-derived patientsí mRNAs and Institut fuer Humangenetik, Philipps-Universitaet, Marburg, Germany. analysed by DNA sequencing. The results obtained were confirmed Chromosomal aberrations as well as different types of point mutations by the analysis of transcribed polymorphisms. cDNAs corresponding located throughout the coding exons of the GLI3 gene are causing to both the normal and the mutated alleles were obtained from the distinct morphopathies associated with polydactyly (GCPS, PHS, heterozygotes for L-27H, M599T, 333,334delTG and 1301+5G>A. PPIV, PAPA/B). Most of the point mutations result in the introduction On the contrary, cDNAs corresponding only to the normal allele, of premature termination codons (PTC). To establish a genotype- which indicated the absence of transcripts from the mutation, were phenotype correlation in GLI3 associated morphopathies a functional obtained from all 5 heterozygotes for nonsense mutations, as well as role has been invoked for different truncated protein products. from the 1877delT and the V46F heterozygotes. From these results To test if GLI3-mRNA molecules with truncating mutations in different we conclude that: 1) The main cause of quantitative PS deficiency positions are retained for translation we determined the amount associated to mutations which generate a premature stop codon of mutant GLI3-mRNA relative to the wild type transcript in patient is not the synthesis of a truncated protein but the exclusion of the derived fibroblasts lines using the ARMS (Amplification Refractive mutated allele due to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. 2) V46F or Mutation System) test and differential restriction following RT-PCR. 404,405AG>GT allele exclusion indicates that an abnormal splicing of Transcripts with PTCs at position 309 or 366 of the cDNA were intron 3, with the generation of a stop codon, is the most likely cause present at lower levels (20-40%) compared with the allelic wild type of PS deficiency associated with this “missense” mutation. transcript. In contrast, transcripts with a PTC located in the last GLI3 We thank FIS (98/0645) and ISCIII (01/1468) for grants. exon or carrying a silent amino acid exchange were present at equal levels compared with their wild type counterparts. These data are P0834. DNA Analysis of Puerto Rican albino patients in line with previous observations that only transcripts with PTCs suspected of having Hermansky Pudlak Syndrome upstream of the last intron-exon junction undergo nonsense mediated C. L. Cadilla1, A. E. Maldonado1, J. Y. Renta1, Y. Rodríguez2, L. mRNA decay (NMD). Nogueras1, M. Castro1, L. del Fierro1, D. Muñoz1, E. Rivera-Caragol2, Haploinsufficiency due to NMD might occur in the 56% of GLI3 PTC I. Ortiz2, N. J. Izquierdo3, P. J. Santiago-Borrero2; mutations located in the first 14 exons associated with all types of 1University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine Dept. of Biochemistry, GLI3-morphopathies, including PHS. Different mechanisms, like San Juan, PR, 2Dept. of Pediatrics, San Juan, PR, 3Dept. of protein instability or functional haploinsufficiency must be invoked for Ophthalmology, San Juan, PR. PTC mutations in the last GLI3 exon that accounts for about half of The most common form of albinism in PR is the Hermansky Pudlak the coding capacity of the full-length GLI3 protein. Syndrome (HPS). A 16-bp duplication in exon 15 of the first HPS gene characterised (HPS1) was found in a large group of PR HPS patients. A third gene for HPS (SUTAL or HPS3) was reported to 250 Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 251 cause additional cases in Central PR due to a 3,904-bp deletion. We gene, the Promoter region & the gene segment responsible for have screened 137 Puerto Rican patients with albinism for the HPS1 encoding the helix termination motif of keratin gene, hHb6, was PCR 16 bp duplication and found that only 48.2% of the patients were amplified and subjected to SSCP. The variant bands obtained were homozygous for the duplication, 44.5% were negative, and 7.3% cloned and sequenced. We observed an association of the disease were heterozygous for the HPS1 PR mutation. We have examined 71 causing mutation, E413K, in hHb6 gene in 13 out of 15 patients in HPS1 duplication- negative or heterozygous PR albino patients for both the families. We also detected a novel polymorphism in the mutations in other albinism genes and found that 6 of these patients Promoter and intron 7 of hHB6 gene. Initial observation indicates were homozygous for the G47D mutation of the TYR gene and 17 that both E413K and promoter polymorphism when present together were homozygous and one heterozygous for the HPS3 PR deletion. contribute to the severity of the disease and hair dystrophy, an Out of 1,416 PR newborns, only 25 (1.76%) were heterozygous and observation not reported earlier. one was homozygous for the HPS1 duplication mutation. The carrier frequency for the HPS1 duplication in Northwest PR was 12 out of P0837. Molecular analysis ot hepcidin gene in Italian 301 newborns (1:25), whereas 10 out of 630 newborns (1:63) carried patients with hereditary hemochromatosis. the HPS3 gene deletion. The PR HPS1 16 bp duplication accounts S. Majore1, F. Binni1, B. M. Ricerca2, G. Brioli1, P. Grammatico1; for close to half of the albinism cases in this cohort; the HPS3 1Medical Genetics, University “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, deletion was responsible for 12.4% the G47D tyrosinase mutation 2Hematology Service University Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. only accounts for 4.4%; and 35.0% require further analysis. NIH- Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is the most common genetic NIGMS grants S06-GM08224 and R25-GM61838 and RCMI award disorder in the Caucasian population, particularly frequent in G12RR03051 supported this study. individuals of northern European origin of Celtic ancestry. It is caused by excess absorption of dietary iron by the intestinal mucosa leading P0835. KIF1B gene study in the large Russian CMT2A to progressive iron deposition in the parenchimal cells of several family tissues, particularly of liver. Although the majority of HH cases are I. V. Mersiyanova1, S. Zuechner2, J. Senderek3, C. Bergmann3, J. associated with mutations in HFE, other genes, some of which Schröder2, E. L. Dadali1, N. N. Vasserman1, I. A. Shagina1, A. V. already identified, play a role in primary iron overload. Hepcidin, Polyakov1; encoding an antimicrobial peptide synthesised in the liver, has 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian been recently proposed as a novel candidate gene involved in the Federation, 2Department of Neuropathology, University of Aachen, development of HH. In fact , hepcidin gene it is overespressed in Aachen, Germany, 3Department of Human Genetics, University of mice, subjected to iron overload. Furthermore, Usf2 gene knockout Aachen, Aachen, Germany. mice, develop extensive iron overload accompanied by lack of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common human hepcidin gene expression. hereditary neuropathy affecting both motor and sensory peripheral We performed hepcidin gene mutation analysis in 10 Italian patients nerves. CMT is divided into two large types: demyelinating CMT1 with HH, negative for C282Y, H63D or other less frequent HFE and axonal CMT2, both are genetically heterogeneous. Recently, mutations and for Y250X in TFR2. Sequencing of the coding region, two genes responsible for CMT2 were identified. These comprise 5’ and 3’UTRs didn’t reveal the presence of any alteration of the the neurofilament light gene for a CMT2E locus on 8p21, and the hepcidin gene in the screened patients. Our results exclude, at least kinesin like gene KIF1B for a CMT2A locus on 1p36. To date, the only in our patients, that hepcidin gene mutations are related to iron pathogenic KIF1B gene mutation resulting in a Gln98Leu substitution overload. was described in a single CMT2A Japanese family. Here we report on a large Russian CMT2 family, in which a significant P0838. Clinical and genetical differences between adult positive LOD score of 3.55 was obtained for markers of the CMT2A primary pulmonary hypertension and the infantile form of locus. All KIF1B exons including flanking parts of introns were the disease. analyzed in this family by direct sequencing. No sequence changes G. Miltenberger-Miltenyi1, E. Gruenig1, R. Zimmermann2, M. resulting in an amino acid substitution or a splice site mutation were Gorenflo1, D. Mereles1, K. Arnold1, D. Schranz2, B. Janssen1; found in affected persons. Several intronic polymorphisms, revealed 1Departments of Human Genetics, Internal Medicine III and also in normal donors, were found in this family, including CMT Pediatrics, University Hospital Heidelberg, c/o Dr. Gruenig patients. This fact allows us to exclude the deletion of the whole Bergheimer Straße 58, 69115, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Children’s KIF1B gene as a cause of CMT in this family. Heart Center and Center for Inborn Heart Disorders, Justus Liebig We propose two hypotheses to explain the present situation: (1) In University Giessen, Feulgenstrasse 12, 35390, Giessen, Germany. this family the disease is caused by deletion of a whole exon or by Background: Primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH) is a rapid mutations in the noncoding part of the KIF1B gene, which could not progressive disease with remodeling of the small pulmonary arteries be revealed by sequencing. (2) There might be another gene in the which occurs at any age. In the families with autosomal dominant 1p36 chromosomal region the mutation of which is responsible for the inherited PPH of adults mutations of the bone morphogenic protein axonal type of CMT2A neuropathy. receptor 2 (BMPR2) gene have been identified. The genetic cause of PPH in children who are often severely affected remains unknown. P0836. Severity of Monilethrix associated with a novel Methods: We studied 42 relatives of 5 children with PPH, aged promoter polymorphism and the known pathogenic 8 to 32 months at diagnosis. PPH was confirmed by right heart mutation in the helix termination motif of the hair cortex catheterisation in all patients. The pulmonary artery systolic pressure keratin gene, hHb6, in two Indian families. (PASP) was estimated by Doppler-echocardiography at rest and N. K. Bairwa1, S. Khandpur2, D. Malhotra1, A. Saha1, B. Reddy2, R. during exercise in all family members. A screening of BMPR2-gene Bamezai1; was performed by SSCP and DHPLC. Linkage analysis was carried 1Human Genetics Section, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru out with markers of chromosome 2. University, New Delhi, India, 2Department of Dermatology and STD, Results: In all children but one both parents and relatives out of both Maulana Azad Medical College, LNJP, New Delhi, India. paternal and maternal branches showed abnormal pulmonary artery Monilethrix is a rare autosomal dominant hair defect with pressure responses during exercise. None of the children or their variable expression, characterized by hair fragility and follicular relatives showed mutations of the BMPR2 or Alk1-gene. We found no hyperkeratosis. The Pathogenic mutations reported in diseased linkage to chromosome 2q31-33 in all families. condition are restricted to helix initiation motif and the helix Conclusion: PPH in the 5 children and their families appeared to be termination motif of the human basic hair keratin genes, hHb1 and transmitted by an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance without hHb6, located on 12q13, however, the severity of disease and hair evidence of BMPR2-mutations. Therefore, we hypothesise that PPH dystrophy varies in monilethrix individuals which is unexplainable in children (IPPH) might be genetically different from PPH in adults. with the same mutational background. There is no report available for the status of the promoter and intron regions of these genes in the disease condition. Here in this study, two unrelated families with 22 individuals were clinically diagnosed with monilethrix in 15 of its members. In order to investigate the pathogenic mutation in keratin Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 252 253 P0839. The “Reunion” mutation is a complex Saint-Joseph,, Beirut, France, 3Service de Biochimie, CHU Ambroise rearrangement of the CYP21 genes and associated wth Paré, Boulogne, France. the 2/3 of classic forms of 21-Hydroxylase Deficiency in To date, 820 mutations have been identified in the LDLR gene, encoding the low-density lipoprotein receptor, in subjects with the Island Familial Hypercholesterolemia. Although genotype/structure- A. Fourmaintraux1, J. L. Alessandri2, V. Tardy3, F. Cartault4, Y. Morel3; function correlations have been substantially investigated, 1ARDPMHE, Pediatric department, Saint-Pierre, REUNION, genotype/phenotype correlations have not been explored. Thus, 2ARDPMHE, Pediatric department, Saint-Denis, REUNION, we have compiled a database containing standardized data for 3Biochimie endocrinienne et moléculaire, INSERM U329, Hôpital each LDLR mutation, and developed the software that provides Debrousse, Lyon, France, 4Cytogenetics, Saint-Denis, REUNION. sorting tools and allows optimized multicriteria research [http: Incidence of the 21-OH deficiency (21OHD) was 1 in 14000 live //www.umd.necker.fr]. The analysis of the 737 point mutations in the births in the world except in Alaska and Reunion island. In this island UMD-LDLR database gives the following information: [1] 58% of of the Indian Ocean near Madagascar, the incidence of SW forms the mutations are missense, and 16% occur in CpG dinucleotides was found higher (1:2141) by neonatal screening (1978-1988). We known to be mutational hot spots; [2] although widely distributed have determined the molecular defects of the CYP21 genes in more throughout the gene, there is an excess of mutations in exons 4 than thirty 21OHD. A new mutation with a high incidence (69% SW- and 6 (ligand-binding repeats) and 7 (EGF-like repeat); [3] there is chromosomes) was identified and carefully characterized. Southern a deficit of mutations in exons 10 and 13 (EGF-precursor-like), 15 blotting studies have showed an unusual Taq-1 pattern suggesting (O-linked-sugar), 16 (transmembrane), 17 and 18 (cytoplasmic); a reverse gene conversion CYP21P pseudogene to CYP21 gene [4] 49% of the small deletions occur between repeated sequences without deletion. Nevertheless using PCR methods associated with and can be explained by the slipped-mispairing model described by the entire sequencing of the genes, this rearrangement did not result Krawczak and Cooper; [5] 67% of the mutations in the ligand-binding in two normal CYP21 genes, but in two duplicated CYP21/CYP21P/ domain affect conserved amino-acids involved in LDL binding; [6] CYP21 hybrid genes. The presence of multiple mutations predicted the functional data available for 183 (29%) mutations indicate 38% no 21-hydroxylase activity. As all patients homozygous for this of class 2B (transport defective) and 33% of class 1 mutations (null mutation have a SW form, a good relationship between genotype alleles). and phenotype has been observed. This mutation was found in a genetically homogeneous isolate called French small white, but P0842. The genetic IP defects: molecular analysis of not in the other ethnic populations of this island (Asian, Indian,....). The incidence of the other mutations was similar to this observed in NEMO gene and NF-kB related genes. Caucasian populations. Reunion mutation seems to originate from a T. Bardaro1,2, G. Falco1, A. Sparago1, V. Mercadante1, M. Ursini1, M. single common ancestor who was among the settlers of the island. D’Urso1; In our large French population (1732 classic CAH chromosomes), 1IIGB-CNR, Naples, Italy, 2Istituto di Scienze Microbiologiche, S.U.N, each time that this mutation has been detected, the patients were Naples, Italy. from Reunion Island. A screening of this mutation should be done to In collaboration with International IP Consortium (IPIF) we recently improve the genetic counseling of 21OHD in this island. demonstrated that 78% of patients of Incontinentia Pigmenti (IP; MIM 308310) show amorphic mutations in NEMO/IKKg gene. P0840. Functional studies of SLC7A7 mutations found in The complete loss of NF-kB activation is lethal for males during embryogenesis but females can survive, owing to mosaicism patients affected by Lusinuric Protein Intolerance as a result of X-inactivation. Moreover, it has been reported that M. P. Sperandeo1,2, M. Taglialatela3, A. Pietrosanto1, V. Fiorito1, G. D. hypomorphic mutations in the NEMO gene lead to an Ectodermal Maropoulos4, G. Andria1, G. Sebastio1; Dysplasia, Hypohidrotic with Immunodeficiency (ED-ID; MIM 1Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University - Naples, Italy, 300291). In human, these mutations affecting NEMO gene impair but 2Telethon Foundation, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Neuroscience, do not abolish NF-kB signaling resulting in two related syndromes Federico II University - Naples, Italy, 4General Children Hospital of that associate specific developmental and immunological defects. Athens, Athens, Greece. Among 357 patients analyzed by the IPIF, 84 are collected in our lab; Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI, MIM 222700) is an autosomal 56 of them carrying the D4-10 deletion, 1 show the E57K mutations recessive defect of cationic amino acids transport (lysine, ornithine, and 4 are carrier of new small mutations. Mutational analysis arginine, namely CAA), caused by mutations of the SLC7A7 gene. by DHPLC revealed that 23 patients, 1 familial and 22 sporadic CAA transport is mediated by y+L system, which is exerted by a cases, do not exhibit mutations in NEMO gene, although a typical heterodimer consisting of the 4F2 heavy chain (4F2hc) and SLC7A7 IP phenotype has been ascertained on clinical presentation. Since (4F2hc/SLC7A7). We have identified 16 causative mutations of the multiple pathways impinge on the NF-kB transcription system, it is SLC7A7 gene in LPI patients, originating from Italy, Tunisia, Greek, conceivable that combinations of mutations in the upstream and Algeria, Pakistan and Japan. We examined nine of these mutations downstream genes could cause a phenotype similar to that produced (M1L, M50K, F152L, T188I, S386R, W242X, Y457X, 346delGGA, by specific defects in NEMO. For this purpose, we are identifying and and 1425delTTCT) to assess the arginine transport function by characterizing regulatory regions of the NEMO promoters and search co-injection of each SLC7A7 mutant with 4F2hc cRNA in X. laevis for mutations in IP and ED-ID patients, which still lack a molecular oocytes. Eight mutations (M1L, M50K, T188I, S386R, W242X, diagnosis. In the meantime, we are searching for other genes Y457X, 346delGGA and 1425delTTCT) abolish the arginine transport involved in NF-kB action that could affect NEMO function as compared with the ‘wild-type’ control (4F2hc/SLC7A7). Another mutation, F152L, reduces the arginine transport of about 10% only. P0843. In search of the forgotten exon of the human We then performed triple injections (cRNA ratio 1:0.5:0.5) of 4F2hc/ F152L+346delGGA, 4F2hc/wt SLC7A7+346delGGA, and 4F2hc/wt crumbs homolog 1 and its implication in LCA. SLC7A7+F152L which resemble the genotypes of one patient and S. Gerber1, I. Perrault1, S. Hanein1, S. Shalev2, J. Zlotogora3, F. his parents. The arginine uptake was abolished when the 4F2hc/ Barbet1, D. Ducroq1, J. L. Dufier4, A. Munnich1, J. M. Rozet1, J. SLC7A7+346delGGA or the 4F2hc/F152L +346delGGA were injected Kaplan1; into the oocytes. We speculate that the 346delGGA mutation might 1INSERM U393 - Recherches Handicaps Génétiques de l’Enfant, have a dominant negative effect. This correlates well with the severe Paris, France, 2Genetic Unit - Haemek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, clinical LPI phenotype observed in the patient. The 346delGGA 3Dpt of Community Genetics - Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, mutation removes a glutamic residue from the protein though letting a Israel, 4Service d’Ophtalmologie, Paris, France. correct reading frame of the protein. Biochemical investigations of the To identify the gene responsible for Leber congenital amaurosis parent carrier of this mutation are in progress. in a very large consanguineous family originating from Palestine, a genome wide search for homozygosity was undertaken. We P0841. Molecular analysis of 737 mutations in the human found evidence for homozygosity for markers of the 1q31 region. Recombination events in two affected patients allowed reducing LDL receptor gene database (UMD-LDLR). the genetic interval containing the disease-causing gene between L. Villéger1, M. Abifadel1,2, D. Allard1, J. Rabès1,3, C. Béroud1, C. D1S1723 and D1S2668. The CRB1 gene was found to map in Junien1,3, C. Boileau1,3, M. Varret1; this 4 cM interval. However, prior to this genome wide search for 1INSERM UR383, Paris, France, 2Faculté de Pharmacie, Université 252 Posters - Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 253 homozygosity, a screening of the six already known LCA-causing P0846. TGFβ 1 screening in Camurati-Engelmann like and gene including CRB1 was performed but no mutation was found. The others diaphyseal sclerosing bone disorders mapping of the disease-causing gene in this family prompted us to B. Campos-Xavier1, M. Le Merrer1, I. Pellier2, A. Munnich1, V. consider that the mutation might lie in a forgotten exon of the CRB1 Cormier-Daire1; gene. Subsequently, we screened the Human Genome Working 1Department of Medical Genetics and INSERM U393, Hôpital Necker Draft in order to identify novel CRB1 exons. This study revealed that Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Unité d’Hématologie - Immunologie a twelfth exon lies in the 3’ end of the gene. The sequence of this Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. exon revealed that the disease in this family is accounted for by a Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED) is a rare autosomal dominant homozygous 10 bp deletion leading to apparition of a premature Stop progressive sclerosing diaphyseal dysplasia due to TGFß 1 codon. Further study of this exon in 80 unrealted LCA patients was mutations. On a total of 31 families studied, 3 families have been therefore undertaken. reported without any TGFß 1 mutation including two families with hyperostosis generalisata with bone striations. P0844. Dominant X-linked RP is frequently accounted for by Here, we report on the molecular study of TGFß 1 gene in three truncating mutations in the exon ORF15 of the RPGR gene. sclerosing disorders presenting clinical and radiological similarities J. M. Rozet1, I. Perrault1, N. Gigarel1, E. Souied1, I. Ghazi2, S. with CED. The series include : 1) a CED like disorder observed in Gerber1, J. L. Dufier2, A. Munnich1, J. Kaplan1; a two generation family with three affected patients presenting in 1Recherches Handicaps Génétiques de l’Enfant - INSERM addition bone striations. 2) a Ghosal syndrome observed in a large U393, Hôpital des Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Service consanguineous family with 2 affected patients characterised by d’Ophtalmologie, Hôpital des Enfants Malades, Paris, France. anaemia responsive to corticosteroids and diaphyseal dysplasia Purpose: To determine whether dominant X-linked retinitis but absence of generalised manifestations. 3) two patients with pigmentosa (DXLRP), a condition previously described as different craniodiaphyseal dysplasia. from the recessive X-linked RP (RP3), are due to mutations in the In all these cases, TGFß 1 was tested by direct sequencing and no retinitis pigmentosa GTPase-regulator (RPGR) gene. mutation was found in the first 6 exons of the coding sequence. Methods: The RPGR gene was screened for mutations in fourteen These results suggest that at least one other gene is involved in X-linked RP families with severe expression in carrier females. sclerosing diaphyseal dysplasia. Results: In 9/14 families, 8 different null mutations were found in the RPGR ORF15 exon. In the 5 remaining families, no mutation was P0847. Detection of mutations in the translation initiation found. Nevertheless, linkage analyses confirmed the localisation of factor eIF2B in a restricted white matter disorder, the the gene in all families at the RP3 locus, suggesting that in these last CACH/VWM syndrome 5 families the RPGR mutation might be overlooked. A. Fogli1, E. Eymard Pierre1, D. Rodriguez2, E. Bertini3, M. Pineda4, Conclusions: We report here on the identification of null RPGR R. Surtees5, G. Uziel6, E. Malaspina7, R. Shiffmann8, O. Boespflug alleles in patients affected with DXLRP. In this retinal dystrophy, both Tanguy1,9; males and females display minimal inclusion criteria for RP. Although, 1INSERM U384, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2Hôpital A.Trousseau the age at onset of the disease in females is delayed compared et INSERM U546, Paris, France, 3Dept of Neurosciences Bambino to males (20-40 years versus 10-20 years, respectively) the visual Gesu Children’s Hospital, Roma, Italy, 4Hospital San Joan de Deu, impairment, the fundus alteration and the visual field reduction can be Barcelona, Spain, 5Institute of Child Health, University College, as severe in heterozygous females as in hemizygous males. In these London, United Kingdom, 6Carlo Basta Institute, Milano, Italy, females who’s ERG is non-recordable, no preferential X-inactivation 7Instituto di Clinica Padiatrica, Bologna, Italy, 8Developmental an was observed. It would be extremely interesting to know the exact Metabolic Neurology Branch, National Institute of Neurological phenotype of females harbouring truncating mutations in the RPGR Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, exon ORF15 in the XLRP families recently reported. Indeed, if some 9Fédération Auvergne de Génétique Humaine, Clermont-Ferrand, of the women were more severely affected than what is usually France. described for carrier females in recessive X-linked RP we would have The Childhood Ataxia with diffuse Central nervous system to consider RP3 as an incomplete dominant X-linked disease. Hypomyelination (CACH) syndrome is an autosomal recessive leukodystrophy clinically characterized by a progressive ataxic P0845. Elucidating the molecular basis of triallelism in diplegia with additional episodes of rapid deterioration following Bardet-Biedl syndrome. febrile infection or minor head trauma leading to death within J. L. Badano, J. R. Lupski, N. Katsanis; a few years after onset. MRI shows a diffuse hyposignal of the Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX. cerebral white matter resembling the intensity of CSF (Vanish White Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) (OMIM: 209900) is a rare genetically Matter (VWM). It has been further characterized as a cavitating heterogeneous disorder characterized primarily by obesity, retinal leukodystrophy with an increased number of oligodendrocytes with dystrophy, polydactyly, hypogenitalism, learning difficulties and foamy feature. Phenotypic variation with later onset, slow chronic renal malformations. BBS has been considered historically an progressive disease with learning and behavioral difficulties have autosomal recessive trait, on which premise six loci have been been also reported. We analyzed 27 CACH families (12 familial mapped in the human genome. Nevertheless, mutational and cases) and found a genetic heterogeneity at the previously reported genetic analyses of the first three cloned BBS genes, BBS2, BBS4 3q27 locus (maximum HLOD score=2.67 between markers D3S1618 and BBS6 suggest that BBS may also exhibit a complex mode and D3S3609 and 5 excluded families). Genetic heterogeneity of disease transmission, requiring at least three mutations in two of this syndrome was recently confirmed by the description of genes to manifest the phenotype (triallelic inheritance). In an effort mutations in the five subunits of the eIF2B translation initiation factor to elucidate the molecular basis of triallelism, we have reasoned that (eIF2Ba (12q24), eIF2Bß(14q24), eIF2Bg(1p36.23), eIF2Bd (2p23), either the different BBS proteins are part of the same multisubunit eIF2Be(3q27)). Complete sequence analysis of RT-PCR eIF2Be protein complex, or that they operate in discrete yet complementary cDNA demonstrated a missense mutation in 50% of families not pathways. Based on these hypotheses, we are conducting excluded for the 3q27 locus by linkage analysis. All were in exons coimmunoprecipitation and immunohistochemical studies to ascertain 3 (60%), 2 (20%), 7 and 4 (10% each). 40% of alleles expressed a the cellular localization and potential interaction between the three preferentially R113H mutation. No genotype were strictly correlated known BBS proteins. We present data from coimmunoprecipitation with the severity of the disease, however the 5 homozygous patients assays performed by transiently co-transfecting HEK293 cells with for this R113H mutation have a milder form than heterozygous Myc- and HA-tagged BBS proteins, that suggest that the three BBS patients for the same mutation. proteins do not interact directly. Furthermore, cellular localization studies indicate that BBS2 and BBS4, but not BBS6, may be P0848. GJB2 mutation in Iranians with autosomal localized in the same cellular compartments, suggesting that the recessive non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss molecular basis of triallelism in BBS may be due to cellular rescue S. Sahebjam1, H. Najmabadi1, R. A. Cucci2, M. Farhadi3, S. by alternative pathways. Elucidation of the molecular etiology of Arzhangi1, N. Daneshmandan1, R. J. H. Smith2; BBS and understanding of triallelism may prove important in bridging 1Genetic Research Center, Welfare Science & Rehabilitation between Mendelian and complex traits. University, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Posters - Muscle Diseases 254 255 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, Department of Five new evolutionary conserved motifs were detected. One of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa; Iowa, them, 76PCxxFFxFACxxW88, close to the transmembrane segment, IA United States, Iowa, IA, 3. Department of Otolaryngology, Rasoul is eukaryotic specific. Four new conserved motifs were localised in Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, the C-terminal region: 456WMxxxTKxxAxxK468, 476VGYP479, 602WW603, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 746CxLW749. When superposed with the cristallographic neprilysin Hereditary hearing loss (HHL) is an extremely common disorder. (the prototype of M13) structure, the new motifs appear to be About 70% of HHL is non-syndromic, with autosomal recessive concentrated in the proximity of the catalytic signatures. No PHEX forms accounting for ~ 85% of the genetic load. Although very orthologue was detected in invertebrates. A zebrafish EST containing heterogeneous, the most common cause of HHL in many different the motif I was identified as an M13 endopeptidase sequence. After world populations is mutations of GJB2, a gene that encodes the sequencing the whole clone, all the above motifs were identified, and gap junction protein connexin 26 (Cx26). This study investigates the protein revealed a high homology with the mammalian PHEX. the contribution of GJB2 to the autosomal recessive non-syndromic PHEX definitely appears tightly linked to tissue mineralisation. deafness (ARNSD) load in the Iranian population. One hundred sixty eight persons from 83 families were studied. GJB2-related deafness P 18. Muscle diseases was diagnosed in 9 families (4, 35delG homozygotes; 3, 35delG compound heterozygotes; 1, W24X homozygote; 1, non-35delG P0851. An sporadic case of DMD girl due to a deletion compound heterozygote). The carrier frequency of the 35delG allele in dystrophin gene and skewed inactivation of normal X in this population was ~1% (1/83). Because the relative frequency chromosome of Cx26 mutations is much less than in the other populations, it is P. Gallano1, A. Garcia1, A. Lasa1, F. Martinez2, M. Rodriguez1, M. possible that mutations in other genes play a major role in ARNSD in Baiget1, M. Roig3; Iran. 1Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 3Hospital Valle Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain. P0849. Loss of a chloride channel and a proton pump Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked inherited lead to slightly divergent forms of osteopetrosis in mice disorder characterized by the absence of dystrophin in myofibers, and man. with a prevalence of 1 in 3000 newborn males. Only about 8% of U. Kornak1, D. Kasper1, A. Schulz2, J. Seidel3, J. Park1, E. Kaiser4, G. the heterozygote female carriers show clinical symptoms, wich can Delling4, C. Kubisch5, T. J. Jentsch1; be as mild as pseudohypertrophy of the calf muscles or proximal 1Zentrum fuer Molekulare Neurobiologie Hamburg (ZMNH), limb weakness. In the rare cases of DMD females, cytogenetic Hamburg, Germany, 2Universitätskinderklinik, Universität Ulm, Ulm, studies have shown either the absence of one X chromosome or Germany, 3Klinische Genetik, Klinik fuer Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, an X-autosome translocation. However, there are reports of rare Universität Jena, Jena, Germany, 4Abteilung fuer Osteopathologie, manifesting carriers with a normal karyotype but with preferential Pathologisches Institut, Universität Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, inactivation of the normal X chromosome. 5Institut fuer Humangenetik, Universität Bonn, Bonn, Germany. We present a young girl, an sporadic case, with a DMD phenotype. Chloride channels play important roles in the plasma membrane and The inmonocytochemistry with anti-dystrophin antibodies in intracellular organelles. ClC-7 is a ubiquitously expressed chloride (Novocastra) showed the total absence of this protein in the muscle channel that resides within late endosomes and lysosomes. Mice tissue. The multiplex PCR showed a deletion of exon 3 to exon 44 deficient for ClC-7 show severe osteopetrosis that becomes apparent (both included). The microsatellite analysis using STRs located in shortly after birth and retinal degeneration. Although osteoclasts are the deleted region (STR07A and STR44) demonstrate hemizygosity present in normal numbers, they fail to resorb bone because they with paternal origin. The healthy brother present the same maternal cannot acidify the extracellular resorption lacuna. In osteoclasts, haplotype. The pattern of inactivation was studied by differential ClC-7 is highly expressed in the ruffled membrane that is formed methylation that exists between the active chromosome and inactive by the fusion of H+-ATPase containing vesicles and that secretes chromosome in the CpG islands of the X-linked genes, by using protons into the lacuna. We conclude that ClC-7 provides the chloride methylation-sensitive enzymes. The results confirmed a nearly total conductance required for an efficient proton pumping by the H+- inactivation of the maternal chomosome. ATPase of the osteoclast ruffled membrane. Comparison with the In spite the difficulty that this kind of families, without affected mouse mutant osteosclerotic (oc), which lacks a subunit of the H+- boy, provides to the molecular analysis of the dystrophin gene, is ATPase, revealed that the retinal phenotype is not secondary to the important to perfoms this kind of stuies in girls with clincial symptoms osteopetrosis but most likely a direct effect of the loss of ClC-7 on the of myopathy to establish the exact diagnosis of the disease. photoreceptors. As the murine phenotype closely resembles human infantile P0852. Evidence for autosomal recessive inheritance malignant osteopetrosis, we also searched for mutations in the in the infantile spinal muscular atrophy variant with human gene, CLCN7, in 23 patients suffering from this disease. congenital fractures. Indeed, three patients were compound heterozygous for mutations. W. Courtens1, A. Johansson2, B. Dachy3, F. Avni4, N. Telerman- Some mutations lead to a complete loss of the ClC-7 protein in Toppet3, H. Scheffer5; cultured fibroblasts from the patients. The majority of cases, though, 1Brugmann University Hospital, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of was positive for mutations in TCIRG1, which codes for the a3 subunit Neonatology, Children’s University Hospital Queen Fabiola, Brussels, of the osteoclast H+-ATPase. Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, University Hospital Brugmann, Brussels, Belgium, 4Department of Paediatric Radiology, Children’s P0850. In the phylogeny, PHEX, whose mutations cause University Hospital Queen Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 5Department X-linked hypophosphataemic rickets (HYP), occurs of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, Groningen, concomitantly with the bony fish Netherlands. L. Bianchetti, C. Oudet, O. Poch; We report on a female newborn with a severe acute form of SMA, IGBMC, Illkirch, France. congenital bone fractures, camptodactyly of fingers and toes, bilateral HYP patients suffer from phosphate leakage in the kidney, growth hip dislocation and congenital heart defect, with early lethal outcome. retardation, and abnormal bone and tooth mineralisation. The product DNA studies showed the absence of homozygosity for a deletion of of the PHEX gene (phosphate regulating gene with homologies exons 7 and 8 of the SMNt gene. A new lethal syndrome consisting to endopeptidases on the X chromosome) belongs to the M13 of infantile spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and multiple congenital metalloendopeptidases family. These enzymes cleave a broad bone fractures in 2 sibs has been suggested in 1991. Recently, range of small physiologically active peptides. M13 endopeptidases another infant with a form of SMA and congenital fractures, was are characterised by 3 catalytic signatures: 580HExxH584, the zinc reported, thus validating the suggestion of a distinct and rare form of binding motif, 642ExxxD646, and 537VNAFY541. Since PHEX has only SMA associated with congenital bone fractures. Autosomal recessive been studied in mammals, the question arises to know whether it inheritance was suggested in the original report, but no history of participates in phosphate metabolism in organisms lacking bone consanguinity was noted in the second. X-linked inheritance could and teeth. A primary sequence alignment has been carried out and however not be excluded since those three affected infants were 81 M13 endopeptidases were identified from bacteria to human. male. Since our case is a female, an X-linked inheritance can be 254 Posters - Muscle Diseases 255 excluded. Since she was furthermore born to first cousin parents, it was strongly suggested on the base of family history. Mutation suggests an autosomal recessive inheritance in this rare variant of analysis of MYH 7 was carried out for exons 8, 9, 13, 15, 16, 19, 20 SMA type 1 with congenital fractures. We further conclude that this and 23. Thirty-nine known mutations (9 malignant including R403Q, SMA variant, with early lethal outcome seems to have a variable R719W and R719Q); 36 substitutions, 2 deletions and 1 insertion clinical expression and that it is probably not linked to 5q. were analysed. The mutations were detected using mutation specific restriction enzyme assays and oligonucleotide sequencing. No P0853. Spinal muscular atrophy type 1-3 in Estonian mutation has been found in the analysed patients. The non-existence children of malignant mutation amongst the analysed patients, especially H. Sibul1, M. Hämarik2; those with a positive family history, it difficult to explain on the basis 1Tartu University Clinics, United Laboratories, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu of published studies till 2000. The research carried out by Ackerman University Clinics Childrens’ Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. in 2001, has shown for the first time very low incidence of malignant The DNA testing for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) became available mutations, less than 1%, what also confirm the results of this study. in Estonia in 1997. Since then, 15 children with the clinical diagnosis of SMA have been studied. In 13 cases the diagnosis was confirmed P0856. The possible modifier effect of mitochondrial DNA by DNA analysis, in 2 cases the deletion was not found and the defect in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy causally diagnosis based on clinical findings, electroneuromyography and linked to beta-MHC gene mutation. muscle biopsy. 6 patients had type 1 (Werdnig-Hofmann), 2 had type M. Diegoli1, E. Porcu2, L. Scelsi3, A. Urrata2, M. Grasso2, N. 2 and 7 had type 3 (Kugelberg-Welander) SMA. Patients with type 2- Banchieri2, A. Repetto3, M. Pasotti3, C. Serio3, A. Brega4, L. Tavazzi3, 3 disease had no complications at birth, those with type 1 SMA were E. Arbustini2; asphyctic at birth, one patient was born with limb fractures. 5 out of 1Department of Pathology - University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 6 SMA type 1 patients had muscle weakness and hypotony at birth 2Cardiovascular Pathol. and Molec. Diagn. - Res.Transplantation already, 1 developed those symptoms by age of 2 months. 5 patients Lab. , IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Cardiology Division, died of respiratory insufficiency in first 6 months, one patient survived IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 4Department of Genetics, to 1.5 years. None of the SMA type 2 patients have ever walked University of Milan, Milan, Italy. unassisted. All SMA type 3 patients developed clinical features of the Two pathological mutations, one in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) disease before the age of 3 years, 4 of them have lost the ability to and one in a nuclear gene were identified in a large Italian family walk at the age of 8-15 years. with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Patients carrying both We recommend to perform molecular testing for SMA in all children heteroplasmic T9957C (Phe→Leu, COX III subunit) mutation of the who are born in asphyxia and muscle weakness. mtDNA and Lys450Glu mutation of the beta Myosin Heavy Chain (beta-MHC) were affected by HCM and developed congestive heart failure, while patients carrying the nuclear defect, but not the mtDNA P0854. Microcephaly-cardiomyopathy syndrome: further defect, did not develop heart failure. The mtDNA mutation alone deliniation of the phenotype was not associated to clinical phenotypes, any type. Among patients K. Becker1, R. Yates2; with congestive heart failure in optimal medical treatment, all those 1The Kennedy-Galton-Centre, Harrow, Middlesex, United Kingdom, who underwent or are awaiting for hert transplantation had higher 2Cardiology Unit, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, amount of mutant DNA than those who are clinically stable. The United Kingdom. cosegregation of congestive heart failure with a heteroplasmic mtDNA Winship et al. reported South African sibs with a combination of defect in our large family with HCM, causally linked to a beta-MHC microcephaly, dilated cardiomyopathy and minor dysmorphic features gene mutation, indicates that mtDNA defects are possible candidates in 1991. The cardiomypathy had resolved in the older child by the age to the role of modifiers, influencing the evolution of the disease of three years, and had markedly improved in the younger child on toward heart failure. anticardiac failure therapy. The microcephaly was severe, and both children showed severe global developmental delay. The dysmorphic P0857. Risk Estimates For Genetic Counselling In features were described as cupping of the outer helix of both pinnae, Myotonic Dystrophy fifth finger clinodactyly and sandal gaps on both feet. P. S. Harper; Kennedy et al. reported a nine year old girl with microcephaly, severe Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom. developmental delay and a dilated cardiomyopathy which had The combination of clinical variability, anticipation and parent of origin resolved at seven years of age. This patient had a sloping forehead, effects creates considerable difficulties in providing accurate risk downslanting palpebral fissures, a narrow palate, small ears and a estimates for relatives at risk for myotonic dystrophy, while the recent big sandal gap. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was normal. recognition of a second locus (PROMM/DM2) is an additional factor. All three children initially presented with cardiac failure, at the ages of Available genetic risk data from both the early and recent literature two months, five months and neonatally respectively. There was no and from personal studies are reassessed and combined to give consanguinity in either family. a series of estimates suitable for genetic counselling of myotonic We report another case with microcephaly and a dilated dystrophy families. In particular it is relevant for presymptomatic cardiomyopathy, but without soft dysmorphic features, which testing that the risk of a clinically normal, adult first degree relative suggests that these are more likely to represent coincidental familial carrying the myotonic dystrophy (DM1) mutation is unlikely to exceed traits. 10%. P0855. Genetic analysis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy P0858. Multiple consanguinity in a large Azorean family in 12 Croatian families affected with Spinal Muscular Atrophy type I: Implication M. Jelusic1, K. Gall-Troselj2, I. Jurak2, K. Pavelic2, H. Kniewald1, N. in genetic counselling Rojnic Putarek1, I. Malcic1; L. Mota-Vieira1, L. Rodrigues2, P. Melo3, C. Melo3, J. Forjaz- 1University Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Division of molecular Sampaio3, R. dos Santos2, A. Maia4; medicine, Ruder Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. 1Genetic and Molecular Pathology Unit, Hospital of Divino Espirito Hypertrophic cardiomiopathy (HCM) is a genetically and clinically Santo, Azores Islands, Portugal, 2Molecular Genetics Unit, Medical heterogeneous myocardial disease that in most cases familial and Genetics Institute, Oporto, Portugal, 3Obstetric and Gynecological transmitted in a dominant fashion. More than 140 different mutations Department , Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, Azores Islands, in 11 sarcomeric genes have been described to date. The most Portugal, 4Pediatrics Department, Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, frequently affected gene codes beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH 7) Azores Islands, Portugal. (35-50%). Previous genotype-phenotype correlation studies have In small populations, consanguinity is an important factor in the shown that mutations carry prognostic significance (R403Q, R719W appearance of recessively transmitted hereditary diseases, like spinal and R719Q mutations were identified as highly malignant defects). muscular atrophy (SMA). This disease is classified into three types, We analysed MYH 7 in 14 patients (7 female and 7 male), members one of which is the early infancy severe SMA type I. About 95% of the of 12 unrelated families, with HCM. The median age of patients at the affected individuals have homozygous deletions of exons 8 and/or 7 time of diagnosis was 11,2 years. In 8 patients dominant inheritance in the SMN1 gene.Posters - Muscle Diseases 256 257 Here, we describe a multiple consanguineous kindred from the To study the role of ADAM 12 in vivo, we generated transgenic mice Azorean island of São Miguel, Portugal, with one child (proband) that overexpress ADAM 12 in the muscle beyond embryonic life. affected with SMA type I. This child, who died before 1, was the first These mice showed accelerated regeneration following acute injury. offspring of a close consanguineous marriage (inbreeding coefficient, Interestingly, when ADAM 12 transgenic mice were paired with F= 0.0703). The ascending genealogy of the proband shows that dystrophin-deficient mdx mice, the enhanced expression of ADAM 12 her parents and one set of her great-grand parents were both first resulted in a decrease of muscle cell necrosis and inflammation and cousins. In addition, the extended genealogical analysis revealed a more than 50% reduction in serum creatine kinase. another consanguineous marriage (paternal proband’s uncle and In order to begin to decipher the molecular mechanism of ADAM his wife) with a lower value of relationship (F= 0.0195), although 12’s action in muscle, we examined on DNA microarray chips the relevant in terms of genetic risk to offspring. No homozygous deletion expression of 12500 genes in ADAM 12 transgenic mice and their of SMN1 and NAIPt genes were found in the proband, indicating littermate controls. Three independent experiments gave similar that she probably has a rare mutation. However, haplotype analysis results; in particular, compared to their littermate controls, the shows homoallelism for five closely linked polymorphic markers. transgenic mice showed an increase in the expression of myogenin, Considering the familiar consanguinity, the proband homoallelism myosin, troponin and acetylcholine receptor which are implicated in suggests identity-by-descent at SMA locus. The proband’s uncle and muscle development and structure. Besides, P21 cycline-dependent his wife are both carriers for the same haplotype, thus each offspring kinase inhibitor, which is implicated in cell survival showed an has a risk of 25% to be affected with SMA type I. increased expression in transgenic mice. The analysis of mdx and In conclusion, this study shows that the extended genealogical ADAM 12/mdx microarray experiments are underway. prenatal investigation and genetic counselling are very informative in families carrying rare recessive genes. (lmv.hospdelgada@mail.tele P0861. Muscle specific alternative splicing of pac.pt) myotubularin-related 1 gene is impaired in DM1 muscle cell cultures P0859. Gene expression profiling analysis shows A. Buj-Bello1, D. Furling2, H. Tronchère3, J. Laporte1, B. Payrastre3, possible signal transduction pathways leading to cardiac G. Butler-Browne2, J. Mandel1; structural changes in left ventricular hypertrophy of renal 1IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, CU. Strasbourg, France, failure 2Faculté de Médecine Pitié-Salpêtrière, CNRS UMR 7000, Paris, C. K. Maercker1, C. Rutenberg2, E. Ritz3, G. Mall4, K. Amann5; France, 3Institut Fédératif de Recherche en Immunologie Cellulaire et 1Resource Center for Genome Research, D-69120 Heidelberg, Moléculaire, Toulouse, France. Germany, 2Resource Center for Genome Research, Heidelberg, The myotubularin-related 1 (MTMR1) gene belongs to a highly- Germany, 3Univ. Heidelberg, Dept. Internal Medicine, Heidelberg, conserved family of phosphatases, which includes hMTM1, mutated Germany, 4Dept. Pathology, Darmstadt, Germany, 5Univ. Erlangen, in X-linked myotubular myopathy, a severe congenital disorder that Dept. Pathology, Erlangen, Germany. affects skeletal muscle, and hMTMR2, mutated in Charcot-Marie- By gene expression profiling, we have investigated signaling Tooth type 4B, a recessive demyelinating neuropathy with a specific molecules which obviously take in a major role in re-organizing Schwann cell pathology. We and others recently showed that the the cytoskeleton, the extracellular matrix, and the capillary density MTM1 gene product, myotubularin, is a potent phosphatidylinositol in hearts of rats with renal failure. Male Sprague-Dawley rats, 3-phosphate (PI(3)P) phosphatase. We now demonstrate that this which were subjected to sub-total nephrectomy (SNX), served as function is conserved amonsgt other members of the family, in a model system for a gene expression profiling analysis. Poly(A)+ particular MTMR2 and MTMR1 proteins. Whereas no mutations in RNA from the hearts of SNX animals and from sham-operated rats the hMTMR1 gene have been associated with a human disorder (SHAM) as a control, was labeled and hybridized with Rat UniGene so far, this gene, that arose from an ancient hMTM1 duplication filters containing about 27.000 gene and EST sequences (Bento and is adjacent to it in Xq28, may share some biological functions Soares, Univ. of Iowa). Phosphoimaging and software analysis with MTM1, as the corresponding proteins are 57% identical. We revealed substantial changes in gene expression in SNX animals investigated whether MTMR1 could play a role in myogenesis by compared to SHAM: Not only integrin a1 and b1 as central players, analysing its expression pattern during muscle differentiation both but also genes downstream of the integrin signaling pathway, like in vitro and in vivo. We have identified 3 novel coding exons in the calreticulin, rac protein kinase a, rho A and rho B have been shown MTMR1 intron 2 that are alternatively spliced, giving rise to at least to be up-regulated in SNX animals. Rho protein again, might be four mRNA isoforms. One of the transcripts is muscle-specific. We causal for the stimulation of the expression different enzymes of analysed MTMR1 alternative splicing in muscle cells derived from the phosphatidylinositol pathway up to cardiac dynein and actin, patients with congenital myotonic dystrophy (cDM1), a disease with which also has been shown by our experiments. Therefore, the RNA splicing disturbances. We have found a reduction of muscle- gene expression profiling experiments discussed here not only allow specific isoform levels and the appearance of an aberrant MTMR1 us to describe genes involved in activation and expansion of the transcript in cDM1 myotubes in culture. Our results suggest that non-vascular interstitial tissue in uraemic animals, like timp3, tgf- MTMR1 plays a role in muscle formation and represents a novel b1, osteonectin, paxillin, and laminin a1, and linker molecules like target for aberrant pre-mRNA splicing in myotonic dystrophy. plectin, catenin, cadherin and ICAM. These experiments also make it possible to find central signaling molecules responsible for the P0862. The neuron-specific RNA binding proteins pathomechanisms involved in cardiac structural changes upon renal CELF3 is a component of the DMPK mRNA-associated failure. ribonucleoprotein complex: implications for myotonic dystrophy P0860. Towards the identification of molecular pathways M. D’Apolito1, M. Bozzali2, A. Caruso3, S. Quattrone4, A. Grifa1, T. underlying ADAM 12’s role in myogenesis Dottorini2, M. Gennarelli5, A. Pizzuti2, B. Dallapiccola2, A. Quattrone1; B. Moghadaszadeh1, P. Kronqvist1, N. Kawaguchi1, R. Albrechtsen1, 1IRCCS CSS, S. Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Istituto CSS Mendel, X. Xu1, H. D. Schrøder2, F. C. Nielsen3, C. Fröhlich1, K. Iba1, E. Roma, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Fisiologia Umana e Farmacologia, Engvall4, U. M. Wewer1; Univ. “La Sapienza”, Roma, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Anatomia, 1Institute of Molecular Pathology, University of Copenhagen, Istologia e Medicina Legale, Univ. di Firenze, Firenze, Italy, 5IRCCS Copenhagen, Denmark, 2The Department of Pathology, Odense Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. University, Odense, Denmark, 3The Department of Clinical Cognitive impairment is a common finding in congenital myotonic Biochemistry, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, dystrophy type 1 (DM1), being also associated with late onset Denmark, 4The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, CA. DM1. The relative independency from the muscular deficits of The ADAMs (A Disintegrin And Metlloprotease) are a recently this DM1 psychiatric feature could be explained on the basis of a described family of cell membrane anchored glycoproteins. During molecular perturbation selective of the CNS, which is at the moment mouse development ADAM 12 is expressed in several tissues completely unknown. A CTG microsatellite expansion in the 3’ UTR including muscle. Postnatally, the expression of ADAM 12 in the of the DMPK mRNA is the cause of DM1, and a substantial body muscle ceases and only reappears transiently during muscle of evidence is indicating that the majority of the clinical features of regeneration. DM1 are consequent to a still undefined perturbation in the cellular 256 Posters - Muscle Diseases 257 ribonucleoprotein infrastructure, due to an aberrant interaction of RNA P0865. Deletion patterns of dystrophin gene and carrier binding proteins with the expanded DMPK mRNA. Here we further analysis in Hungarian families with Duchenne/Becker characterize a family of six human RNA binding proteins, ortholog of muscular dystrophies the Drosophila Bruno translational repressor, which are component H. Piko1, I. Nagy2, A. Herczegfalvi3, A. Herczegfalvi3, E. Endreffy4, V. of the DMPK mRNA-associated ribonucleoproteins. Two of these Karcagi2; proteins, CELF3 and CELF5, display a strictly neuron-specific pattern 1National Center for Public Health, Budapest, Hungary, 2National of expression. CELF3 appears to be extremely well conserved in Center for Public Health, National Institut of Enviromental Health, evolution and selectively expressed in certain regions of the mouse Budapest, Hungary, 3Bethesda Children’s Hospital, Budapest, adult brain, while its developmental expression pattern in the mouse Hungary, 4University of Szeged, Faculty of Medicine, Pediatric clinic, is indicative of a role in brain formation. Therefore, a perturbation Szeged, Hungary. of localization or activity of CELF3 could be involved in the mental Duchenne muscular dystrophy is an X-linked progressive muscular deficiencies suffered by DM1 subjects. disorder with an incidence of 1 per 3500 live-born males. Patients become wheelchair-bound at the age of 18-25 years. Becker P0863. Functional Consequence of Two Novel Dominant muscular dystrophy is a less severe allelic form of the disease with Mutations in the Muscle Chloride Channel Gene CLCN1 an incidence of 1 per 30 000 live-born males. Causing Thomsen’s Syndrome Deletion pattern analysis of the dystrophin gene was performed in 49 M. Dunø1, E. Colling-Jørgensen2, M. Schwartz1, J. Vissing2; Hungarian patients with Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy. The 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, 4062, University Hospital Copenhagen, detection of deletions was performed by multiplex PCR technique that Denmark, 2Dept. of Neurology, 2082, University Hospital enables the simultaneous screening of 18 exons of the dystrophin Copenhagen, Denmark. gene. In 29 cases (59% of total patients), deletions were detected Autosomal dominant myotonia congenita - Thomsen’s disease - and in the most commonly affected exons. With respect to the proximal- autosomal recessive myotonia congenita - Becker’s disease - are distal distribution of the deletions, 82% of the patients had deletions rare mostly nondystrophic disorders both due to mutations in the at the 3’ end of the gene, 18% of the deletions affected only the 5’ CLCN1 gene encoding the muscle chloride channel 1. In an attempt end. Distribution pattern in the dystrophin gene deletions showed to categorize Danish patients with myotonia congenita genetically, similarity to that observed in various Western European populations. we sequenced all 23 exons of the CLCN1 gene in ten selected If deletions were detected in the index patient, identification of female patients and identified four novel mutations. Two missense mutations carriers in the affected family was carried out by radioactive Southern (E193K, M128V) were found in dominant myotonia whereas one blot hybridization using special cDNA probes, a new method in missense (T328I) and one nonsense (nt2517ΔCT) mutation were Hungary introduced by our laboratory. In the 15 families examined so found in recessive myotonia. Apart from the novel mutations we also far, 46% of female relatives proved to be carriers of the DMD/BMD found the previously described mutations; P480L, G285E, F307S gene deletions. The cDNA analysis also enables determination of and ntΔ1437-1450. Surprisingly, the recurrent R894X mutation the exact localization and the full size of the deletion in patients. was found in four pedigrees segregation both in a dominant and a Therefore, the analysis was also performed in 38 patients and recessive fashion, and the F307S mutation, which has priviously additional exon deletions of the dystrophin gene were detected. thought to be strictly dominant, was found together with the nt2517ΔCT nonsense mutation, suggesting recessive behavior in P0866. Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy-new this family. Thus, the relation between genotype and phenotype is not approach in carrier testing straightforward in myotonia congenita. In order to shed light on the j. Knezevic1, K. Gall-Troselj2, J. Pavelic1; genotype - phenotype relation we examined the electrophysiological 1”Rudjer Boskovic” Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2”Rudjer Boskovic” features of the patients caring the two novel dominant mutations and Institute,, Zagreb, Croatia. unexpectedly, found no decrease of the decrement. The functionality Duchenne muscular dystrophy and Becker muscular dystrophy are of the two mutations was further characterized by whole-cell patch- X-linked recessive neuromuscular diseases caused by mutations clamp. in the gene coding for the 427-kD cytoskeletal protein dystrophin. Deletions, or more rarely duplications, of single or multiple exons P0864. Cardiac Disorders in BMD Patients with Distal within the dystrophin gene are responsible for about 65% of DMD Gene Deletions or milder, BMD cases. Within the dystrophin gene, these deletions I. Novakovic1, S. Apostolski2, S. Todorovic3, L. Lukovic1, V. tend to cluster in hot spot. Frameshift deletions result in DMD (with Bunjevacki1, D. Bojic4, L. Mestroni5, J. Milasin6; no functional dystrophin protein produced), while deletions that 1Institute of Biology and Hum. Genetics, School of Medicine, maintain the reading frame produce the BMD phenotype (partially Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 2Institute of Neurology, KCS, Belgrade, functional dystrophin present). Approximately two-thirds mothers Yugoslavia, 3Clinic for Pediatric Neurology and Psychiatry, Belgrade, of affected males with known deletions are asymptomatic carrier of Yugoslavia, 4Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases “Dedinje”, Belgrade, DMD and about 30% percent of affected males represent de novo Yugoslavia, 5ICGEB, Trieste, Italy, 6Institute of Biology and Hum. mutations. Current methods used in carrier testing are directed to Gentics, School of Stomatology, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. multiplex PCR and quantitative analysis of products. However these In-frame deletions of distal part of the dystrophin gene are generally methods are difficult to perform and interpretation can be subjective. associated with classic Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD). Skeletal In our study we try to develop an effective and exact assay of carrier myopathy has benign course with later presentation and slower testing through cDNA. Illegitimate transcription has made possible progression, but cardiac disorders could show clinical diversity. In the analysis of dystrophin mRNA from peripheral blood lymphocytes. this study we analyzed correlation between gene defect and clinical Thanks to the fact that deletions are clustered in hot spots we have phenotype in a group of BMD patients with dystrophin gene deletions designed two sets of primers which span the regions of interest. In encompassing exons 45-60. Dystrophin gene deletions were a case of female carrier two bands should be recognised; one from detected by standard multiplex PCR method based on simultaneous normal allel and second related to DMD allel. Here we would like to amplification of deletion prone exons. Clinical evaluation included show preliminary data, which in our opinion will be of great benefit neurological and detail cardiological examination. The mean time of in diagnostic laboratory procedure. We believe that in this way any onset of disease in our patients was 14.4 y. and skeletal myopathy subjective interpretation will be overcome. had relatively slow progression rate, so none of them was in severe stage or wheelchair bound. All of the patients were without symptoms P0867. Loss of the chloride channel in DM1 skeletal of heart failure, but we detected diffrent forms of cardiological muscle due to misregulated alternative splicing: a likely disorders, ranged from benign ECG changes to moderate heart cause of myotonia function impairment (EF=40%). Cardiac disorders were in correlation N. Charlet-B., R. S. Savkur, G. Singh, A. V. Philips, E. A. Grice, T. A. with patient age and, to a lesser extent, with muscle dystrophy Cooper; severity. Herat dysfunction was associated with different types of Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX. gene deletions. For example, moderate systolic function impairment Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is the most common form of adult had one patient with single exon 45 deletion (age 19 y.) and another onset muscular dystrophy (1 in 8500 individuals). It is a dominantly patient with deletion of exons 45-47 (age 31 y.). inherited disorder caused by a CTG trinucleotide expansion in the 3’ Posters - Muscle Diseases 258 259 untranslated region of the DMPK gene. Nuclear accumulation CUG)n The activation of cryptic exons by a point mutation is not a novel RNA from the expanded allele is proposed to be pathogenic in DM1 mechanism, but to our knowledge it has not been reported so far in by disrupting the function of the splicing regulator, CUG-binding the recently deciphered gigantic DMD gene introns. This mechanism protein (CUG-BP). A predominant feature of DM1 is myotonia, seems to be unfrequent since we found only 2 such cases in our manifested as delayed skeletal muscle relaxation after voluntary collection of 720 DMD/BMD patients with a documented mutation. contraction. In humans or animal models myotonia can be due to loss We emphasize that this type of mutation, now explorable, cannot be of the muscle-specific chloride channel (ClC-1). Here we demonstrate directly detected at the genomic level without prior transcript analysis. by western blot and RNase protection analysis loss of ClC-1 mRNA and protein in DM1 skeletal muscle. The likely cause is nonsense P0870. Sequencing Of The 79 Exons Of The Dystrophin mediated decay, as premature stop codons are incorporated in the Gene In Duchenne And Becker Muscular Dystrophies: ClC-1 mRNA by aberrant alternative splicing of intron 2 and exons Identification Of 45 Point Mutations. 6b and 7a. We were able to reproduce the DM1 aberrant splicing L. Michel-Calemard1, E. Ollagnon2, M. P. Cordier3, F. Prieur4, N. pattern in normal cells by coexpressing CUG-BP with a ClC-1 intron 2 Streichenberger5, L. Féasson6, H. Plauchu7, P. Guibaud8, Y. Morel1; minigene. We conclude that aberrant regulation of alternative splicing 1Laboratoire de Biochimie Endocrinienne et Moléculaire, Hôpital leads to a predominant pathological feature of DM1. We predict that Debrousse, Lyon, France, 2Service de Génétique, Hôpital de la Croix- other targets of CUG-BP are misregulated in DM1 patients causing Rousse, Lyon, France, 3Service de Génétique, Hôpital E. Herriot, other symptoms of the disease Lyon, France, 4Service de Génétique, Hôpital Nord, St-Etienne, France, 5Laboratoire d’Anatomie-Pathologique, Hôpital Neurologique, P0868. A 12-year experience in molecular diagnosis Lyon, France, 6Service d’Explorations Fonctionnelles Musculaires, of Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies: a Hôpital St Jean Bonnefonds, St-Etienne, France, 7Service de comprehensive strategy for mutation detection allows Génétique, Hotel-Dieu, Lyon, France, 8Service de Pédiatrie et to detect the molecular defect in 90% of the DMD/BMD Génétique, Hôpital Debrousse, Lyon, France. patients. In 1996, we took over molecular diagnosis of dystrophinopathies S. Tuffery-Giraud1, S. Chambert1, C. Saquet1, C. Coubes2, F. Rivier3, from the Rhône-Alpes region of France, previously performed in two B. Echenne3, M. Claustres1; distinct laboratories. 1816 DNA from 326 families are progressively 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Montpellier, France, reanalyzed. In 161 studied families, 81 deletions were identified by 2Consultation de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Montpellier, France, multiplex-PCR 18 exons (50%). 3Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU, Montpellier, France. In the absence of deletion, our strategy to explore the gene depends Since 1989, 258 families have been referred to our laboratory on the feasibility of a muscle biopsy. When muscular tissue is for molecular diagnosis of Duchenne (DMD) or Becker (BMD) available, sequencing of cDNA is used to seek for mutations. 5 point muscular dystrophies. We have developed a hierarchical mutation mutations, 1 deletion and 1 duplication were identified this way. screening strategy for mutation identification in the dystrophin If the biopsy is impossible, strategic choice becomes delicate. As the gene (Xp21) including the following steps (1) multiplex PCR to gene is large, sequencing of all exons doesn’t seem the appropriate detect large intragenic deletions (2) RT-PCR coupled to the protein one at first. It is though the approach we chose for different reasons: truncation test (PTT) to scan for rare deletions, duplications, and 1) we have in our laboratory an old version of sequencer which is point mutations, and (3) sequencing, PCR/restriction, DHPLC, or not very suitable for screening techniques, 2) the patients being gene dosage analysis (LightCycler, Roche Diagnostics) to confirm hemizygotes, one sequence is sufficient to explore an exon. A little point mutations and test for gene dosage alterations at the genomic more than 2 gels are necessary to sequence a patient’s all exons, level. This strategy allows to detect the molecular defect in 90% 3) samples were usually collected long ago and the patients are not of the investigated patients. As a result, the families are currently approachable for biopsy. benefiting from accurate carrier-status assessment. Up to now, a Some exons are co-amplified, reducing the number of PCRs to total of 71 mutations have been found by the RT-PCR/PTT procedure perform (69 vs 79). consisting in 6 exon deletions, 6 duplications, and 59 point mutations 77 patients were sequenced: 69 on genomic DNA, 8 on cDNA, (26 nonsense, 17 splice mutations and 16 frameshift). The effects allowing 73% detection: 5 deletions outside the hot-spots, 1 of nucleotide alterations in splice sites were precisely determined by duplication and 50 point mutations (20 non-sense, 16 splicing, 14 examination of muscle transcripts, and accurate genotype/phenotype frameshift mutations). Among the 21 patients without mutation, only correlation was delivered to the clinicians. Further investigations are 7 were completely sequenced. They probably carry undetected required to identify the cause of DMD or BMD in the remaining 10% duplications or intronic mutations. patients in whom the mutation is not identified yet. An alternative mutation scanning method, the Base Excision Sequence Scanning P0871. Familial Hypertophic Cardiomyopathy: many (BESS), is currently being tested in those patients. genes, how many diseases? Support : Association Francaise contre les myopathies (AFM). S. Nasti1, C. Autore2, S. C. Barillà2, G. D’Amati3, D. Pistilli3, F. Sironi4, G. Ghigliotti1, C. Brunelli1, R. Casadonte5, P. Spirito6, G. Cuda5, D. A. P0869. Insertion of mid-intron cryptic exons in dystrophin Coviello4; mRNA: a novel mechanism of dystrophinopathy 1Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Università di Genova, Genova, F. Leturcq, C. Beroud, A. Carrie, C. Beldjord, N. Deburgrave, S. Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Cardiovascolari e Respiratorie, Llense, N. Carelle, J. C. Kaplan, D. Recan; Università la Sapienza Roma, Roma, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Medicina Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France. Sperimentale e Patologia, Università la Sapienza Roma, Roma, We describe two cases of Becker Muscular Dystrophy with an Italy, 4Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Medicina aberrant dystrophin transcript containing an unknown sequence di Laboratorio, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milano, Italy, precisely intercalated between two intact exons (89 nt between exons 5Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale Clinica, Università Magna 60 and 61 in patient #1; 90 nt between exons 9 and 10 in patient #2). Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 6Divisione di Cardiologia, Ospedali Galliera, Both insertions introduce a premature stop codon into the transcript. Genova, Italy. An in silico survey of the now available entire DMD gene sequence Many genetic conditions are considered a single disease. However, showed that these inserts are present in the mid-part of intron 60 (95 molecular analysis often revealed a wide genetic heterogeneity. kb) and intron 9 (52 kb) respectively, both being flanked by cryptic Recently, new classifications based on the molecular defect, rather splice sites. By sequencing each putative cryptic exon in the two than clinical presentation, have been proposed. patients we found a single substitution ( G→T in patient #1; C→ Familial Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (FHC) is transmitted as T in patient #2), converting a weak donor splice site into a perfect autosomal dominant trait with a prevalence of about 1/500. The one, corroborating the assumption that the inserted sequences were disease is characterised by a hypertrophied and non-dilated left cryptic exons activated by a point mutation. ventricle. The clinical course of the disease is heterogeneous: some Both patients exhibited a BMD phenotype, consistent with the patients remain asymptomatic, others die suddenly. Mutations coexistence of the aberrant transcript with a normally spliced causing disease in ten cardiac contractile proteins have been transcript and a weak normal sized dystrophin. Patient #1 was identified in FHC patients. Recently mutations on a non sarcomeric severely mentally retarded. protein gene have also been identified as responsible of FHC. 258 Posters - Muscle Diseases 259 Genotype-phenotype correlation is crucial to the understanding of of both clinically and morphologically expressed CCD, 12 different the natural history of FHC and possibly to separate heterogeneous mutations of the C terminal domain of RYR1 have been identified in clinical presentations into different diseases. Genetic definition 16 unrelated families. Morphological analysis of the patients’ muscles of FHC may also have to be reconsidered including the clinical showed different aspects of cores, all of them being associated interpretation of possible recessive mutations, double heterozygous with mutations in the C terminal region of RYR1. Furthermore, we mutations, and mutations on two genes in the same subject. characterized the presence of neomutations in the RyR1 gene in four We believe that it is crucial to perform the molecular characterisation families. This indicates that neomutations into the RyR1 gene are of patients on several loci. Due to the large number of genes not a rare event and must be taken in account for genetic studies of responsible for this disease, we have started a pilot study to organise families that present with congenital myopathies type “Central Core an Italian laboratory diagnostic network, and we look forward to join Disease”. Three mutations led to the deletion in frame of amino acids. other European laboratories working in the same field. This is the first report of amino-acid deletions in RYR1 associated Our activity has focused on search of mutations in MYH7, MYBPC3, with CCD. According to a 4- transmembrane domains model, the TPM1 and TNNT2 genes using the DHPLC technology and mutations concentrated mostly in the myoplasmic and luminal loops automated sequencing. A total of 26 different mutations have been linking respectively transmembrane domains T1 and T2 or T3 and T4 identified. Specific cases will be reported in our presentation. of RYR1. P0872. Various forms of worldwide quadriceps sparing P0874. Results of mutation analysis in candidate genes myopathy are caused by mutations in the UDP-N- for Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/ N-acetylmannosamine M. S. Wehnert1, C. Wasner2, G. Bonne3, A. van der Kooi4, D. Recan5, kinase gene D. Toniolo6; I. Eisenberg1, G. Grabov-Nardini2, H. Hochner2, T. Potikha2, V. 1Institute of Human Genetics, D-17487 Greifswlad, Germany, Askanas3, T. Bertorini4, W. Bradley5, G. Karpati6, L. Merlini7, M. 2Institute of Human Genetics, Greifswald, Germany, 3INSERM Sadeh8, Z. Argov2, S. Mitrani-Rosenbaum2; UR523, Paris, France, 4Department of Neurology, Amsterdam, 1The Hebrew University- Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Netherlands, 5Hopital Cochin, Paris, France, 6IGBE, Pavia, Italy. Israel, 2The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, So far two disease genes, STA and LMNA, have been associated to Israel, 3University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 4The Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD). Screening of patients University of Tennessee, Memphis, TN, 5University of Miami School with EDMD revealed, that mutations in these two genes together of Medicine, Miami, FL, 6Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, account for only 45 % of the cases. Obviously, further genes are likely PQ, Canada, 7Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy, 8Wolfson to be involved in EDMD. Unfortunately, most patients are sporadic Hospital, Holon, Israel. cases and families for a positional cloning approach are rare. Thus, Hereditary Inclusion Body Myopathy (HIBM) (MIM600737) is a unique we started a candidate gene approach. Emerin encoded by STA and group of neuromuscular disorders characterized by adult onset, lamin A/C encoded by LMNA are components of the inner nuclear slowly progressive distal and proximal weakness and a typical muscle membrane and the nuclear lamina. Thus it seems very likely, that pathology including rimmed vacuoles and filamentous inclusions. The other genes encoding functionally related proteins can cause this autosomal recessive prototype form described in Jews of Persian disease. Additionally, we considered such genes as candidates, descent and later of other Middle Eastern origins (Iraq, Afghanistan, which are specifically expressed in heart and skeletal muscle, that Kurdistan, Uzbekistan, Egypt) affects mainly leg muscles but with an represent the mainly affected tissues in EDMD. Thus, 118 EDMD unusual distribution that spares the quadriceps. We have identified patients, that were excluded to have mutations in STA and LMNA, the gene encoding for UDP-N-acetylglucosamine2-epimerase/N- were included in the candidate gene mutational analysis. Using acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE), at chromosome 9p12, as the genomic DNA of the patients, the exons including the intron/exon disease causing gene in this community, where a single homozygous boundaries and the promoter regions of candidate genes were missense mutation (Met712Thr) has been found. Further study of the amplified by PCR and screened by heteroduplex analysis combined involvement of GNE in HIBM affected families from various ethnic with direct sequencing. Currently, 12 genes (BAF, DDX16, FLNC, origins identified ten novel mutations: an homozygous missense LAP1, LAP2, LBR, LMNB1, LMNB2, MAN1, NRM, PSME3, SMPX) mutation in a consanguineous family from Mexico and distinct are under investigation. So far no disease causing mutation has been compound heterozygotes in HIBM-quadriceps sparing non Jewish found. However, 17 intragenic SNPs have been identified including families from Germany, The Bahamas, Italy, Georgia (USA), and in one in the translated region of FLNC leading to an amino acid a large family from East India. Furthermore, interestingly, the GNE exchange. Further upcoming genes related to the nuclear membrane “Persian mutation” was also found in HIBM atypical patients with and lamina have to be involved to complete the study. unusual muscle weakness distribution (quadriceps involvement, unusual proximal leg involvement, mild facial weakness) and with P0875. First description of mild phenotypes of Ullrich congenital unusual occurrence of inflammation, known to appear only in the muscular dystrophy caused by mutations in COL6A3. sporadic form of inclusion body myositis (IBM). P. Guicheney1, E. Demir1, V. Allamand1, P. Sabatelli2, B. Echenne3, The identification of GNE as the responsible gene for HIBM allows H. Topaloglu4, L. Merlini5; not only the re-evaluation of the phenotypic and genotypic scope of 1INSERM U523, Paris, France, 2CNR, Bologna, Italy, 3Hôpital Saint multiple worldwide recessive HIBM forms, but also its involvement Eloi, Montpellier, France, 4Hacettepe Children’s Hospital, Ankara, in the sporadic form of the disease which is the most common Turkey, 5IOR, Bologna, Italy. myopathy in individuals over age fifty. Ullrich Congenital Muscular Dystrophy (UCMD) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by generalized muscular weakness, contractures of multiple joints and distal hyperextensibility. P0873. Familial and sporadic forms of central core Homozygous mutations of COL6A2 on chromosome 21q22 have disease are associated with mutations in the C-terminal recently been shown to cause UCMD. We performed a genome-wide domain of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor screening with microsatellite markers in a consanguineous family with J. Lunardi1, N. Romero2, N. Monnier3, P. Landrieu4, Y. Nivoche5, M. three UCMD affected sibs. Linkage of the disease to chromosome Fardeau2; 2q37 was found in this family and others. Analysis of COL6A3, which 1Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France, 2U523-Institut de encodes the alpha3 chain of collagen VI, led to the identification of a Myologie, Paris, France, 3CHU, Grenoble, France, 4CHU-Bicêtre, Le homozygous mutation in three families. Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 5Hôpital R. Debré, Paris, France. A nonsense mutation, R2342X, caused absence of collagen VI in Central core disease (CCD) is an autosomal dominant congenital muscle and fibroblasts and a severe phenotype, as described in myopathy. Diagnosis is based on the presence of cores in skeletal UCMD patients. A splice site mutation (6930+5A>G), leading to the muscles. CCD has been linked to the gene encoding the ryanodine skipping of an exon, caused a partial reduction of collagen VI in receptor (RYR1) and is considered as an allelic disease of Malignant muscle biopsy and an intermediate phenotype. A nonsense mutation Hyperthermia Susceptibility. However, the report of a recessive R465X was associated with only a limited reduction of collagen type form of transmission together with a variable clinical presentation VI around patient muscle fibers. This was due to nonsense mediated has raised the question of the genetic heterogeneity of the disease. exon skipping and could explain the mild phenotype of the patient Analyzing a panel of 34 families exclusively recruited on the basis who was ambulant at the age of 18 years and showed an unusual Posters - Muscle Diseases 260 261 combination of hyperlaxity and finger contractures. 1INSERM 523, Institut de Myologie, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, Mutations in COL6A3 are described in UCMD for the first time, and France, 2IBMC du CNRS, UPR 9002, Strasbourg, France, illustrate the wide spectrum of phenotypes which can be caused by 3Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, Paris, France, 4IOR, Bologna, Italy, collagen VI deficiency. 5Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6Hacettepe Children’s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 7University of Copenhagen, P0876. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy in Copenhagen, Denmark. Romania Rigid Spine Muscular Dystrophy (RSMD) is a rare autosomal D. Coprean1, M. Popescu2, M. Militaru1, B. Bosca1; recessive neuromuscular disorder characterized by early rigidity of 1”Iuliu Hatieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, the spine, axial and proximal muscle weakness associated with a Romania, 2”Horea Radu” Center of Neuromuscular Pathology, dystrophic pattern of patient muscle biopsies, limb-joint contractures, Valcele, Romania. and restrictive respiratory insufficiency requiring nocturnal ventilation. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHMD) is characterized We recently reported the refinement of the RSMD1 locus on 1p35- by a considerable variability in terms of the severity of symptoms, 36 to a 1cM region by linkage disequilibrium and the identification onset age and changes at muscular level. FSHMD can be clinically of mutations in SEPN1, the gene encoding a recently described distinguished from the other progressive muscular dystrophies by: selenoprotein of unknown function, selenoprotein N. Selenoproteins changes in the face appearance (tapir lip) and scapulohumeral girdle, have in common to contain selenium as selenocysteine. One of the as well as slow evolution. FSHMD is a myopathy with autosomal unique features in the incorporation of selenocysteine is the use of dominant inheritance and incomplete gene penetrance. The locus a UGA codon, which normally serves as a termination signal and of FSHMD gene maps to 4q35-3 ter. The studies were performed needs a mRNA stemloop structure located in the 3’ unstranslated on 180 FSHMD cases. The analysis of the pedigrees of the patients region and specific translation factors to be recognized as the codon investigated confirms the autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. for selenocysteine insertion. Fourteen different mutations including The analysis of FSHMD onset age in patients from the same family frameshift, missense, nonsense mutations in the coding sequence (ancestry and descent) shows the presence of the anticipation and a splice-site mutation, have been identified in SEPN1. Previous phenomenon (earlier age at onset in successive generations). Northern blot experiments showed an ubiquitous expression of Incomplete FSHMD gene penetrance is demonstrated by the SEPN1. Polyclonal antibodies were developed in order to perform intrafamilial variability of the severity and evolution of the disease: additional studies at the protein level. Biochemical studies with these from almost asymptomatic patients to wheelchair dependent patients. antibodies allowed the detection of a 70 kDa band corresponding Our study found a slight prevalence of the disease in the male sex to the full-length protein present in control fibroblasts or myoblasts. (52.68%) compared to the female sex (47.32%). Epidemiological However, this band could not be detected in total proteins extracted studies have found a higher FSHMD incidence in Brasov, Constanta, from patients cells bearing a homozygous frameshift mutation. The Ilfov, Prahova, Salaj and Sibiu districts, which can be explained cellular localization of the selenoprotein N is currently underway and by the effect of the founder couple and genetic drift. The study of might help to better understand the role of this protein in skeletal the incidence and clinical genetic aspects of this form of myopathy muscle. which represents 9% of all PMD types and generates serious socio- economic problems (being a disabling disease) is motivated by the P0879. Conversion analysis between SMN 1 and SMN 2 necessity of offering efficient genetic counseling to FSHMD patients genes in patients with a spinal muscular atrophy from and their families. North-West region of Russia. A. Glotov, S. Mogilina, A. Kiselev, T. Ivaschenko; P0877. Molecular and Clinical Studies of Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy (FSHMD) in Federation. Greece Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the second most common fatal H. Fryssira, K. Kekou, C. Sofocleous, S. Youroukos, A. Manta, A. autosomal recessive disease with the frequency 1: 10 000 newborn. Mavrou, C. Metaxotou; The results of deletion and conversion analysis in 53 SMA families Medical Genetics, University of Athens Medical School, “Aghia from North-West region of Russia are reported. Homozygous Sophia” Childrens Hospital, Athens, Greece. deletions of SMN 1 gene were identified in 96% of our patients. FSHMD is a myopathy transmitted by autosomal dominant 21% of our SMA patients had the absence of exon 7 SMN1 gene inheritance.The genetic locus has been mapped to the 4q35 but retention of exon 8. This complex rearrangements might result subtelomeric region. The telomeric probe p13E-11 has been shown either from extensive deletion (up to exon 8) or from gene-conversion to detect EcoRI polymorphic fragments shorter than 35kb and an event giving rise to the origin of “chimeric” gene. The latter has been EcoRI-BlnI (or AvrII) digestion is used to avoid the interference of registered in 13% of SMA patients. All our conversion cases could be small EcoRI polymorphic fragments of 10qter attributed to the formation of “chimeric” genes consisting of 5’ area of origin. We studied 45 Greek families, 59 affected and 21 unaffected SMN 2 gene (exon 7) and 3’ area of SMN 1 gene (exon 8). Thus two individuals at risk of inheriting or transmitting the FSHMD shorter types of conversion chromosomes were identified: with the deletion of frgments. Restriction analysis of genomic DNA using EcoRI and exon 7 of SMN 2 gene as result of “chimeric” gene formation (1) and EcoRI/AvrII enzymes, followed by pulse-field or conventional gel without such a deletion (2). electrophoresis and non radioactive hybridization with p13E-11 probe, were performed. The results revealed an EcoRI/AvrII fragment, P0880. SMN mutations screening in non deleted SMA ranging between 7.5 and 34kb, in 32 families (74%), comprising 19 patients familial and 13 isolated cases. In all, except one, FSHMD familial V. Cusin1, O. Clermont2, D. Chantereau1, B. Gérard3, E. Bingen2, J. cases the same size fragment segregated in the family. In two Elion1; isolated cases, the presence of three shorter fragments, complicated 1Service de Biochimie Génétique, Hopital R. Debré, Paris, France, the interpretation of Southern blot analysis. An overall correlation 2Laboratoire de Génétique bactérienne (EA 3105), Hôpital R. Debré, has been found, between fragment size, age of onset and disease Paris, France, 3Service de Biochimie hormonal, metabolique et severity, indicating that patients with EcoRI/AvrII fragment smaller génétique, Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France. than 20kb are more severely affected than patients with larger Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is linked to 5q13 locus in 95% fragments. The application of double digestion, identifies FSHMD patients. Among them, 98% show homozygous deletion of SMN1 alleles even in pre-symptomatic cases, facilitates clinical prognosis gene, while about 2% of them show heterozygous deletion of SMN1 and allows genetic counselling of the disease. associating a mutation on the only SMN1 copy they present, and thus required a specific approach to reach diagnosis. P0878. Mutations in the Selenoprotein N gene (SEPN1) Here we show the results of SMN1 analysis in this specific group cause congenital muscular dystrophy with early rigidity of SMA patients among those referred for molecular diagnosis to our laboratory. Genotype was established in all patients with clinical of the spine and restrictive respiratory syndrome course and electromyography consistent with spinal muscular atrophy N. Petit1, B. Moghadaszadeh1, C. Hu1, A. Lescure2, S. Quijano3, B. diagnosis and not showing homozygous SMN1 deletion. Detection Estournet3, L. Merlini4, F. Muntoni5, H. Topaloglu6, A. Krol2, U. Wewer7, of patients carrying a heterozygous SMN1 deletion was performed P. Guicheney1;260 Posters - Neurogenetics 261 according to the fluorescent quantitative assay described by Gerard resulting in the majority of SMN2 transcripts lacking exon 7. All et al. (2000). Three patients carrying this genotype were identified patients retain at least one, more often two to four, copies of SMN2. and screened for SMN1 mutation with a standardized method Milder phenotypes are generally associated with higher gene copy associating single strand conformational polymorphism analysis number and higher levels of protein, although patients with different and long range PCR to demonstrate that the detected mutations are phenotype can carry the same number of SMN2 copies. These data indeed localized on SMN1 not SMN2, his homologous gene. Using suggest that SMN2 genes are functionally different and one possible this strategy, we successfully identified the causative mutations in all mechanism responsible of such differences could be epigenetic 3 studied patients. Two novel mutations were described in exon 3 and modifications, like DNA methylation and/or histone acetylation. Thus, the third one was the previously described Y272C in exon 6. upregulation of SMN2 by chromatin remodelling agents can be a potential target for a therapeutic approach to SMA. P0881. Molecular genetic study of spinal muscular We have currently undertaken a study to evaluate the effect of atrophy in Russia. hyperacetylating agents, such as sodium butyrate and derivatives, I. Shagina, E. Dadali, A. Polyakov; on SMN2 expression in primary fibroblast cultures from patients Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. with different disease severity. Preliminary results show that the Spinal muscular atrophy is a common often lethal neurodegenerative treatment significantly increases the production of full length SMN2 disorder with three major clinical phenotypes (SMA type I, II, III). transcripts and the number of gems (the nuclear structures where The disease is caused by deletion, conversion or point mutations the SMN protein concentrates). These encouraging results suggest in the telomeric survival motor neuron gene (SMNt). In our study, that hyperacetylating agents can be beneficial in SMA treatment we present the molecular-genetic analysis of 372 patients from 369 protocols. Russian SMA families. Homozygous deletions of either one exon 7 or both exons 7 and 8 of SMNt have been demonstrated in 96,2% of P0884. Two approaches to therapy for Muscular our patients (99%, 96% and 90% for SMA I, II and III respectively). Dystrophies in Russia. The absence of SMNt exon 7 but retention of exon 8 were revealed S. S. Shishkin1, N. I. Shakhovskaya2, L. F. Skosobzeva2, S. B. in 59 (16 %) SMA patients. “Chimeric” (SMNc-SMNt) gene was found Artemieva2, I. N. Krakhmaleva1, A. A. Khodunova1, N. L. Gerasimova3; in 9% of SMA I, in 16% of SMA II and in 15% of SMA III patients. 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian SMNt/SMNc ratio was analyzed by densitometry analysis (Gel Doc Federation, 2Children’s Psycho-Neurological Hospital of Moscow 2000/ Bio-RAD) of 7 and 8 exons PCR products digested by Eco RV Region, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Interregional Association of and Bse NI respectively. Twenty families were referred for prenatal assistance to people suffering neuromuscular diseases, Moscow, diagnostics without accessible material from affected child. Parents Russian Federation. in sixteen families were heterozygous carriers of SMNt deletion. Two approaches in therapy for muscular dystrophies were developed Prenatal diagnostics has been performed in 118 SMA families by as a part of program for the long-term support for families with means of deletion analysis of SMNt gene and polymorphic DNA- hereditary neuromuscular disorders (HNMD) in which included markers (D5S435, D5S557 and D5S629). We identified 31 affected, clinical trials of medicaments treatment (prednisolone, cyclosporine) 58 carrier and 29 normal individuals among observed fetuses. and myoblast transplantation for DMD gene correction; the creation of computer database of Russian families with HNMD; the use of P0882. Catalytic nucleic acids for specific inhibition of common diagnostic criteria with DNA-analysis et cetera. SMN gene expression 94 DMD/BMD and 10 LGMD patients-volunteers participated in B. H. Trülzsch, K. Davies, M. J. A. Wood; double-blind controlled prednisolone trial during 1 year with alternate- Dept of Human Anatomy and Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. day schedule (0.5 mg/kg/day in treatment day). In 80% cases were Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive obtained some beneficial effects and in all cases were absent disease caused by loss of functional survival motor neuron gene the manifested side-effects. 17 DMD/BMD patients obtained this (SMN) product. SMA ultimately leads to progressive loss of motor treatment 3-6 years and maintained relatively good conditions with neuron function and muscular atrophy. Although the SMN gene is low progression of muscular weakness. ubiquitously expressed, the cause for selective motor neuron loss For the other approach it was developed special technique of is unknown. Study of the disease has been hampered by the fact preparation of human myoblast cultures. 5 DMD patients-volunteers that the condition is embryonal lethal for mice, and other currently participated in clinical trial of myoblast transplantation by protocol available transgenic mice models are not viable for long periods of “single muscle treatment”. Every recipient received cyclosporine two time. Goal of this study is to develop a cell culture system in which weeks before transplantation and one month after transplantation. 50- the SMN gene expression can be varied using catalytic nucleic acids. 90 millions of myoblast cells was transplanted into m. tibialis anterior Catalytic nucleic acids are short sequences of RNA (ribozymes) or of one leg. 6 months after transplantation in biopsy specimens were DNA (DNAzymes) capable of sequence specific cleavage of a target revealed the presence of donor’s DNA (in three cases) and the mRNA, thus downregulating gene expression. We designed three expression of dystrophin (in two cases). Dystrophin and donor’s DNA ribozymes and three DNAzymes targeted against the murine Smn were absent in the sham-injected muscles. RNA sequence. All ribozymes and DNAzymes effectively cleaved the full length Smn RNA in a sequence specific manner, while P 19. Neurogenetics inactive versions of the molecules had no effect. Cleavage of target RNA was observed at magnesium concentrations as low as 2 mM, P0885. A first locus for common simple Febrile seizures which corresponds to the intracellular Magnesium concentration of R. Nabbout1,2, J. Prud’Homme2, A. Hermann3, A. Brice3,4, O. Dulac5, mammalian cells. Cleavage increased in a time and concentration E. Leguern3,4; dependent manner. These results indicate that catalytic nucleic acids 1INSERM, Paris, France, 2Généthon, Evry, France, 3U289, INSERM, effectively cleave Smn target RNA in a cellular environment and thus Paris, France, 4Departement de Génétique, Cytogénétique et have great potential for interference with Smn gene expression in Embryologie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Hôpital Saint cells and in vivo. Vincent de Paul, Paris, France. We report a large multigenerational French family with a P0883. Hyperacetylating agents activate SMN2 gene homogeneous phenotype consisting of isolated simple Febrile Seizures (FS). The FS trait did not show any linkage with the reported expression in fibroblast cultures from spinal muscular loci for FS and Generalised Epilepsy with Febrile Seizures (GEFS+). atrophy (SMA) patients After a genome scan, a new locus for FS was identified. C. Andreassi, F. D. Tiziano, C. Angelozzi, T. Vitali, E. De Vincenzi, G. Patients and methods: Clinical study: Our family consisted of Neri, C. Brahe; 166 individuals on 5 generations. Affected members presented a Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. history of simple FS that segregates as autosomosal dominant trait. Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder Genotyping and linkage analysis: After exclusion of reported loci for caused by homozygous loss of the Survival of Motor Neuron (SMN1) FS and GEFS+, a genome-wide search was performed with 380 gene. SMN1 is located in a large inverted duplicated region on markers. 5q13 where an almost identical copy, SMN2, is also present. The Results: All affected members presented FS that fulfil the criteria two genes differ only for a silent mutation in the reading frame, Posters - Neurogenetics 262 263 of simple FS. All FS ceased before 5 years of age and no later P0888. Cognitive impairment in autosomic dominant pure afebrile seizures or epilepsy were reported. In the oldest generation spastic paraparesis SPG4 (II), the status of all members was considered as unknown for the C. M. E. Tallaksen1,2, E. Guichard-Gomez2, V. Hahn-Barma2, J. reliability of the genetic analysis. The genome wide search allowed Hazan3, B. Fontaine2, B. Dubois2, A. Dürr1,4; the identification of a new candidate region (Zmax=3.31 at q=0.00). 1Inserm U289, Paris, France, 2Fédération de Neurologie, Paris, Multipoint analysis and haplotypes construction confirmed the genetic France, 3Génoscope, Evry, France, 4Département de Génétique, linkage of this region to simple FS trait. Cytogénétique et Embryologie, Paris, France. Conclusion: Our family presents a homogeneous phenotype Sixty five individuals from 10 French families with identified mutations consisting of isolated simple FS, the commonest form of FS. A new of the spastin gene (SPG4) participated in a study on cognitive locus is identified in this family and the sequence analysis of a function. The study was conducted to verify previous reports on potential candidate gene is in progress. the association of cognitive impairment and hereditary pure spastic paraparesis. Thirty six carriers (24 female, 12 male) including 5 P0886. Clinical and Genetic Analysis of a New asymptomatic at the time of the study as well as 29 of their non- Multigenerational Pedigree with GEFS+ (Generalized carriers siblings (18 female, 11 male) were included in the study. The Epilepsy with Febrile Seizures Plus) Cambridge Cognitive Examination test (CAMCOG) was used in all P. Roll1, S. Pereira1, F. Gerard2, S. Jamali1, A. Lemainque3, A. subjects, supplemented by additional neuropsychological tests for 30 Robaglia-Schlupp1, P. Genton2, M. G. Lathrop3, P. Szepetowski1; individuals to evaluate executive functions, memory and visual form 1INSERM U491, Marseille, France, 2Centre St Paul, Marseille, discrimination. France, 3CNG, Evry, France. There was no overall significant difference between carriers and non- Febrile seizures (FS) affect 3% of all children under six years of carriers. However, in the group with age over 50 years, a significant age. A small proportion of children with FS later develops epilepsy. cognitive impairment was found in carriers compared to non-carriers, While most FS show complex inheritance, a small proportion of FS is with lower scores in several parameters of executive functions. autosomal dominant. Two FS genes have been localized at 8q14-q21 Similar results have been reported previously in Irish families with and 19p. The syndrome of generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures spastic paraparesis. These findings suggest a wider involvement plus (GEFS+) is a heterogeneous disorder characterized by febrile of subcortical and, may be, cortical functions even in pure spastic seizures that may persist beyond the age of six, and non-febrile paraparesis after 50 years. seizures. GEFS+ is an autosomal dominant disorder and three genes (SCN1A, SCN1B, GABRG2) have been identified to date at 2q34, P0889. Iron-binding properties of frataxin and its 19q13, and 5q34, respectively, while a fourth GEFS+ locus (5q14- homologues q15) has been suggested. S. Adinolfi1, S. Martin2, A. Pastore2; A large multigenerational GEFS+ family was collected in France. 1National Institute of Medical, London, United Kingdom, 2National All affected members had typical FS. Among them, seven had other Institute of Medical Research, London, United Kingdom. types of seizures including FS after the age of 6 years, non-febrile Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA), an autosomal recessive cardio- and generalized seizures, or partial seizures later in life. neurodegenerative disease, is caused by low expression of frataxin: a Exclusion study of candidate genes and loci was performed with small mitochondrial protein, encoded into the nucleus. At biochemical penetrance at 0.9 and phenocopy rates at 0.02 or 0.03. Multipoint level the lack of frataxin leads to disregulation of mitochondrial LOD scores < -2 were obtained at 5q14-q15, 8q14-q21 and 19p. In iron homeostasis and oxidative damage which eventually causes addition, the genomic areas surrounding the SCN1A, SCN1B and neuronal death. Recently, it has been reported the Yfh1 (yeast GABRG2, were also excluded. frataxin homologue) shows a ferritin-like behaviour in vitro: the Our data provide further evidence for the high level of genetic protein was shown to form large aggregates able to sequester heterogeneity associated with familial febrile seizures and GEFS+, iron form solution in the presence of an iron excess (1). No direct and prove the existence of a new GEFS+ gene situated elsewhere in iron binding was however shown for human frataxin under similar the genome. Genome-wide scan is now underway in order to localize conditions (2). We have carried out an exhaustive study on three this new GEFS+ gene and preliminary data will be presented. frataxin orthologues from E. coli, yeast and from human with the aim of further testing the working hypothesis of a direct involvement of P0887. A novel KCNA1 mutation in a large family with frataxin in iron binding. Using Episodic Ataxia type 1 these three proteins, selected as representatives of different R. L. Touraine, A. Combes, F. Prieur, B. de Freminville, B. Lauras; evolution steps, we have characterised their fold and thermodynamic CHU de SAINT ETIENNE, Saint Etienne, France. stability, compared their ion binding specificity and their tendencies Familial episodic ataxia are rare genetically heterogeneous to aggregate. A number of mutants was produced to identify the neurological disorders. Type 1, or myokymia with periodic ataxia protein surface involved in these functions. Our work leads us to a (OMIM 160120) is characterized by short-lasting attacks of ataxia, more complex and complete picture of the binding and aggregative sometimes accompanied by jerking movements, episodes of properties of frataxins. dizziness and permanent tremor of the head and hands (myokymia). References This disorder has been ascribed to alteration of a potassium channel 1) Adamec J, Rusnak F, Owen WG, Naylor S, Benson LM, Gacy subunit, encoded by the KCNA1 gene, localized in 12p13. AM,Isaya G. We describe a large French family with 11 affected patients Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Sep;67(3):549-62. over 3 generations. The propositus, a young lady, is particularly 2) Musco G, Stier G, Kolmerer B, Adinolfi S, Martin S, Frenkiel T, handicapped by myokymia. She was previously diagnosed as having Gibson T, Pastore A a psychiatric disturbance. Structure Fold Des. 2000 Jul 15;8(7):695-707. Direct DNA sequencing of the KCNA1 gene disclosed a novel heterozygous misense mutation, leading to a Leucine to P0890. Spastin, the protein mutated in autosomal Phenylalanine substitution at position 305, in the 4th transmembrane dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia, is involved in domain. The mutation was confirmed by enzymatic restriction microtubule dynamics analysis with the disappearance of an AluI cutting site. This Leucine A. Errico1, P. Claudiani1, A. Ballabio1,2, E. I. Rugarli1; residue is highly conserved through evolution, from drosophila 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy, 2II to human. All the studied affected family members carried this University of Naples, Napoli, Italy. mutation that is absent in 100 unrelated and unaffected individuals. Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a neurodegenerative disease Therefore, it is likely that this Leu to Phe substitution at position 305 characterised by weakness and spasticity of the lower limbs due is pathogenic. Only speculations can be made regarding the possible to degeneration of the corticospinal tracts. The gene responsible consequences of the Leu to Phe substitution for the K+ channel for the most frequent form of autosomal dominant HSP (SPG4) function. encodes spastin, an ATPase belonging to the AAA proteins family. This autosomal dominant disorder is important to recognize, not Interestingly, almost all the missense mutations found in HSP patients only to avoid a erroneous diagnosis of psychiatric disturbance that fall into the AAA functional domain. frequently mislabel these patients, but also to offer specific therapies. The cellular pathways in which spastin operates and its role in 262 Posters - Neurogenetics 263 causing degeneration of motor axons are still unclear. By expressing involved in the myelination process of the CNS. wild-type or ATPase-defective spastin in several cell types, we To test this hypothesis, we sought the possible involvement of show that spastin interacts dynamically with microtubules. This SOX10 in the regulation of expression of PLP and its alternative association is mediated by the N-terminal region of the protein and transcript DM20. Both proteins are major components of myelin in regulated through the ATPase activity of the AAA domain. Expression the CNS, and mutations of the PLP gene are associated with PMD. of missense mutations falling into the AAA cassette leads to Here we show that SOX10 activates expression of the PLP gene in constitutive binding to microtubules in transfected cells and induces transfection assays, and that EGR2, another major regulator in the the disappearance of the aster and the formation of thick perinuclear CNS, is also able to regulate the PLP promoter. These results were bundles, suggesting a role of spastin in microtubule dynamics. further confirmed by the study of a cell line expressing SOX10 in an Moreover, overexpression of wild-type spastin seems to promote inducible manner, where PLP and DM20 expression is upregulated microtubule disassembly in transfected cells. These data suggest that when SOX10 is induced. the degeneration of corticospinal axons, in HSP patients, could be due to impairment of fine regulation of the microtubule cytoskeleton. P0893. Inducible mouse models for Friedreich Ataxia To better understand spastin localization, specific antibodies have D. Simon1, H. Puccio1, N. Lagarde1, L. Reutenauer1, A. Gansmuller1, been produced and experiments to determine the endogenous P. Rustin2, J. L. Mandel1, M. Koenig1; protein localization are in progress. Furthermore, a recombinant 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2Hôpital Necker, Paris, France. spastin obtained with the baculovirus system will be used in Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the most common autosomal recessive microtubule severing assay in order to confirm the hypothesized role ataxia, associates degeneration of the large sensory neurons and of spastin in microtubule disassembly. spinocerebellar tracts, cardiomyopathy and increased incidence in diabetes. FRDA is caused by severely reduced levels of frataxin, P0891. Mice lacking paraplegin, a mitochondrial AAA a mitochondrial protein of unknown function. Data from yeast and protease involved in hereditary spastic paraplegia, show patients indicate that frataxin defect causes a specific iron-sulfur axonal degeneration and abnormal mitochondria protein deficiency and mitochondrial iron accumulation, suggesting F. Ferreirinha1, A. Quattrini2, V. Valsecchi1, M. Pirozzi1, A. Ballabio1,3, oxidative damage involvement. E. I. Rugarli1; As complete absence of frataxin in mouse was lethal early in 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy, 2San development, we have chosen a conditional gene targeting approach, Raffaele Hospital, Milano, Italy, 3II University of Naples, Napoli, Italy. to generate first a heart frataxin-deficient line and a neuron/heart Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a progressive neurological frataxin-deficient line. The heart line reproduces well the different disorder characterized by degeneration of the corticospinal tracts. steps of the human cardiac defects, but the neuron/heart line The gene responsible for the autosomal recessive form linked to (generated to study the neurological defects) was very severe. chromosome 16q (SPG7) encodes paraplegin, a mitochondrial Indeed, the mutant mice showed a short life expectancy (25 days), ATPase involved in protein quality control in the inner mitochondrial probably due to many additional lesions in brain and other tissues. membrane. In order to study the pathogenesis of HSP due to lack To better reproduce the natural evolution of the neurological of paraplegin, we have generated a mouse model by inactivation of symptoms, we have generated two inducible neuronal frataxin- the Spg7 gene. Paraplegin deficient mice are born at the expected deficient lines by using tamoxifen inducible recombinase. The mendelian ratio, are viable, and fertile. At approximately 6 months deletion of frataxin is induced at 4 weeks of age. In one line the of age homozygous Spg7 -/- animals start displaying an impaired deletion occurs in the central and the peripheral nervous system and performance on the rotarod apparatus. Semithin sections of the the other line presents a deletion more specific of the cerebellum. spinal cord of 7-months-old animals show a variable number of The mice have a normal life expectancy but develop a progressive focal axonal swellings in the distal axons of the fasciculus gracilis spinocerebellar degeneration revealed by histology, electron and of descending spinal tracts, consistent with a retrograde microscopy and behavioural studies to assess the evolution of the axonopathy. This phenotype is slowly progressive, with signs of symptoms. axonal degeneration becoming prominent at 12 month of age. Mice These models represent good models to evaluate treatment older than one year show additional phenotypes, such as axonal strategies for the neurological side of the human disease. swelling and degeneration in the optic and sciatic nerves, and muscle abnormalities. Electron microscopy analysis of affected spinal cords P0894. Huntington’s Chorea In The Moscow Region demonstrates that, long before degeneration, axons are filled with S. Kotov, O. Sidorova, V. Neretin, O. Evgrafov, A. Petrin, E. Dadali; mitochondria with abnormal morphology, indicating that mitochondrial Moscow Regional Research Clinical Institute (MONIKI), Moscow, dysfunction is likely the cause for the disease. Swollen axons contain Russian Federation. accumulated organelles and neurofilaments, suggesting that axonal Huhtington’s chorea is a severe hereditary neurodegenerative degeneration may be due to impaired axonal transport. We are disease characterized by choreic hyperkinesis and progressing currently analyzing whether defective ATP production, oxidative dementia. The object of the present study was creation of genetic stress or apoptosis are important determinants of pathology in our register of the Huntington’s chorea in the Moscow Region in order HSP animal model. to organize medico-genetic consulting patients using up-to-date diagnostic methods. Direct and indirect registration methods were P0892. The transcription factor SOX10 regulates PLP applied. The total of 111 families suffering from the Huntington’s chorea was registered in the Moscow region. Molecular-genetic expression in the central nervous system method was used to confirm the primary diagnosis. Diagnosis was M. Girard1, N. Bondurand1, N. Lemort1, V. Pingault1,2, M. Goossens1,2; considered confirmed if the number of repeating cytosine-adenine- 1INSERM U468, Creteil, France, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie et guanine sequences in the disease gene molecule exceeded 37. Génétique Moléculaire, AP-HP, Creteil, France. Probands’ children underwent molecular-genetic investigation to SOX10 is an essential factor for the enteric nervous system (ENS), determine disease gene carriers. Siblings were also examined if melanocytes and glial cells development. Mutations in the SOX10 the disease in question was found in more than one generation. gene were described in several cases of Shah-Waardenburg In cases when prenatal diagnosis revealed the disease gene syndrome, a neurocristopathy characterized by the association of carriage by probands’ children, the latter were prescribed to undergo Hirschsprung disease (intestinal aganglionosis) and Waardenburg DNA-investigation. Haloperidolum was used for treatment of the syndrome (pigmentation defects and sensorineural deafness). Huntington’s chorea patients. In accordance, it was shown that SOX10 controls expression of MITF and RET, which play important roles during melanocytes and ENS development, respectively. Some patients also present with P0895. Study of the normal CAG tract at the Huntington myelination defects of the central (CNS) and peripheral nervous disease locus in the Portuguese population system (PNS), which is in agreement with the demonstration that P0 M. C. Costa1, L. Guimarães1, F. Ferreirinha1, A. Sousa1,2, P. Maciel1,2, and Cx32, two major proteins of the PNS, are controlled by SOX10. J. Sequeiros1,2; Nevertheless, these findings cannot explain the defects of the CNS, 1UnIGENe/IBMC, University of Porto, Portugal, 2Dept. Estudos das consistent with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD), observed in Populações/ICBAS, University of Porto, Portugal. one patient. This suggests that SOX10 may regulate other genes Huntington disease (HD) is a dominant disorder caused by the Posters - Neurogenetics 264 265 expansion of a (CAG)n localised on the first exon of the gene, which although secondarily the patients become bedridden and demented. contains (1) 6-26 CAGs in normal stable alleles, (2) 27-35 CAGs in The evolution in the adult forms may be of several decades. In all non-pathogenic but expandable alleles, (3) 36-39 CAGs in expanded those cases in the adult, the enzyme deficiency is identical as well alleles with reduced penetrance and (4) 40 CAGs in fully-penetrant as sulfatiduria which relates to the absence of the catabolic enzyme alleles. Molecular diagnosis is based on the determination of the for sulfated glycolipids. Interestingly, it is well known from the work CAG repeat size by PCR. of V. Gieselmann (reviewed in Human Mut. 4: 233-243, 1994). that Intermediate (class 2) alleles were present in 4.4%, while low- the mutations in infantile forms are different from those occurring in penetrance (class 3) alleles were present in 2.0%, among all ‘control’ the adult which may explain homochrony.There seem to be specific chromosomes (n=249) from our routine genetic testing. This high mutations according to the motor and psychocognitive types in frequency of unstable alleles led us to study a large control sample the adult, i.e. P426L for motor forms in a homozygote form and (n=1772 chromosomes) from the Portuguese population (50 Guthrie in the psychiatric forms a specific I179S mutation as a compound cards from each district in mainland Portugal and the islands of heterozygote.Studies are in progress to determine the precise clinical Madeira and Azores). characteristics of the psychiatric forms and whether I179S mutation No differences between normal (classes 1+2) alleles from affected of arylsulfatase A could be a susceptibility factor of schizophrenia. individuals and controls could be shown. Distribution of the (CAG)n size showed: range 9-40 CAGs, mean 18.4±3.2, mode 17, median 17 P0898. Correction of the biochemical phenotype in (skewness 1.3, kurtosis 3). The 17-CAGs allele was by far the most an X-Linked adrenoleukodystrophy mouse model by frequent (38.0%). Intermediate alleles (27-35) represented 3.0% in transgenic overexpression of the ALDR gene: functional the control population; 2 expanded alleles (36 and 40 repeats, 0.11%) redundancy at the peroxisomal membrane? were found. There was no evi-dence for geographical clustering C. Camps1, A. Pujol1, E. Metzger1, T. Pampols2, J. Mandel1, M. of the intermediate or expanded alleles. This study showed that Giros2; intermediate alleles at the HD locus are relatively frequent in the 1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2IBC, Fundacio Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. Portuguese population, which is particularly important for molecular X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is a neurological disorder presenting diagnosis and genetic counselling. This will also be relevant for with central or peripheral demyelination and impaired function genetic epidemiology and evolution studies of the HD mutation. of adrenals. X-ALD patients accumulate very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) in plasma and tissues, mainly adrenal cortex and P0896. Common trends in distribution of HLA-DQA1 and nervous system. The two main neurological phenotypes are the DQB1 haplotypes in patients with febrile seizures and severe childhood cerebral form and the slowly progressive adult epilepsy. adrenomyeloneuropathy. A mouse model of the disease also V. V. Egorov1, S. A. Groppa2; accumulates VLCFAs in target organs, and has recently been shown 1Center of Motherhood and Childhood Health Care, National Center to develop an adrenomyeloneuropathy-like phenotype (Pujol et al, of Family Planning and Medical Genet, Chisinau, REPUBLIC OF Hum Mol Genet in press). MOLDOVA, 2Department of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Medical The gene mutated in the disease codes for a peroxisomal ABC Genetics, Chisinau State University of Medicine and Pharmaceutics transporter protein (ALDP). There is other three peroxisomal ABC “N. Testemitsanu”, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova, Chisinau, transporters, ALDRP being the closest homolog (88% similarity with REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA. ALDP at the aminoacid level). A working hypothesis is that ALDRP Objective: The present study was designed to reveal the common could play a similar biochemical function. To assess whether an trends in distribution of HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 haplotypes overexpression of ALDRP in target organs could compensate the frequencies in patients with febrile seizures (FS) (simple and biochemical phenotype of the ALD deficient mouse, transgenic mice transformed to afebrile seizures (FST)) and epilepsy to determine the overexpressing ALDRP in target organs were generated (ALDRtg), common traits between the pathologies. and crossed to ALD KO mice (ALD KO/ALDRtg). Methods: We investigated HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 haplotypes We have compared the ALD KO and ALD KO/ ALDRtg have found by RFLP-analysis in the group of 68 children with FS (inclusive 12 that overexpression of the ALDRP leads to full correction of C26: patients with FST), 22 patients with epilepsy, and 70 individuals from 0 and C24:0 fatty acids levels and of the ratios C26:0/C22:0 and control group. C24:0/C22:0 in adrenal gland and CNS. Preliminary results indicate Results: Frequency of HLA-DQA1 *0501 haplotype was maximal in a correction of histopathology in adrenals. It remains to be seen control group (0.436), less frequent in patients with FST (0.250), in whether this normalisation of the biochemical phenotype leads to an patients with FS (0.235) and in patients with epilepsy (0.023) with p amelioration of the neurological AMN-like phenotype in mice. < 0.001 between FS and control group, FST and epilepsy and FST and control group, and p < 0.1 between the FST and control group. P0899. New families with ataxia and hearing and visual Frequency of HLA-DQA1 *0201 haplotype was maximal in patients impairment (van Bogaert-Martin syndrome) linked to with epilepsy (0.318), less frequent in patients with FST (0.125), in 6p21-23 and refined genetic localisation patients with FS (0.081) and in control group (0.043), with p < 0.001 M. Gribaa1, S. Klur1, P. Bomont1, R. Gershoni-Barush2, B. Leheup3, between epilepsy and control group. Frequency of HLA-DQB1 *0502 M. Koenig1; haplotype was maximal in control group (0.093), less frequent in 1igbmc, Strasbourg, France, 2Rambam Medical Center - faculty of patients with FS (0.088), in patients with FST (0.042) and in patients Medicine - Department of Human Genetics, Haifa, Israel, 3CHU with epilepsy (0.000) with p < 0.05 between patients with epilepsy - Service de Médecine Infantile 3 et de Génétique Clinique, Nancy, and control group. France. Conclusions: The results suggests common trait in HLA-DQA1 and The hereditary ataxias are a heterogeneous group of genetic DQB1 haplotypes distributions in patients with FS, FST and epilepsy disorders characterised by cerebellar symptoms associated with and, probably, have a “protective” role. others neurological and non neurological features. Van Bogaert- Martin syndrome (MIM#271250) is defined by childhood onset P0897. Metachromatic leukodystrophy : relations autosomal recessive ataxia with optic and cochlear degeneration between phenotype and mutations in arylsulfatase A in leading to blindness and deafness. We have previously reported adult forms. that this condition is linked to a 17 cM region in 6p21-23 in an Israeli J. Turpin, M. Lefevre, B. Colsch, N. A. Baumann; family. INSERM, Paris, France. We have analysed a set of patients born from consanguineous Metachromatic leukodystrophy is due to a deficiency in arylsulfatase parents and for whom a diagnosis of Friedreich ataxia, ataxia with A which hydrolyses sulfogalactosylceramides and other sulfated vitamin E deficiency or ataxia linked to 9q34 (with elevated alpha- glycolipids (sulfatides). In function of age, the clinical manifestations foetoprotein) was excluded. Four patients, from three families were are different. The infantile form is characterized by a regression of homozygous over part of the 6p21-23 interval. A sister and a brother acquired motor and later of mental activities. There are also adult of Turkish origin were haploidentical in 6p21-23 and homozygous forms which do not occur in the same families. Moreover, in the over 6 consecutive markers defining an 11 cM interval. They adult, there are two clinical variants, one in which motor signs are developed ataxia and a peripheral demyelinating neuropathy before predominant, the other in which psychiatric symptoms dominate, age 10, but had no hearing impairment. The sister developed retinitis 264 Posters - Neurogenetics 265 pigmentosa by age 15, which was not present in the younger brother. Linkage with all known ADPHSP loci was also excluded. A genome The two other patients, of Israeli and Lebanese origin respectively, wide search using 400 microsatellite markers covering all autosomes were homozygous over at least 6 consecutive markers. Albeit it allowed to map a novel ADPHSP locus, termed SPG18. cannot be formally excluded that one or both are homozygous by chance (due solely to consanguinity and not by linkage), the minimal P0902. Linkage analysis in an Italian family with region of homozygosity would suggest that the defective gene is autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia located in a 7 cM interval located between markers D6S1660 and M. Muglia1, A. Magariello1, A. L. Gabriele1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. Conforti1, D6S265. A. Patitucci1, T. Sprovieri1, L. Mangone2, L. Morgante3, A. Epifanio3, P. La Spina3, A. Quattrone1,2; P0900. Further evidence that SPG3A gene mutations 1Institute of Neurological Sciences-CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, cause autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia 2Institute of Neurology, School of Medicine, Catanzaro, Italy, A. Magariello1, A. Patitucci1, A. L. Gabriele1, F. L. Conforti1, R. 3Department of Neurology, University of Messina, Italy. Mazzei1, M. Caracciolo1, G. Nicoletti1, L. Mangone2, B. Ardito3, M. Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a heterogeneous group of Lastilla3, M. Muglia1; disorders of the motor system, characterized clinically by slowly 1Institute of Neurological Sciences-CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, progressive lower extremity spasticity and weakness, in which 2Institute of Neurology, School of Medicine, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Hospital dominant, recessive and X-linked forms have been described. While “Miulli”, Acquaviva delle Fonti (BA), Italy. autosomal dominant HSP has been extensively studied, autosomal Autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia (AD-HSP) is a recessive HSP is less well known and it is considered a rare form. genetically heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorder characterized Until now, five families (four Tunisian and one Algerian) with recessive by progressive spasticity of the lower limbs. HSP linked to chromosome 8p11-8q13 have been published. The In the past few years, eight spastic gait (SPG) loci have been shown HSP locus was mapped in a region of 32.2 cM flanked by the to be associated with the “pure” form of AD-HSP, but only one gene markers PLAT and D8S279. responsible for the SPG4 locus has been identified. In the current study, we report a small Italian RHSP family linked to Very recently, the gene responsible for the SPG3A locus was also chromosome 8. Using additional markers located between PLAT and identified. D8S279, we were able to refine the HSP region. The coding sequence is divided into 14 exons spanning Negative lod scores were obtained in the two-point linkage analysis approximately 69 Kb. The peptide encoded by SPG3A, atlastin, by using STR markers on chromosome 15 and 16, whereas positive shows significant homology with several GTPases. Atlastin lod scores were obtained for D8S509, D8S1828, D8S285, D8S1102, contains three conserved motifs: P-loop (74GAFRKGKS81); DxxG D8S1723, D8S260, D8S1840 and D8S279 with a maximum lod (146DTQG); and RD (217RD) that characterize guanylate binding/ score of 1.46 at D8S260 marker. The two affected siblings were GTPase active sites. homozygous for the markers D8S1102, D8S1723 and D8S260. We report a novel mutation in a large Italian pedigree from southern According to the Genethon map, haplotype reconstruction revealed Italy with AD-HSP. Significant linkage to the SPG3 locus on that the patients shared a common 8.2 cM region of homozygosity chromosome 14 was detected with a maximum LOD score of 4.58 at encompassing the D8S1102, D8S1723 and D8S260 markers. Based D14S255. on recombination events in our Italian family, we could map the Direct sequencing of the SPG3A gene revealed a G→A mutation RHSP gene between D8S285 and D8S1840, thus refining the HSP at position 818 in the exon 7 of the gene. This mutation created region by approximately 20 cM, from 32.2 to 12cM. an amino-acid change from Arg to Gln at codon 217. The variation was also confirmed with restriction enzyme Taq I, which cleaved the P0903. Linkage of a new locus for autosomal recessive axonal wild-type PCR product of 208 bp into 145 bp and 63 bp digestion form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease to chromosome 8q21.3. fragments, but did not cleave the corresponding region of the SPG3A C. Barhoumi1, R. Amouri2, C. Ben Hamida2, M. Ben Hamida2, S. gene in our patients. Complete co-segregation of the heterozygous Machghoul1, M. Guediche1, F. Hentati2; mutation with the disease was observed. This mutation was absent in 1Hopital Militaire Principal de Tunis, Montfleury, Tunisia, 2National 100 control chromosomes examined. Institute of Neurology, Tunis, Tunisia. These data confirm that mutations in the SPG3A gene are causative We report clinical and genetic linkage analysis of large Tunisian of AD-HSP. family including 13 affected patients suffering from a particular form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) with pyramidal feature. The inheritance P0901. Linkage analysis in an italian family affected by was autosomal recessive. The clinical phenotype was sterotyped autosomal dominant pure hereditary spastic paraplegia in all patients and characterized by onset during the first decade, a V. Caputo1, F. Brancati1, E. Valente2, E. Bertini3, C. Patrono3, F. progressive course and distal atrophy in four limbs associated with Santorelli3, S. Salvi2, A. Pizzuti1, B. Dallapiccola1; a mild pyramidal syndrome. Nerve biopsy performed in two patients 1University of Rome La Sapienza and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, showed severe axonal neuropathy. Genetic linkage studies allowed Italy, 2CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 3Ospedale Pediatrico to exclude linkage with known loci of different forms of CMT, familial Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy. spastic paraplegia and Juvenile Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. A Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) includes a heterogeneous significant lod score obtained with marker D8S286, confirming linkage group of neurodegenerative disorders characterised by progressive to chromosome 8q21.3. The clinical syndrome observed in this family spasticity of the lower limbs. Clinically, HSP has been divided in pure corresponds to a new genetic form of autosomal recessive CMT. and complicated forms. In pure HSP no other neurological features are present and slowly progressive spastic gait is usually associated P0904. Fine mapping of disease locus and with mild decrease of vibration sense and sphincter disturbances. histopatholgical studies in Russian family with The mode of inheritance may be autosomal dominant, autosomal autosomal dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy recessive or X-linked. So far, seven loci responsible for autosomal type 2F dominant pure HSP (ADPHSP) have been mapped to chromosomes S. Ismailov1,2, V. Fedotov3, E. Dadali1, V. Ivanov1, I. Ivanova- 14q (SPG3), 2p (SPG4), 15q (SPG6), 8q (SPG8), 12q (SPG10), 19q Smolenskaya2, S. Illarioshkin2, A. DeSandre-Giovannoli4, I. Bocaccio4, (SPG12) and 2q (SPG13). Two ADPHSP genes have been identified N. Levy4; so far, the SPG4 gene (Spastin) and the SPG3 gene (Atlastin). 1Russian State Medical University (RSMU), Moscow, Russian Here we report an Italian family with 10 individuals affected by Federation, 2Institute for Neurology of Russian Academy of Medical ADPHSP spanning three consecutive generations. The way Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Genetic Counselling of inheritance is autosomal dominant, with high penetrance. Department of Voronezh Diagnostic Centre, Voronezh, Russian The phenotype is characterised by a high incidence of urinary Federation, 4Inserm U491, Faculty de Medecine de la Timone, disturbances, mild muscle weakness and wasting, and benign course Marseille, France. (only two patients were wheelchair-bound after 10 to 20 years of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common inherited disease). Patients often complained of mild lower limbs paresthesias motor and sensory peripheral neuropathy. The axonal form of CMT, and diurnal fluctuations of spasticity. Mutations in the Spastin gene or CMT type 2 (CMT2), is clinically and genetically heterogeneous were excluded by direct sequencing of all 17 exons of the gene. with several assigned autosomal dominant loci.Posters - Neurogenetics 266 267 Last year, at the 10th International Congress of Human Genetics in in which the same syndrome is inherited as a dominant trait with full Vienna, Austria, we reported of the new locus (CMT2F) for autosomal penetrance. Epilepsy is of the rolandic type and language dysfunction dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2 neuropathy that maps within 15 is of the same type as in the former family. Video-EEG in the cM region on chromosome 7q11-q21 in an extended Russian family. youngest patient showed asynchrone biphasic spikes predominant By this moment we performed fine mapping for CMT2F locus using over the centro-temporal regions increased by sleep. The five set of short tandem repeat (STR) markers located inside of the subjects who performed neuropsychological testing showed a mental previously defined region and flanking markers. delay with significantly lower verbal performances. The main verbal Using these additional markers we got narrowing CMT2F locus. deficits involved speech articulation and auditory verbal memory Haplotype analysis with the new additional markers demonstrates span. that the disease gene maps at chromosome 7q11-q21 within reduced The family is composed of eleven affected individuals, of whom to 8 cM region. ten are alive. Blood samples from all ten affected patients as well Presently we are also performing histopatholgical examination of as from four unaffected members were collected. Genome screen peripheral nerves in affected patients from CMT2F family and these was initiated with markers spaced regularly across the genome. results will be ready by the ECHG 2002 conference and can be Statistical studies are being performed assuming a dominant mode of presented at the conference too. inheritance with full penetrance and preliminary linkage data will be presented. P0905. Axonal Autosomal Recessive forms of Charcot Marie Tooth disease: genes (GDAP1 and P0907. The -463G/A myeloperoxidase promoter LMNA)frequencies and spectrum of their mutations. polymorphism is associated with reduced risk for late- H. Azzedine1, N. Birouk2, G. Durosier3, M. A. M. Salih4, D. Ente1, D. onset sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. Mahmoudi5, A. N. Masmoudi5, A. Vandenberghe6, M. Tazir7, D. Grid8, I. Manna, V. Andreoli, A. La Russa, G. La Porta, G. Nicoletti, P. Serra, G. Stevanin1, A. Brice1, E. Le Guern1; R. Cittadella; 1INSERM U289 Hopital de la Salpetriere, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire CNR Institute of Neurological Science, Cosenza, Italy. de Neurogenetique Hopital des Specialites, Rabat, Morocco, 3Centre Myeloperoxidase (MPO) is a myeloid-specific enzyme that catalyses Hospitalo-Universitaire, Port-au-Prince, HAITI, 4Department of the reaction of chloride and hydrogen peroxide to yield hypochlorus Paediatrics (39) College of Medecine&KKUH King Saud University, acid, a strong ossidant, and its reactive by-products have been Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 5Service de Neurologie, Hopital de Bab el linked to DNA-strand breakage. MPO is present at high levels Oued, Algiers, Algeria, 6Laboratoire de Neurogenetique, Hopital de in circulating neutrophils and monocytes but is not detectable in l’Antiquaille, Lyon, France, 7Service de Neurologie, Hopital Mustapha, microglia in normal brain tissue . However, MPO presence has been Algiers, Algeria, 8AFM, Hopital Salpetriere, Paris, France. demonstraded in microglia associated with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) Charcot Marie Tooth Disease (CMT) is a pathologically and plaques, suggesting that MPO gene expression may play a role in genetically heterogeneous group of hereditary motor and sensory neurodegenerative diseases involving macrophage-microglia. One neuropathies characterised by slowly progressive weakness and portion of the gene thought to be involved in regulation of MPO atrophy, primarily in peroneal and distal leg muscles. Two major expression is the proximal 5’ flanking region. The polymorphic G/A types have been distinguished, in which the neuropathy is either nucleotide base shift, 463 bases upstream from the transcription start demyelinating or neuronal. Electrophysiological studies on median site, negates the binding region for the general transcription factor motor conduction velocity (MNCV) have confirmed the distinction SP1, and results in reduced gene expression, which would imply between the demyelinating and axonal forms of the disease. Several lower susceptibility to Alzheimer’s risk. loci and various modes of inheritance were described: autosomal In this work, we present a case-control study to test this hypothesis. dominant, X linked and autosomal recessive (ARCMT). More than We have examined this polymorphism in a sample of 162 30 loci and 10 genes are implicated. Only 3 loci were reported on the characterized AD cases compared with 158 cognitively normal axonal form of ARCMT: 1q21, 8q13 and 19q13. subjects from the same geographic background. MPO genotypes 36 consanguineous families with axonal ARCMT originating from the were examined by PCR-RFLP. The allele frequency for MPO -463A Mediterranean basin were selected and screened by linkage analysis was found to be 22.5% for cases and 34.2% for controls (OR=0.560, and homozygocity mapping to these loci. Nine families were linked to 95% CI=0.40-0.8, p=0.0011). These results the 1q21 locus (LMNA gene), 10 to the 8q13 locus (GDPAD1 gene) suggest that MPO -463 A allele reduces the risk of the Alzheimer ‘s disease. and only one family was linked to 19q13. The GDAP1- and LMNA- linked forms were equally frequent, representing 25% and 28% of P0908. Analysis of the GRIK1 gene in patients with our series, respectively. The 19q13 locus is the rarest one (3%). Juvenile absence epilepsy Therefore, ~44% remains unlinked to any known axonal ARCMT S. Barlati1, C. Izzi1, A. Barbon1, R. Kretz2, T. Sander2; locus. Furthermore, 5 families with demyelinating ARCMT were 1University, Brescia, Italy, 2University, Berlin, Germany. found to be linked to the 8q13 locus. The mutation screening in the Hereditary factors play a major role in the aetiology of juvenile axonal and demyelinating families is ongoing and the results will be absence epilepsy (JAE). Sander et al. (1997) reported an allelic presented at the meeting. association of JAE with the nine-copy allele of a tetranucleotide repeat polymorphism in the third intron of the kainate-selective GluR5 P0906. Clinical and genetic studies of a large pedigree receptor gene (GRIK1) and supportive evidence for linkage of IGE with rolandic epilepsy and speech dyspraxia co-inherited to GRIK1 in families of JAE probands. These findings suggest that as a dominant trait a major genetic determinant of GRIK1 confers susceptibility to JAE. G. Rudolf1, P. Roll2, S. Jamali2, R. Carcangiu1, M. P. Valenti1, We have sequenced the coding regions and regulatory sequences of S. Finck1, C. Seegmuller1, A. de Saint Martin3, C. Marescaux1, the GRIK1 gene in 8 JAE patients who carry the nine-repeat allele of A. Lemainque4, M. N. Metz-Lutz1, M. G. Lathrop4, E. Hirsch1, P. the GRIK1 tetranucleotide repeat polymorphism to detect a putative Szepetowski2; functional GRIK1 mutation that is in linkage disequilibrium with the 1Neurology Unit, Strasbourg, France, 2INSERM U491, Marseille, nine-repeat allele. Seven of them were derived from families showing France, 3Paediatric Unit, Strasbourg, France, 4CNG, Evry, France. positive evidence for linkage to GRIK1. Our mutation analysis The complex relationship between epilepsy and language impairment of coding regions and splice junctions revealed only two silent is well known but poorly understood. Rolandic epilepsies (RE) polymorphisms (A522C and C1173T) out of the five SNPs present account for about one-sixth of all childhood epilepsies. Language in public databases and no mutations affecting protein structure. No processing deserves particular attention in RE because discharges significant differences were found in the allele frequencies of the involve the perisylvian language areas. Consequently, several studies detected polymorphisms between the JAE patients and controls. High have shown that language dysfunction may be associated with RE. levels of sequence conservation were also found in the promoter, in One family with nocturnal oro-facio-brachial seizures and centro- the 5’ and both the 3’ untranslated regions and in the RNA secondary temporal epileptiform discharges associated with oral and speech structure involved in the editing reaction. These results indicate that dyspraxia and cognitive impairment had been described (Scheffer et mutations in the coding sequences, in the intron-exon boundaries al., 1995). and in the main regulatory and editing regions of the GRIK1 are not A new family was identified (Rudolf et al., manuscript in preparation) commonly involved in the aetiology of JAE.266 Posters - Neurogenetics 267 P0909. BACE1 and BACE2: exclusion of allele Population of Sardinia is an isolated genetically homogeneous, association with Alzheimer’s disease distinct and different from other European populations that originates P. Giannakopoulos1, F. Herrmann1, G. Gold1, C. Bouras1, R. from a limited number of Caucasian ancestors, it has high degree of Mulligan1, G. Duriaux-Sail2, A. Michon1, S. E. Antonarakis2, J. L. consanguinity, low migration rate, high prevalence of MS cases (157/ Blouin2; 100000 inhabitants) and high proportion of MS cases in the young 1Department of Psychiatry and Geriatrics, University Hospitals, ages. Geneva, Switzerland, 2Medical Genetics, University Hospitals and 6p21 region covering major histocompartibility complex (MHC) has School of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland. been identified as promising in previous genome screenings. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterized neuropathologically A haplotype-based strategy of TDT mapping was adopted. The aim by neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques in brain. A key of this stage of the study was to evaluate the association in the 6p21 component of plaques is Aß, a 40-42 residue polypeptide derived region with MS in Sardinian population. from Aß-precursor-protein (APP) through proteolytic cleavage Blood samples were obtained from 120 recruited MS trios (nuclear catalyzed by ß and γ-secretases. ß-secretase is the rate-limiting MS families from the MS register, Nuoro province, Central Sardinia). enzyme in this process, which represents an alternate to normal Mapping in some candidate regions was performed to search for a-secretase cleavage. Sequence variation in genes BACE1 the susceptibility genes. In this analysis 7 microsatellite markers (chromosome11q23.3) and BACE2 (chromosome 21q22.3), which (D6S2222, D6S276, STR-MICA, MICB, TNFalfa, D6S273, DQCARII) encode two closely related proteases that appear to act as the covering of about 4 cM in the MHC region (6p21) were chosen to AD ß-secretase, may represent a strong genetic risk factor for AD. study candidate regions identified before and according to the prior In order to address this issue, we analysed the frequencies of 2 hypothesis involving TNFalfa and MICB genes. SNPs in BACE1 (V262, dbSNP rs#638405) and BACE2 (chr.21- To test for the allelic association, we performed the classical TDT test cSNP database #hc21s00169, dbSNP rs#12149) respectively in using TRANSMIT programme (D.Clayton) that allows for incomplete a community-based sample of 96 individuals with late-onset AD data. followed in geriatric and psychiatric clinics (mean age = 79.9; SD 9.3 Analysis of linkage disequilibrium and results on allelic and haplotype ; 45% men) and 170 controls randomly selected among residents of association between microsatellites in study and MS will be the same community who participated in an epidemiological study of presented. Hypothesis about the role of some small regions of MHC dementia and underwent extensive mental status testing (mean age region in the disease aetiology to be discussed. = 74.7 ; SD 7.4 ; 48% men). Genotype and allele distribution in both study groups were compared using Fisher’s exact test and did not P0912. Linkage disequilibrium analysis indicates a multiple demonstrate any association between AD and BACE1 or BACE2. sclerosis susceptibility effect in vicinity to the protachykinin-1 These data do not support BACE1 or BACE2 involvement in genetic gene (TAC1) on chromosome 7q21-22. risk of late onset AD in agreement with the recently published studies A. Goris1, I. Alloza2, P. Fiten1, S. Heggarty3, E. Cocco4, S. A. (Nowotny et al., 2001, Murphy et al., 2001). Hawkins5, C. A. Graham3, M. G. Marrosu4, G. Opdenakker1, K. Vandenbroeck2; P0910. Absence of association between multiple 1Rega Institute, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Cytokine Biology and Genetics Programme, School of Pharmacy, QUB, Belfast, United sclerosis and the –463 promoter region polymorphism of Kingdom, 3Department of Medical Genetics, QUB, Belfast, United the human myeloperoxidase gene. Kingdom, 4Department of Neuroscience, University of Cagliari, R. Cittadella1, I. Manna1, V. Andreoli1, A. La Russa1, G. La Porta1, Cagliari, Italy, 5Department of Neurology, Royal Victoria Hospital, P. Serra1, P. Valentino2, F. Ruscica2, L. Mangone2, D. Messina1, A. Belfast, United Kingdom. Quattrone2,1; Chromosome 7q21-22, and in particular the region surrounding 1CNR Institute of Neurological Sciences, Cosenza, Italy, 2Institute of D7S554, emerged from the recent American genome screen in Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. multiple sclerosis (MS) as the most promising region genome-wide Multiple Sclerosis (MS), the common autoimmune demyelinating for harboring a disease susceptibility gene. Also in the Canadian disease of young adults, is a chronic inflammatory disease of genome screen linkage was found with this chromosome region. the central nervous system (CNS) characterized by primary We tested association between D7S554 and MS in 217 Sardinian demyelination with relative axonal sparing. Although the pathogenesis trio MS families by the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT), and of MS is not fully understood, the role of genetic factors is firmly in a Northern Irish case-control study comprising 542 individuals. In established. Several association studies of single genes have both populations we found evidence for significant allelic association illustrated that genetic factors contribute to the increased risk to (Pc = 0.04 and Pc = 0.0002, respectively). In a second stage, develop MS . Myeloperoxidase (MPO) catalyses a reaction between we analysed 5 microsatellite markers in a 4 megabase interval chloride and hydrogen peroxide to generate hypochlorous acid and on chromosome 7q21-22 in the same set of Sardinian families. other reactive compounds that have been linked to DNA damage. Parental transmission of a single allele of one of these markers, Reactive oxygen species generated by macrophages have been i.e. D7S3126, was significantly distorted (Pc = 0.008). D7S554 implicated in inflammatory or neurodegenerative disorders. MPO and D7S3126 are located at distances of respectively 40 and 81 is expressed in macrophages and microglia, which play a key role kb 5‘ from the startcodon of the protachykinin-1 gene (TAC1), and in the demyelination of nerve axons in Multiple Sclerosis (MS). occur in strong linkage disequilibrium (P < 10-7). Our study indicates A G-to-A substitution polymorphism in the promoter region of the that the previous finding of linkage with D7S554 refers possibly to MPO gene has been suggested in vitro studies to decrease gene the presence of an MS susceptibility effect in vicinity to TAC1. In transcription. We tested the association of this polymorphism with addition, a second independent association was uncovered between Multiple Sclerosis in a population-based case-control study of 131 a microsatellite polymorphism in the plasminogen activator inhibitor- cases and 163 controls from the same geographic background. We 1 gene, i.e. D7S477, and MS. Overall, the analysis presented here did not found an association with gender, age at onset, susceptibility may contribute to the increasingly refined genomic map of MS, and to or the course of MS, according to the specific genotypes of the underscores the requirement for a further high-resolution screening of polymorphism of the MPO gene. chromosome 7q21-22. P0911. Association between some candidate regions on P0913. Susceptibility and disease progression in the chromosome 6p21 and Multiple Sclerosis: a family Portuguese patients with multiple sclerosis - study of the based study in population of the Central Sardinia, Italy role of APOE and SCA2 loci I. Prokopenko1, L. Bernardinelli1, L. Foco1, C. Montomoli1, L. Musu2, M. Santos1, M. C. Costa1, M. E. Rio2, M. J. Sá2, M. Monteiro2, A. M. Piras2, A. Ticca2, P. Holmans3, B. Murgia2; Valença3, A. Sá4, J. Dinis5, J. Figueiredo6, L. Bigotte de Almeida7, 1University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2St.Francesco Hospital, Nuoro, Italy, A. Valongueiro5, I. Coelho8, M. T. Matamá1, J. Pinto-Basto1,9, J. 3MRC Biostatistics Unit. Institute of Public Health., Cambridge, United Sequeiros1,10, P. Maciel1,10; Kingdom. 1UnIGENe-IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2Hosp. S. João, Porto, Portugal, Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an immune-mediated disease with the 3Hosp. Força Aérea, Lisboa, Portugal, 4Hosp. Dist. Sto André, Leiria, complex interplay between genetic and environmental factors noted Portugal, 5Hosp. Dist. Sta Luzia, Viana do Castelo, Portugal, 6Hosp. in its aetiology.Posters - Neurogenetics 268 269 S. Marcos, Braga, Portugal, 7Hosp. Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal, we show that polyalanine expansions in PABP2 cause increased 8Hosp. Dist. Sta Oliveira, Guimarães, Portugal, 9Igm, Porto, Portugal, numbers of inclusions and enhance death in COS-7 cells. We 10Icbas, Porto, Portugal. observed similar increases of protein aggregation and cell death with Multiple sclerosis (MS) a is a major demyelinating disease with nuclear-targeted green fluorescent protein (GFP) linked to longer vs. a highly variable clinical presentation, following a progressive or shorter polyalanine stretches. Intranuclear aggregates in our OPMD relapsing-remitting course that affects around 1:500 European young cell model were associated with HSP40 (HDJ-1) and HSP70. Human adults. Genetic factors are thought to play a role in susceptibility to HDJ-1, yeast hsp104, a bacterially-derived GroEL minichaperone MS and its progression. and the chemical chaperone DMSO reduced both aggregation and In order to determine the influence of the APOE and SCA2 loci on cell death in our OPMD model without affecting levels of PABP2 and susceptibility to multiple sclerosis and their correlation with disease similar trends were seen with GFP with long polyalanine stretches. severity, we studied 243 Portuguese patients, who were matched by Thus, polyalanine expansion mutations in different protein contexts sex, age and region of origin to 192 healthy controls. Both parents cause proteins to misfold/aggregate and kill cells. The situation in of 92 patients were also studied. We did not detect any significant OPMD appears to have many parallels with polyglutamine diseases, difference when APOE and SCA2 allele frequencies of cases and raising the possibility that misfolded, aggregate-prone proteins may controls were compared (McNemar’s test), or when we compared perturb similar pathways, irrespective of the nature of the mutation or cases with primary progressive versus other forms of the disease protein context. (Fisher’s exact test). Disequilibrium of transmission was tested for both loci in 92 trios, and we did not observe segregation distortion for P0916. SCA7 mouse model: understanding and any allele at both loci. suppressing polyglutamine-induced toxicity To test the influence of the APOE epsilon 4 and SCA2 22 CAG D. Helmlinger, G. Yvert, K. Merienne, Y. Trottier, L. Ben-Haïem, C. alleles in the severity of the disease, we compared the age of onset, Weber, J. Mandel, D. Devys; severity and progression rate between the groups with and without Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire those alleles. We did not observe an association of the epsilon 4 or (IGBMC), Illkirch, France. the 22 CAG alleles with severity or rate of progression of MS in our Nine neurodegenerative disorders are caused by expansions of population. CAG repeats within the coding region of the disease-causing genes, Given the importance of gene-environment interactions in MS, it is encoding polyglutamine tracts in the corresponding proteins. Among possible that different genetic factors are relevant to its pathogenesis these disorders, spino-cerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7) is the only one in different populations. affecting the retina. To investigate the mechanisms of expanded ataxin-7 neurotoxicity, P0914. No evidence of association between alpha 2 we generated transgenic mice overexpressing full-length human macroglobulin gene and Parkinson’s disease in a case- ataxin-7 (containing 10 or 90 glutamines) in rod photoreceptors, control sample by using the rhodopsin promoter. Expression of the mutant protein G. Annesi1, A. A. Pasqua2, P. Spadafora2, E. V. De Marco2, D. triggers a clear, easily quantifiable, retinal dysfunction associated Civitelli2, S. Carrideo2, I. C. Cirò Candiano2, F. Annesi2, P. Serra2, L. with neurodegeneration. Intranuclear inclusions (NIs) form by Mangone3, M. Zappia3, G. Nicoletti2; accumulation of an N-terminal cleaved fragment of mutant ataxin- 1Insitute of Neurological Sciences National Research Council, 7, are ubiquitinated and recruit chaperones (HDJ2, HSP70) and Mangone (Cs), Italy, 2Institute of Neurological Sciences, National proteasomal subunits. Research Council, Mangone (CS), Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, Because retina is suitable for molecular analysis and for testing University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. therapeutic strategies, we initiated two different studies using this Parkinson’s disease is one of the most frequent neurodegenerative model. disorders. The pathological hallmarks of PD are: a) the presence First, we addressed in vivo normal ataxin-7 fate in presence of the of Lewy bodies (cytoplasmatic eosinophilic hyaline inclusions) in all mutant form, by crossbreeding SCA7-Q10 and SCA7-Q90 mice. affected brain-stem regions, especially the dorsal motor nucleus of Interestingly, photoreceptors expressing both transgenes lose the vagus; and b) a massive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the pars rapidly, progressively and completely normal ataxin-7 protein, as compacta of the substantia nigra. shown by a complete disappearance of its cytoplasmic staining, Lewy body contains a variety of costituents, and its antigenic whereas aggregation still occurs. Whether mutant ataxin-7 or any determinants can be divided into four groups: structural elements of polyglutamine containing proteins induce a transcriptional repression Lewy bodies during their formation. The mechanism of Lewy-body or a specific proteolytic response is now investigated. formation, the importance of Lewy body to the pathogenesis of Second, we wanted to determine whether inducing chaperone activity Parkinson’s disease, and its role in the neurodegenerative process could allow significant protection against polyglutamine-induced remain unknown. Alpha-2 macroglobulin (A2M) is a component retinal toxicity in our SCA7 model. Mice overexpressing either of Lewy bodies; two alpha2 macroglobulin polymorphisms were HDJ2 or HSP70 under the same rhodopsin promoter are currently described: a five nucletide deletion at the 5’ splice site of exon 18 characterized. Preliminary results on mice expressing mutant and a valine (Val) to isoleucine (Ile) exchange in aminoacid position ataxin-7 and HDJ2 suggest a specific partial reduction of histological 1000 near the thiolester active site. We present a study of these abnormalities. polymorphisms in a case-control sample consisting of 158 PD patients to verify if a potential functional alteration of this protein P0917. Ataxin-7, the gene product involved in would be a risk factor for PD. No significant difference regarding Spinocerebellar ataxia 7, interacts with Sprouty-1 and 2: allelic and genotypic distribution was found between cases and the Cbl-associated protein connection. controls between early and late onset PD patients. These data A. S. Lebre1, J. Takahashi2, H. Fujigasaki1, C. Duyckaerts2, J. H. suggest that these polymorphisms do not represent risk factors for Camonis3, A. Brice1; PD and do not modulate age at onset of PD. 1INSERM U289, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire de Neuropathologie, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3INSERM U528, Paris, P0915. Mammalian, yeast, bacterial and chemical France. chaperones reduce aggregate formation and death in a Spinocerebellar ataxia 7 (SCA7) is a neurodegenerative disease cell model of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy caused by a polyglutamine expansion in ataxin-7. The molecular Y. Bao, D. C. Rubinsztein; basis of SCA7 disease and the normal function of ataxin-7 remain Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United unknown. Since SCA7 patients have retinal degeneration, we used Kingdom. a two-hybrid approach to screen a human retina cDNA library for Autosomal dominant oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) ataxin-7 binding proteins and have isolated Sprouty-1. Sprouty was is characterized pathologically by intranuclear inclusions in skeletal genetically identified as an antagonist of fibroblast growth factor muscles and is caused by the expansion of a 10 alanine stretch to signaling during tracheal branching in Drosophila. To date, four 12-17 alanines in the intranuclear poly(A) binding protein 2 (PABP2). mammalian Sprouty genes have been identified. Human Sprouty- While PABP2 is a major component of the inclusions in OPMD, 1 was the most frequently cDNA isolated in this screening. By the pathogenic mechanisms causing disease are unknown. Here Northern blot, we observed that Sprouty-1 is expressed in brain 268 Posters - Neurogenetics 269 and peripheral tissues. As Sprouty-2 is also expressed in brain, presented similar features and both had cognitive disturbances. the subcellular localizations of Sprouty-1 and 2 were examined by Analysis of expanded alleles showed 55 CAG repeats in TBP gene in immunohistochemistry in mouse brain: both are expressed in the both sisters, with existing CAA interruptions. Purkinje cells affected in SCA7. The interaction between ataxin-7 Up to date, SCA1 and SCA2 were the only types of SCA we identified and Sprouty-1 and 2 were confirmed by GST pull-down. Sprouty among a large group of Polish patients. These results suggest that associates directly with c-Cbl, a known down-regulator of receptor SCA17 may be another, rare form of spinocerebellar ataxia in Poland. tyrosine kinase signaling. A short sequence in the N-terminus of the Sprouty proteins was found to bind directly to the RING finger P0920. Predictability of age at onset in Huntington domain of c-Cbl. Interestingly, we previously identified a variant of disease in the Dutch population another Cbl-associated protein, CAP, as an ataxin-7 binding protein A. Maat-Kievit1,2, M. Losekoot2, K. Zwinderman3, M. Vegter-van der which colocalized with mutated ataxin-7 in neuronal intranuclear Vlis2, R. Belfroid2, G. J. van Ommen2, R. Roos4; inclusions of SCA7 patients. More investigations are underway to 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, confirm and further characterize the role of Cbl and Cbl-associated Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, proteins in the normal function of ataxin-7 and their involvment in the Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Dept pathophysiology of SCA7. of Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Dept of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, P0918. Processing of Huntington’s Disease protein and Leiden, Netherlands. formation of intracellular aggregates. Huntington disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant, progressive Y. Trottier1, A. Lunkes2, K. S. Lindenberg3, L. Ben-Haiem1, D. Devys1, neuropsychiatric disorder with chorea, dementia and changes in G. B. Landwehrmeyer3, J. L. Mandel1; personality, mood and -behavior. The disease is incurable and leads 1IGBMC, Illkirch-Strasbourg, France, 2European Molecular Biology to death usually within 17 years after onset (range: 2 to 45 years). Organization, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Dept Neurology, University of The age at onset ranges from 2 to 80 years, with a mean between Ulm, Ulm, Germany. 46.0 and 48.9 years and the number of repeats, in the causal Huntington’s Disease (HD), an inherited neurodegenerative disorder, CAG repeat expansion, is inversely related to the age at onset and is caused by an expansion of a polyglutamine stretch localized accounts for 50-77% of the variation in age at onset. in the amino-terminal region of huntingtin, a cytoplasmic protein We analysed a Dutch cohort of 755 individuals retrospectively to of 350 kDa. The polyglutamine expansion, which modifies the assess the probability of onset for any given CAG repeat. antigenicity of huntingtin and promotes its aggregation, confers a The repeat size is the major determinant of age at onset, with a gain of “toxic” property by a yet unkown mechanism. Animal and correlation of -0.74, stronger (-0.84) in paternal than in maternal cellular model systems for HD suggest that processing of mutant inheritance (-0.64), consistent with increased repeat expansion huntingtin is a key event in the pathogenesis of HD, as mutant and stronger anticipation in the paternal line. The age at onset huntingtin breakdown products, which aggregate in cytoplasm and within families was more similar, than could be explained by the nucleus, are more harmful to neurons than the full length form. resemblance of the repeat size of persons in the same family. Studies on the proteolysis of huntingtin could reveal potentiel targets We hypothesised that if environmental factors were principally for therapeutic interventions by uncovering proteolytic sites. In this responsible for this familiar aggregation, one would expect a greater study, we focus on the characterization of the molecular nature of correlation for sibs than for parents and children. Our observations the inclusions and the proteolytic activities generating huntingtin suggest that genetic factors may play a greater role in the onset fragments, which aggregte in neurons. We report that cytoplasmic of HD than a shared environment. Finally we discuss several and nuclear aggregates detected in HD brain and in a neuronal cell explanations for the fact that the Dutch median age at onset for all model of HD are made up of huntingtin breakdown products differing expanded repeat sizes studied is significantly later -about 10 years- in size. The shorter of these fragments is the major huntingtin product than a Canadian study. that form aggregates in the nucleus, and is released by cleavage in a 10 aminoacid domain. Deletion and aminoacid replacement of the P0921. Genetic heterogeneity of Huntington’s Disease : proposed cleavage domain either abolishes or diminishes cleavage. screening of Huntington’s disease-like 1 and 2 loci We also provide evidence that these huntingtin fragments are G. Stevanin1, A. S. Lebre1, C. Jeannequin1, C. Julien1, A. Camuzat1, generated by proteases, which act in concert with the proteasome to R. Sahloul2, C. San3, R. L. Margolis4, C. Dode3, A. Durr1,5, A. Brice1,5; ensure the normal turn over of huntingtin. 1INSERM U289, Paris, France, 2-, Colombes, France, 3Groupe Hospitalier Cochin-Port Royal, Paris, France, 4John Hopkins P0919. SCA17 - a rare form of spinocerebellar ataxia University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 5Fédération de identified in Poland Neurologie et Département de Génétique, Cytogénétique et A. Sulek1, D. Hoffman-Zacharska1, E. Zdzienicka1, J. Empel2, J. Embryologie, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France. Zaremba1; Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant 1Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Warsaw neurodegenerative disorder resulting mainly from the loss of neurons Uniwersity, Warsaw, Poland. in the striatum. Patients suffer from progressive and unremitting Autosomal dominant ataxias are a group of neurodegenerative chorea, rigidity and cognitive impairment. A CAG repeat expansion disorders characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia of gait and in the IT15 gene on chromosome 4 accounts for 93% of typical HD limbs, dysarthria and other neurological signs. Several genes have cases in our series. Recently, 2 new mutations were reported in HD- been linked to different types of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs). like (HDL) patients : a 192 nucleotide insertion in the PRPN gene Six types of SCA (SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA6, SCA7 and DRPLA) encoding the prion protein (HDL1) and a CTG/CAG repeat expansion are caused by an expanded CAG repeats in coding region of in the gene encoding Junctophilin-3 (HDL2). We analyzed 74 HD corresponding genes. The frequency of particular types of SCAs patients without expansions in the IT15 and DRPLA genes for these present an ethnical diversity. 2 mutations. The 192 nucleotide insertion in the PRNP gene was In 2001, a new form of spinocerebellar ataxia - SCA17, with not detected in our series. The CAG/CTG repeat at the HDL2 locus expansion of CAG repeats in coding region of TBP gene was was polymorphic in the controls and ranged from 8 to 28 units with identified in a few Japanese families. Besides typical cerebellar ataxia a 62% heterozygosity rate. Only one Moroccan HD patient carried symptoms, patients with SCA17 presented extrapiramidal signs and 50 uninterrupted CTG/CAG repeats at the HDL2 locus. This patient, intellectual deterioration. a 44 year old woman with no know family history, presents with a 2 Analysis of CAG polymorphism in TBP gene was performed in Polish years duration of mild choreic movements of the face and extremities control group consisted of 100 unrelated, healthy individuals with no and sub-cortical dementia. Enlargement of the anterior horn of neurological signs. The non-pathogenic repeat number in our group the lateral ventricles was observed on cerebral MRI suggesting has ranged from 32 to 45 CAG. atrophy of the head of the caudate nucleus. Cortical atrophy was Molecular analysis among 50 Polish patients with other types of marked. In conclusion, CTG/CAG repeat expansions at the HDL2 SCA excluded, revealed one familial case with expansion of CAG locus account for 0.2% of our series of HDL patients while the 192 in TBP gene. The proband was a 38 year-old woman with ataxia, nucleotide insertion in the PRNP gene was not found. Further genetic bradykinesia, parkinsonism, dystonia and dementia. Her sister heterogeneity is then expected.Posters - Neurogenetics 270 271 isoform, polyglutamine tract length or the presence or absence of a P0922. Polyalanine accumulation and toxicity in a CAG putative nuclear localization sequence. However, the morphology of tract disorder, Machado-Joseph Disease. nuclear aggregation appears to depend upon polyglutamine length. A. Toulouse, C. Gaspar, D. Rochefort, J. Roussel, G. A. Rouleau; Ataxin-7 is implicated in apoptotic cytotoxicity by qualitative as well McGill University Health Centre Research Institute, Montreal, PQ, as quantitative parameters . Consistent with its nuclear localization Canada. and apoptotic propensity, ataxin-7 acts as a substrate for an activated Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is part of a group of caspase. Ataxin-7’s susceptibility to caspase action was eliminated by neurodegenerative disorders caused by the expansion of a mutation of specific residues. The data support a model whereby one polyglutamine-coding CAG repeat. A pathological hallmark of of ataxin-7’s roles in the nucleus is as a modulator these disorders is the presence of intranuclear inclusions (INIs) which are aggregates of insoluble proteins including the expanded P0925. Geldanamycin activates a heat shock response polyglutamine protein. The presence of such INIs in patient material and inhibits huntingtin aggregation in a cell culture and cellular models has lead to a cellular toxicity model. Similar INIs model of Huntington’s disease. are found in oculo-pharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD), which is A. Sittler1,2, R. Lurz2, G. Lueder2, J. Priller3, H. Lehrach2, M. Hayer- caused by the short expansion of an alanine-encoding GCG repeat. Hartl4, U. Hartl4, E. E. Wanker2; The similarities between OPMD and the CAG tract disorders INIs led 1IGBMC, CU Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 2Max Planck Institute of us to hypothesize that frameshifting events leading to polyalanine Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Charité, Humboldt-University, accumulation could contribute to the toxicity observed in CAG tract Berlin, Germany, 4Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, disorders. We previously demonstrated that such events occur in Germany. patient material and in a cellular model of MJD. Here we propose Huntington’s disease (HD) is a progressive neurodegenerative a frameshifting mechanism for CAG tracts involving RNA structure disorder with no effective treatment. The formation of neuronal formation, similar to that previously implicated in retroviral organisms. inclusions with aggregated huntingtin protein is associated with the We also investigate the role of polyalanine accumulation in the progressive neuropathology in HD. Our previous work suggested cellular toxicity observed in MJD. that inhibition of huntingtin protein aggregation in patients by small molecules could be a promising therapeutic strategy (Heiser et al, P0923. Episodic Ataxia 2, Spinocerebellar Ataxia 6 and 2000, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 6739-6744). Geldanamycin CACNA1A gene mutations. is a benzoquinone ansamycin that binds to the heat shock protein L. Veneziano1, S. Guida2, E. Mantuano1, L. D’Urbano2, S. Pagnutti3, Hsp90. Geldanamycin disrupts a complex consisting of Hsp90 and A. Tottene3, T. Fellin3, L. Verriello4, K. A. Stauderman5, M. E. the heat shock transcription factor HSF1 and triggers the activation of Williams5, D. Pietrobon3, C. Jodice2, M. Frontali6; a heat shock response in mammalian cells. In this study, we show by 1Istituto di Neurobiologia e Medicina Molecolare, C.N.R., Roma, Italy, using a filter retardation assay and immunofluorescence microscopy 2Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy, that treatment of mammalian cells with geldanamycin at nanomolar 3Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Padova, Padova, concentrations induces the expression of Hsp40, Hsp70 and Hsp90 Italy, 4Cattedra di Neurologia, Università di Udine, Udine, Italy, 5SIBIA and inhibits HD exon 1 protein aggregation in a dose-dependent Neurosciences, La Jolla, CA, 6Istituto di Neurobiologia e Medicina manner. Similar results were obtained by overexpression of Hsp70 Molecolare, CNR, Roma, Italy. and Hsp40 in a separate cell culture model of HD. This is the first CACNA1A gene encodes the a1A subunit of P/Q Ca2+channels and demonstration that huntingtin protein aggregation in cells can be its mutations are responsible for 3 disorders: Familial Hemiplegic suppressed by chemical compounds activating a specific heat shock Migraine (FHM), preferentially associated with missense mutations, response. These findings may provide the basis for the development Episodic Ataxia type 2 (EA2) and Spinicerebellar ataxia type 6, of a novel pharmacotherapy for HD and related glutamine repeat thought to be due, respectively, to premature stop mutations and to disorders. small expansions of a CAG repeat. A mutation screening, by SSCP and DHPLC, of the CACNA1A gene, P0926. Haplotypes in five Portuguese DRPLA families still ongoing, was performed on 26 ataxia patients from different I. Silveira1, T. Matamá1, S. Martins1, L. Guimarães1,2, J. Sequeiros1,2; families. So far 4 patients with a mutation of CACNA1A gene 1UnIGENe, IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2Icbas, Porto, Portugal. were identified. Two families showed a CAGn expansion, and 2 a The spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are neurodegenerative disorders previously undescribed point mutation: 1 missense and 1 deletion clinically and genetically very heterogeneous. Dentatorubropallid in frame. In addition single nucleotide substitutions have been oluysian atrophy (DRPLA) is a type of SCA, characterized by gait detected in introns or in exons, without aminoacid change, possibly ataxia, myoclonic epilepsy and dementia, due to a (CAG)n expansion affecting exon splicing enhancers sites. No mutations leading to on chromosome 12p13. DRPLA is prevalent in Japan, but several premature stop were so far identified. The clinical picture was that families of non-Japanese ancestry have been identified. Expanded of EA2 or of SCA6, showing once more the wide overlap between DRPLA alleles of Asian and Caucasian ancestry share a common the 2 disorders. The functional analysis of some of the above EA2 haplotype, which is associated with longer repeats commonly found point mutations favors the hypothesis of a loss of channel function. in Asians. Associations between prevalence of dominantly inherited Overall the present and literature data suggest that ataxia-causing SCAs and frequency of large normal alleles have indicated that these point mutations, different from those leading to truncated protein, are may contribute to the generation of expanded alleles. We identified relatively frequent and appear to be preferentially located in the III five families with DRPLA in Portugal. Interestingly, no association protein domain, while missense mutations causing FHM appear to be between the frequency of DRPLA and the frequency of large normal widely spread in all protein domains. alleles was found in the Portuguese population. To identify the Telethon Grant E847 to MF, Grant of Ministry of Health to MF and LM origin of the expanded DRPLA alleles in Portuguese we studied two previously reported intragenic polymorphisms in introns 1 (A1010G; P0924. Ataxin 7: A Nuclear Protein Involved In Caspase system A) and 3 (T1865C; system B). Polymorphisms were detected cleavage-mediated Apoptotic Cell Death by PCR-SSCP or/and sequencing. We found that all expanded L. G. Gouw1, S. S. Propp2, L. M. Ellerby2; DRPLA alleles in Portuguese share the same polymorphism in intron 1University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 2Buck Institute, Novato, CA. 3, which is common to that found in Asian expanded chromosomes. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7) is a polyglutamine disorder We are presently assessing the phase of expanded alleles with characterized by specific degeneration of cerebellar, brainstem system A. Our preliminary results, thus, seem to indicate that and retinal neurons. Although they share little sequence homology, expanded DRPLA alleles in Portuguese share a common haplotype. proteins implicated in other trinucleotide (CAG)n repeat disorders have similar attributes beyond their characteristic polyglutamine P0927. Familial essential tremor is not associated with tract and neurodegenerative pathology. These attributes include a SCA 12 mutation in southern Italy nuclear aggregation phenotype associated with apoptotic cell death F. Annesi1, G. Nicoletti2, S. Carrideo2, A. A. Pasqua2, P. Spadafora2, I. and roles as caspase substrates. In this study we present evidence C. Cirò Candiano2, D. Civitelli2, L. Mangone3, M. Zappia3, G. Annesi2; that ataxin-7, the product of the SCA7 gene, has a predominantly 1Insitute of Neurological Sciences National Research Council, nuclear distribution in HEK 293 cells that does not depend upon on Mangone (Cs), Italy, 2Institute of Neurological Sciences, National 270 Posters - Neurogenetics 271 Research Council, Mangone (CS), Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, 3Aventis-Pharma, Vitry, France, 4Hospital de Clinicas, Curibita, Brazil, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. 5CHU de Grenobles, Grenobles, France, 6Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias (ADCA) are a heterogeneous Birmingham, United Kingdom, 7Queen Square, London, United group of hereditary neurodegenerative disorders characterized Kingdom, 8Laboratorio Gentika, Curibita, Brazil, 9Aventis-Pharma, primarily by progressive cerebellar ataxia and classified clinically Paris, France. in various subgroups. Recently, Holmes et al. identified in a large Parkin gene mutations have been reported to be a major cause American pedigree of German descent, a novel form of ADCA of early onset parkinsonism in families with autosomal recessive termed spinocerebellar ataxia 12 (SCA 12). SCA 12 was mapped on inheritance and in isolated juvenile-onset parkinsonism (age at onset chromosome 5q31-33. Affected subjects had expansions containg <20 years). However, the precise frequency of parkin mutations in 66 to 78 CAG repeats in the 5’-untranslated region of the gene isolated cases is not known. In order to evaluate more accurately the encoding PPP2R2B, a brain-specific regulatory subunit of protein frequency of parkin mutations in patients with isolated early onset phosphatase PP2A, whereas controls had 7 to 28 repeats. SCA 12 parkinsonism, we studied 146 patients of various geographical origin is a slowly progressive ADCA that differs from other SCAs becouse with an age at onset <45 years. All were screened for mutations in it typically begins with tremor of head and arms, often diagnosed as the parkin gene with the use of semi-quantitative PCR combined essential tremor (ET). We conducted a study to screen individuals with the sequencing of the entire coding region. We identified parkin who presented with familial ET for SCA 12 mutation. Thirty index mutations in 20 patients including 4 new exons rearrangements and cases (12 men and 18 women, from families) with familial ET a new missense mutation. Taken together with our previous study underwent to DNA analysis for the SCA 12 mutation. As controls we (Lücking et al. 2000), these data show that parkin mutations account enrolled 58 (23 men and 35 women) healthy subjects. All cases and for at least 15% (38/246) of early-onset cases without family history, controls were from the same ethnic and socio-economic background a proportion significantly decreasing when age at onset increases. (Southern Italy). The range of allele size was 9 to 21 in both patients There were no clinical group differences between parkin cases and and controls; the most frequent allele was the 10 repeat allele (44.8% other patients with early onset parkinsonism. However, a single among controls, 43.3% among patients) no patient with ET presented case presenting with cerebellar ataxia several years before typical a repeat larger then 19. In the current study, no patient with familial parkinsonism allows to extend the spectrum of parkin disease. postural and tremor of head or arms harboured the SCA 12 mutation confirming that ET and SCA 12 are distinct diseases. P0931. Mutations in the ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein 1 gene (GDAP1) are P0928. A Family with Alzheimer’s Disease Caused by a associated with axonal or demyelinating recessive Novel APP Mutation (Thr714Ala) Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT). A. R. Noorian1, P. Pasalar1, B. Moghimi1, A. Jannati1, A. E. Nelis1, S. Erdem2, M. C. Belpaire-Dethiou3, A. Cuesta4, L. Soltanzadeh1, T. Krefft2, R. Crook3, H. Najmabadi4, J. Hardy3,5; Pedrola4, C. Verellen5, P. De Jonghe1,6, F. Palau4,7, P. Y. K. Van den 1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Bergh3, E. Tan2, H. Topaloglu8, V. Timmerman1; Iran, 2Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, 1Molecular Genetics Department, Flanders Interuniversity Institute FL, 3Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, of Biotechnology (VIB), Born-Bunge Foundation (BBS), University of 4Genetics Research Center the Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Antwerp (UIA), Antwerpen, Belgium, 2Department of Neurology and University., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Laboratory of Neuromuscular Diseases Research Laboratory, Hacettepe University, Neurogenetics, NIA/NIH, Building 10, 6C, Bethesda, MD. Ankara, Turkey, 3Centre de Référence Neuromusculaire, Cliniques Despite the fact that APP mutations were the first described cause of universitaires St-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain (UCL), Alzheimer`s Disease relatively few pathogenic mutations have been Brussels, Belgium, 4Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, described. Here we describe the occurrence of a novel APP mutation Instituto de Biomedicina, CSIC, Valencia, Spain, 5Unité de Génétique (T714A) in an Iranian family with documented affected individuals in Médicale, Université catholique de Louvain (UCL), Brussels, 3 generations. The phenotype in this family is similar to that of many Belgium, 6Department of Neurology, University Hospital Antwerp of the other families with APP mutations, with an onset age In the mid (UZA), Antwerpen, Belgium, 7Department of Genetics, Universitat 50. de Valencia, Burjassot, Spain, 8Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hacettepe Children’s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. P0929. Mutations in the parkin gene in patients from Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common inherited Russia is associated with parkinsonism peripheral neuropathy. The disease can be demyelinating as well O. Miloserdova1, S. Illarioshkin2, I. A. Ivanova-Smolenskaya2, S. as axonal and is inherited as an autosomal dominant, autosomal Selestova1, P. Slominsky1, S. A. Limborska1; recessive or X-linked trait. Mutations in the ganglioside-induced 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, differentiation-associated protein 1 gene (GDAP1) were recently 2Institute of Neurology, Moscow, Russian Federation. shown to be responsible for recessive CMT4A (chromosome Until now only two genes have been associated with PD coding for 8q21.1). GDAP1, comprising an ORF of 1077 nucleotides, encodes the proteins α-synuclein and parkin. Exonic deletion of the parkin a protein of 358 amino acids containing a glutathione S-transferase gene and parkin mutations have been assocoated with autosomal (GST) domain. GST enzymes are known to function in antioxidant recessive juvenile parkinsonism (with onset before age 40). We pathways and in detoxification. Therefore, GDAP1 might play a studied parkin gene mutations in 55 patients from Moscow. 1, 2, and role in protecting myelin membranes against free radical-mediated 7 exones were examined by SSCP analysis. We found an aberrant damage, to which it is susceptible. We screened the GDAP1 gene band pattern in exon 1 in 3 patients, in exon 2 in 1 patient and in for the presence of mutations in 7 recessive CMT families compatible exon 7 in 1 patient. Daughter of patient with alteration in exon 7 has with linkage to CMT4A. A homozygous nonsense mutation in exon the same pattern. 5 of GDAP1 (c.581C>G, S194X) was found in a consanguineous Subjects were screened for mutations in the PARK2 gene with use of Moroccan family. Clinical, electrophysiological and neuropathological a semiquantitative PCR assay that simultaneously amplified several examination of the patients showed an axonal CMT phenotype. exons too. We found alterations of gene dosage in 5 of 55 Moscow’s A homozygous 1 bp deletion in exon 6 (c.786delG, G262fsX284) patients with PD. Mutations included heterozygous deletion of exons of GDAP1 was identified in two probably related Turkish families. 4, 10 and 12, homozygous deletion of exon 5. Electrophysiological as well as neuropathological data support a Among the 55 patients with early-onset Parkinson disease, was demyelinating CMT phenotype. In a Turkish consanguineous family founding 10 (18%) PARK2 mutations. At present time our workgroup a homozygous missense mutation (c.844C>T, R282C) in exon 6 of continue searching mutations in other exons. GDAP1 was detected. Electrophysiological examination of the patient revealed an axonal CMT phenotype. In conclusion, we detected 3 P0930. Parkin mutations are frequent in patients with distinct homozygous GDAP1 mutations (a nonsense, a frameshift isolated early-onset parkinsonism and a missense mutation) in families with recessive CMT. The CMT M. Periquet1, M. Latouche1, E. Lohmann1, N. Rawal1, G. De Michele2, phenotype associated with GDAP1 mutations can be axonal as well S. Ricard3, H. Teive4, A. Ouvrard-Hernandez5, D. Nicholl6, N. W. as demyelinating. Wood7, S. Raskin8, J. Deleuze9, Y. Agid1, A. Dürr1, A. Brice1; 1Inserm U289, Paris, France, 2Universita Federico II, Naples, Italy, Posters - Neurogenetics 272 273 P0932. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1B (CMT1B): P0934. A novel PLP mutation in X-linked hereditary GFP is a versatile tool to visualize in vivo effects of spastic paraplegia (SPG2) further broadens the extent of Myelin Protein Zero (P0) mutations. heterogeneity at this locus. A. B. Ekici1, S. Oezbey1, E. Nelis2, C. Van Broeckhoven2, M. C. K. Hand, M. Dubé, M. Shevell, G. A. Rouleau; Schachner3, B. W. Rautenstrauss1; McGill University Health Centre Research Institute, Montreal, PQ, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Laboratory of Canada. Neurogenetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Centre for Hereditary Spastic paraplegias (HSP) are a large group of genetically Molecular Neurobiology, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorders. The disease is P0 is a well characterized cell adhesion molecule playing a crucial characterized by progressive lower limb spasticity. Three X linked role during myelination in the peripheral nervous system. GFP is a HSP loci have been identified and mutations in the proteolipid helpful tool to observe cellular events in vivo and is frequently used protein (PLP) gene have been identified in families linked to the for this purpose in various cells or even organisms. P0 mutations uncomplicated SPG2 locus on Xq22. The PLP gene encodes 2 cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1B (CMT1B), Dejerine- myelin proteins in the CNS, PLP and DM20 by alternate splicing. Sottas-Syndrome (DSS) and congenital hypomyelination (CH), Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is an X-linked recessive diseases of widely varying phenotypes, even if the same position is disorder which is also caused by PLP mutations. PMD normally substituted by different amino acids. We used two insect cell lines, manifests in infancy or early childhood with nystagmus and cognitive S2 and HighFive, in order to develop an adhesion test system to impairment with progression to severe spasticity and ataxia. The determine in vivo effects of P0 mutations. We analyzed 3 pathogenic most common mutation in PMD is a duplication of the entire PLP mutations for their effect on adhesion capability in a S2 cell system gene, resulting in a mild phenotype, while point mutations often result and found a direct correlation of adhesion capability and severity of in a more severe disease. the disease phenotype. Subsequently we constructed fusion proteins Here we present findings in a large French Canadian family with a with GFP for P0wt and the Ala221fs mutation to visualize the effect complicated X-linked recessive HSP linked to the SPG2 locus. The in vivo both on the intracellular localization and on the changes in proband has been wheelchair-bound since the age of 3 years and the adhesion capability. The GFP-P0wt fusion revealed the expected at 11 years old he presents a severe spastic paraplegia, mild upper adhesion capability and moreover the membrane insertion of the limb spasticity and mild developmental delay. Mutation analysis of the fusion protein was clearly visible using a fluorescent microscope. The PLP gene identified a segregating mutation in the initiation codon. Ala221fs mutation is expressed, however, no membrane insertion This G to A mutation is expected to result in complete absence of takes place. This may explaine the lack of its adhesion capability. PLP. Mutations in this codon have been identified in PMD patients Hence, this system is suitable to predict the severity of the phenotype with mild forms of the disease, but not in HSP, thus extending the based on expression of in vitro mutated P0 and to visualize the effect spectrum of mutations found in these allelic disorders and indicates of mutations in vivo. further clinical heterogeneity than previously thought. P0933. Genetics of X-linked congenital cerebellar P0935. Refined SPG11 locus in autosomal recessive atrophy(XCA) hereditary spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum G. Zanni1,2, V. des Portes1, K. Poirier1, S. Illarioshkin3, E. Bertini2, J. G. Montagna1, E. M. Valente2, E. Bertini1, F. Brancati2, F. M. Chelly1; Santorelli1,3, B. Dallapiccola2,4, C. Casali3; 1ICGM Cochin Port-Royal INSERM U129, Paris, France, 2Bambin 1Bambino Gesù Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2CSS-Mendel, Rome, Italy, Gesu’ Childrens’ Hospital Dept of Molecular Medicine, Rome, 3Inst.of Neurology, La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 4Inst. of Italy, 3Department of Neurogenetics, Russian Academy of Medical Genetics-La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy. Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. Objective: To study nine Italian families with Hereditary Spastic X-linked congenital cerebellar atrophy (XCA) is a rare genetic Paraplegia (HSP) and thin corpus callosum (TCC). disorder characterized by severe hypotonia at birth, delayed motor Background: HSP is a genetically heterogeneous group of upper development, dysarthria, slow eye movements and nonprogressive motor neuron syndromes and has been divided into pure and ataxia with normal/borderline intelligence. Global cerebellar complicated forms. Both forms are classified by inheritance: hypoplasia is generally evident after age 2. autosomal dominant (AD), recessive (AR), X-linked. Complicated The XCA locus was assigned to a large genetic interval of 54cM HSP is mainly recessive and five loci have been mapped. A locus on on Xp11.21-Xq24, flanked by markers DXS991 and DXS1001 chromosome 15q13-15 (SPG11) has been identified in Italian and (Illarioshkin et al 1996) American pedigrees and in Japanese AR-HSP+TCC families. In two additional XCA families an exclusion mapping strategy was Methods: We studied a total of 39 individuals from nine non- adopted, consanguineous Italian families with AR-HSP+TCC. Genetic reducing the critical interval to two subregions: Xp11.21-q21.33 linkage analyses were carried out with polymorphic DNA markers and Xq23-q24 flanked by markers DXS991-DXS990 and DSX424- of 15q13-15 using an ABI 3100 Sequencer. Pairwise LOD scores DXS1001 respectively (Bertini et al 2000). were obtained using the FASTLINK version of the MLINK program. We have been initially focusing on the Xp11.21-Xq13 subregion. Multipoint LOD scores were generated by use of SIMWALK2. Genes or transcripts identified by bioinformatic tools, have been Results: Linkage with the SPG11 region could neither be confirmed screened by RT-PCR to test their expression profile in the cerebellum nor excluded with certainty in five families. Three families showed and other tissues. Out of 77 genes, 59 have been found positive evidence for linkage to the SPG11 locus. Analysis of recombination for cerebellum expression. Candidate genes have been selected events combined with data from published pedigrees narrowed the and tested for mutation screening by DGGE, DHPLC or direct SPG11 locus to a 17.7 cM region. The upper extent of the region is sequencing,according to the following criteria: between markers D15S1007 and D15S971, while the lower extent 1)genes or their homologs strongly expressed during cerebellar of the region is between markers D15S659 and D15S978. In one development:EPLG2, LMO6 family, linkage to SPG11 could be excluded, supporting genetic 2)genes in which mutation or disruption resulted in cerebellar defects heterogeneity. in either human pathology or animal models:CXCR3, NDUFA1 Conclusions: Our analyses suggested that AR-HSP+TCC is more 3) Xq deletion associated with cerebellar hypoplasia.(AR and OPHN1 frequent than previously believed in Italy, narrowed the SPG11 locus, genes are deleted resulting in a contiguous gene syndrome with and corroborated genetic heterogeneity in AR-HSP. mental retardation and androgen insensitivity) The involvement of Supported by the Italian Ministry of Health and MIUR OPHN1 gene in XCA was also excluded. Additional XCA families are being recruited to further narrow down P0936. Autosomal recessive ataxias: a new gene the critical interval. – aprataxin – responsible for ataxia-ocular apraxia 1, and The project is funded by Italian Telethon (492/B) a new locus on 9q34 M. C. Moreira1,2, S. Klur1, C. Barbot2,3, N. Tachi4, P. Bomont1, M. Watanabe5, M. Shoji5, J. M. Warter6, P. Aubourg7, A. Dürr8, A. H. Németh9, R. Amouri10, F. Hentati10, A. Alurkar11, D. Divekar11, P. Mendonça12, J. Sequeiros2, P. Coutinho2,13, M. Koenig1;272 Posters - Neurogenetics 273 1IGBMC - CNRS, INSERM, ULP, Strasbourg / Illkirch, France, P0938. De Novo mutations in the sodium channel gene 2UnIGENe - IBMC, ICBAS Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Hospital de SCN1A cause severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy Crianças Maria Pia, Porto, Portugal, 4School of Health Sciences, L. R. F. Claes1, J. Del-Favero1, B. Ceulemans2, L. Lagae3, C. Van Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, Japan, 5Department of Broeckhoven1, P. De Jonghe2; Neurology, Gunma University School of Medicine, Maebashi, Japan, 1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2University Hospital 6Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Civil, Strasbourg, France, 7Hôpital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Saint Vincent de Paul, Pédiatrie C, Paris, France, 8INSERM U289, Leuven, Belgium. Département de Génétique, Cytogénétique et Embryologie, et Severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI) is a rare disorder Fédération de Neurologie, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France, occurring in patients without a family history of a similar disorder. 9Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics and Department of Early manifestations of the disease are tonic, clonic and tonic-clonic Clinical Genetics, The Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, seizures occurring within the first year of life. These seizures are 10Institut National de Neurologie, Tunis, Tunisia, 11Pune Institute of often prolonged, generalized and associated with fever. Later in life, Neurology, Pune, India, 12Department of Hematology, Hospital do SMEI patients suffer from afebrile seizures, including myoclonic, Divino Espirito Santo, S. Miguel, Açores, Portugal, 13Hospital Säo tonic-clonic, absences, simple and complex partial seizures. Sebastiäo, Sta. Maria da Feira, Portugal. Early psychomotor and speech development is normal, but in the The newly recognized ataxia-ocular apraxia 1 is the most frequent second year of life developmental stagnation occurs. Patients often cause of autosomal recessive ataxia in Japan and is second only to become ataxic and speech development is delayed. In general, Friedreich ataxia in Portugal. It shares several neurological features SMEI is very resistant to all anti-epileptic drugs. A mild type of with ataxia-telangiectasia, including early onset ataxia, oculomotor epilepsy associated with febrile and occasionally afebrile seizures in apraxia and cerebellar atrophy. However, it does not share its adulthood is generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+). extraneurological features (immune deficiency, chromosomal Missense mutations in the gene coding for a neuronal voltage- instability and hypersensitivity to X-rays). AOA1 is also characterized gated sodium channel α-subunit (SCN1A) were identified in families by axonal motor neuropathy and the later decrease of serum with GEFS+. Since both GEFS+ and SMEI show fever-associated albumin levels and elevation of total cholesterol. We have identified seizures we screened 13 unrelated SMEI patients for mutations in the gene causing AOA1 and the major Portuguese and Japanese SCN1A. Mutation analysis was performed using DHPLC and DNA mutations. This gene encodes aprataxin, a new and ubiquitously sequencing. We identified a single heterozygous mutation in each expressed protein, comprising three domains that share distant patient: 4 frameshift, 2 nonsense, 2 splice donor and 5 missense homology with the amino-terminal domain of polynucleotide 5’- mutations. Using a multi-allelic marker we genotyped the patients kinase 3’-phosphatase (PNKP), with histidine-triad (HIT) proteins and the parents to confirm paternity. Sequencing demonstrated and with DNA-binding C2H2 zinc-finger proteins, respectively. The that all mutations are de novo mutations. Pyrosequencing was results suggest that aprataxin is a nuclear protein with a role in DNA used to confirm that none of the mutations occurred in 184 control repair, reminiscent of the function of the protein defective in ataxia- chromosomes. telangiectasia, but would cause a phenotype restricted to neurological signs when mutant. P0939. Disruption of the serine threonine kinase 9 gene A second AOA locus - on 9q34 - was initially identified in a Japanese (STK9) as the cause of X-linked infantile spasms and a Pakistanese family. We have since then identified families V. M. Kalscheuer1, T. Jiong1, G. Hollway2, E. Schwinger3, M. from Portugal, France, Algeria and Turkey. In most cases, we found Hoeltzenbein1, H. Eyre2, N. Tommerup4, H. H. Ropers1, J. Gecz2; an association with elevated serum alfa-fetoprotein, adolescent age 1Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, of onset, and ocular apraxia defined by hypometric saccades. The 2Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Women’s and critical interval was reduced to a 3 cM region. Children’s Hospital, and Department of Paediatrics (J.G.) University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 3Institute for Human Genetics, P0937. Infantile Onset Progressive Ascending Spastic Universitätsklinikum Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 4Wilhelm Johannsen Paralysis is Linkes to ALS2/Alsin Gene on 2q33-35 Centre for Functional Genome Research, IMBG, The Panum E. Eymard-Pierre1, E. Bertini2, G. Lesca3, M. di Capua2, R. Cusmai2, Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. V. Leuzzi4, A. Ponsone5, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1,6; X-linked infantile spasms (ISSX) or West-syndrome (WS) are 1INSERM U384, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2Dept of Pediatric characterised by onset of generalized seizures between 3 and Neurology, Bambino Gesu Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Service 7 months of age, hypsarrhythmia on the electroencephalogram de Génétique, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France, 4La Sapienza, (EEG) and mental retardation (MR). In the pursuit of the ISSX/WS Roma, Italy, 5Ospedale Infantile Regina Margarita, Torino, Italy, gene we have acquired two patients with balanced translocations 6Fédération Génétique Auvergne, CHU, Clermont-Ferrand, France. 46,X,t(X;6)(p22.3;q14) and 46,X,t(X;7)(p22.3;p15) and clinical We report on 15 patients from 10 families (4 familial and 6 sporadic features of severe ISSX/WS. Both patients had early onset of forms) who presented severe progressive ascending spastic seizures at age 2-3 month, and developmental arrest with profound paralysis. They were considered normal at birth and spastic mental retardation. Cloning of the X-chromosome breakpoints paraplegia initiated during the two first years of life. Weakness and revealed the serine threonine kinase 9 gene (STK9, Montini spasticity extended to upper limbs around the age of 7-8 years. The et al. Genomics 51:247-433, 1998) to be interrupted by these patients were all wheel-chair bound by the age of 10 years and during rearrangements. Mutation screening of the 21 exons of the STK9 the second decade the disease progressed to tetraplegia, anarthria, gene in three ISSX families was negative. In the meantime the dysphagia and slow eye movements. Muscle Biopsy and EMG were ISSX/WS gene interval was refined on one Canadian family to ~7cM normal, PEM showed abolition of corticospinal response en contrast region in Xp21.3-Xp22.1 (Bruyere et al. Clin Genet 55:173-181, with normal SEP. Genotyping analysis excluded linkage to previously 1999); importantly, excluding the STK9 gene. More recently, the ISSX reported loci for dominant as well as and recessive Hereditary gene (MIM # 308350) has been identified from this interval (J. Gecz, Spastic Paraplegia and established linkage to ALS2 locus on unpublished). Based on the identical phenotype of our two patients chromosome 2q33-35 with a lod score of 6.66, raising the possibility with balanced X-autosome translocations we suggest, that there that this infantile onset ascending spinobulbar paralysis is allelic are at least two genes for ISSX on the human X-chromosome. We to the condition previously reported as juvenile amiotrophic lateral propose, that lack of a functional Stk9 protein is responsible for a sclerosis (ALS2). Therefore, we tested as gene candidate the ALS/ severe form of West-syndrome. Alsin gene recently reported mutated in 3 families consanguineous Arabic families with ALS2 and 1 consanguineous Saudi family with a P0940. Implication of the GABAA receptor in familial childhood-onset primary lateral sclerosis (PLS). Alsin mutations were epilepsy with febrile seizures found in 4 families: 3 deletions and 1 splice site mutation leading S. Baulac1, I. An-Gourfinkel2, G. Huberfeld1, M. Baulac2, A. Brice1, R. to truncated Alsin protein. In the six remaining families absence Bruzzone3, E. Le Guern1; ALS2/Alsin gene mutation suggest an heterogeneity in infantile onset 1INSERM U289, Pitié-Salpetriere hospital, France, 2Epilepsy center, progressive ascending spastic paralysis. Pitié-Salpetriere hospital, France, 3NSNR, Institut Pasteur, France. GABAergic neurotransmission is known to be involved in epilepsy since many decades. We report a K289M mutation in the GABAA Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 274 275 receptor gamma2 subunit gene (GABRG2) that segregated in a same Dandy-Walker malformation. family with a phenotype closely related to Generalized Epilepsy with It was concluded that, family history, sonographic examination, Febrile Seizures Plus (GEFS+), an autosomal dominant disorder measurement of serum or amniotic fluid alpha-fetoprotein have associating febrile seizures and generalized epilepsy that had so crucial importance in genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis of far been linked only to mutations in sodium channel genes. The MGS. K289M mutation affects a highly conserved residue located in the extracellular loop between transmembrane segments M2 and M3. P0943. Anxiety of mothers participating in second Functional analysis in Xenopus oocytes confirmed the genetic trimester screening for Downs syndrome evidence of the implication of this mutation. The K289M mutation S. Vejvalková, M. Simandlova, M. Havlovicová, V. Krutílková, M. caused a dramatic decrease in the amplitude of GABA-activated Malíková, E. Seemanova, P. Goetz; currents compared to wild-type receptor. This study provides the UBLG, FN Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. first genetic evidence that a GABAA receptor is directly involved in a Objective : To test the anxiety during second trimester serum human idiopathic epilepsy. screening for Downs syndrome, we compared 253 mothers with false positive result of second trimester screening and 183 mothers , who P0941. Molecular characterisation of a 11q14.3 underwent invasive prenatal diagnosis because of age . microdeletion associated with leukodystrophy of Methods: We interviewed all mothers 3-8 years after birth of their unknown cause. healthy baby and asked them about their anxiety during the time B. Arveiler1, C. Goizet1, I. Coupry1, L. Taine2, C. Rooryck1, D. of waiting on the result of karyotype obtained from amniotic cells. Lacombe2; Women were asked to choose one number of 7 point scale (0-6), 1Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France, 2CHU de the individual numbers marked the level of anxiety (stress).We Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. asked them also about their attitudes towards eventual termination We have previously described a de novo 11q14.3 microdeletion in of pregnancy (TOP) in the speculative case, that karyotype would a boy with leukodystrophy of unknown cause and oculocutaneous be abnormal and we asked them about their opinion of genetic albinism. The detection of this chromosomal rearrangement revealed investigation during pregnancy. a new chromosomal region susceptible to bear a gene involved in the Results: Median of anxiety features in the group of mothers with false pathogenesis of leukodystrophy. We have molecularly characterized positive results was 4, median in second group was 3. The result is this microdeletion in order to identify the causative gene. Eighteen statistically significant ( p value <0,0005). Statistically significant is polymorphic microsatellite markers mapped in 11q14.3 were selected also the difference in the number of women with positive attitudes to test the patient for hemizygosity. The maternal alleles of two of towards eventual TOP (63,2% vs. 75,4%, p value = 0,020 ) and them, D11S1780 and D11S1367, were deleted, while eleven were not suitability of genetic investigation during pregnancy.( 83% vs. 91,8%, and five were uninformative. The genetic size of the defined region p value =0,018). is 2.4 cM. We have constructed a contig of BACs encompassing the entire region of interest that allowed us to obtain a physical map of P0944. The fetal neurology clinic. A multidisciplinary this region. Only one gap of unknown size persists among this BAC approach for the treatment of the fetus with suspected contig. The DNA of several BACs from this contig was extracted nervous system pathology. and used as molecular probes for FISH analysis on patient’s D. Lev1,2, T. Lerman-Sagie1,3, N. Zahalkah1,4, C. Vinkler1,2, M. Yanoov- chromosomes. The size of the deleted region was reduced to 2 Mb. Sharav1,2, L. Ben-Sira5, D. Kidron6, M. Glezerman1,4, G. Malinger1,7; Sequence annotation of this region was performed in order to identify 1Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, candidate genes implicated in leukodystrophy determinism. We Holon, Israel, 3Pediatric Neurology Unit, Holon, Israel, 4Department of are now testing the potential implication of these candidate genes Obstetrics and Gynecology, Holon, Israel, 5Tel Aviv Medical Center, both in our patient and in a group of children with leukodystrophy of Tel Aviv, Israel, 6Pinhas Sapir Medical Center, Kfar-Saba, Israel, unknown cause. Identification of the causative gene will be useful for 7Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, Holon, Israel. elucidation of the molecular bases of leukodystrophies, the cause of Congenital nervous system anomalies are the second most common which remains unknown in 30% of cases. congenital anomalies and the most frequent cause of malpractice litigation in the field of prenatal diagnosis. The difficulty in diagnosis P 20. Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics resides in various factors: difficult approach to the fetal brain by standard ultrasound, late development of some brain structures and P0942. Prenatal Diagnosis of Meckel Gruber Syndrome possible lack of neuroanatomic and neuropathologic experience by and Dandy-Walker Malformation in four affected most sonographers. We reviewed all the cases referred to the Fetal consecutive siblings, the fourth one diagnosed at 22 Neurology Clinic at The Edith Wolfson Medical Center during a 2-year weeks’ of gestation period between November 1999 and October 2001. S. Balci1, F. Teksen2, F. Dökmeci3, B. Cengiz3, R. B. Cömert4, B. During this period 128 patients were referred to the Clinic, and Can5, S. Özdamar5; 187 examinations were performed (1.46 examinations/patient).The 1Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Division of Clinical ultrasound findings and the patients’ follow up are summarized. Our Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara University, Faculty of Health team recommended continuing the pregnancy with regular follow up Education, Department of Basic Health Sciences, Ankara, Turkey, in 59.4% of the patients, in 15.6% the findings were so serious that 3Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics termination of pregnancy was advised and in 10.6% we advised the and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Hacettepe University , Faculty patients to consider termination of pregnancy, 7.8% of the patients of Medicine, Department of Radiology, Ankara, Turkey, 5Hacettepe were referred for MRI and 7% for amniocentesis. University , Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Ankara, The fertile interaction between the different sub-specialties involved Turkey. in counseling helped in the differentiation between normal and Meckel Gruber syndrome (MGS) is a rare autosomal recessive pathologic cases. In cases with suspected pathology, the team disorder characterized by posterior encephalocele, post-axial discusses with the parents the possible implications and the meaning polydactyly and dysplastic, polycystic kidneys. of the diagnosis, based on the conjoined clinical experience of the We report a 23 weeks’ old male fetus affected by Meckel Gruber team. This approach enables optimal perinatal management of the syndrome. Posterior encephalocele, post-axial polydactyly, Dandy- pregnancy. Walker malformation were observed in the ultrasonographic (USG) examination at 22 weeks’ of gestation but lisencephaly and P0945. Detection of fetal cell in a minimal amount of holoprosencephaly were demonstrated with post mortem magnetic maternal blood using HbF staining and polymerase chain resonance (MR) before the autopsy. After the termination of the reaction pregnancy, polycystic dysplastic kidneys were also noted in the post T. Karuppiah, R. Rosli; mortem investigation. Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia. The proband was the fourth pregnancy of a consanguineous family The available fetal cells in maternal blood give a potential source which the all three siblings were also affected similarly. Interestingly, for the detection of fetal abnormalities without risk to the fetus. We the 2 years old affected sister and 23 week’s old male fetus had the attempted to detect fetal cells and fetal DNA in a minimal amount 274 Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 275 of maternal blood obtained from forearm and fingertip. Fetal cells P0948. The incidence of confined placental mosaicism in were isolated from 1 µl of maternal blood by fetal hemoglobin (HbF) non-cultured cells of human spontaneous abortions staining and microdissection, while DNA was extracted from 200 µl I. N. Lebedev, N. V. Ostroverkhova, S. A. Nazarenko; of maternal blood. The isolated fetal cells and DNA were analyzed Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. by polymerase chain reaction using Y chromosome specific primers. One of the most important conceptions over the past few years in These techniques correctly identified the sex of the fetus in all interpretation of the pathogenesis of abnormal intrauterine human pregnancies tested. Our study showed that fetal DNA could be development is the statement about possible discrepancies between detected in maternal blood obtained from fingertip at 6 weeks of karyotype of cells of embryonic and placental origin. During prenatal gestation. The findings suggest that prenatal diagnosis can be carried diagnosis the incidence of confined placental mosaicism is evaluated out as early as 6 weeks of gestation with a small amount of maternal usually about 1-2%. In order to determine the influence of distribution blood using the inexpensive techniques mentioned above. of cells with chromosomal abnormalities in placental tissues on arrest of embryo development the non-cultured cells from cytotrophoblast P0946. Trends In Live Birth Prevalence Of Congenital and extraembryonic mesoderm of 28 first trimester internal abortions Anomalies. 1979-1999 : The Impact Of Prenatal Diagnosis were studied by interphase FISH analysis with centromere-specific C. Stoll, Y. Alembik, M. Roth, B. Dott; DNA probes for each chromosome. 7 discrepancies (25%) between Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France. karyotypes of two studied tissues were found. Cell lines with trisomy Objectives: To describe the impact of prenatal diagnosis on the birth 7, trisomy 8, monosomy 15 were confined to cytotrophoblast prevalence of congenital anomalies during 21 years (1979-1999) in a whereas the karyotype of extraembryonic mesoderm cells was well defined population. normal. One embryo has mosaic monosomy 7 in cytotrophoblast Design: A descriptive population-based study. only but in mesoderm the tetraploidy/diploidy mosaicism was Setting: Northeastern France (13,500 births per year). detected. Two abortions have chromosome aberrations both in Methods: Analysis of data from multiple sources on births and cytotrophoblast and extraembryonic mesoderm but in former the terminations of pregnancy after prenatal diagnosis of congenital chromosomal abnormalities were in mosaic form with normal cell anomalies in 265,679 consecutive pregnancies of known outcome. line whereas in later only the cells with abnormal karyotype were The study period was divided into 3 subgroups 1979-88, 1989-93 and detected. One embryo has 45,X/46,XY/46,XX/47,XXY karyotype in 1994-99. cytotrophoblast and 45,X/46,XY/46,XX in mesoderm. Our data based Results: Between 1979 and 1988 and 1993 and 1999 prenatal on analysis of non-cultured cells indicates that the tissue-specific detection of congenital anomalies increased from 11.7% to 25.5% compartmentalization of cell lines with chromosomal abnormalities and to 31.9%. Termination of pregnancy (TOP) increased in the may have a significant influence on pathogenesis of early embryo same proportions during the 3 time periods. However the increase development. of TOP was much higher for chromosomal anomalies than for non chromosomal congenital anomalies : 21.7, 43.9 and 64.0 vs 4.8, 7.3, P0949. Fetal erythroblasts are not the source of cell free and 10.2 respectively. The birth prevalence of Down syndrome fell fetal DNA in the maternal circulation by 80% from 1979-88 to 1994-99. Sensitivity of prenatal detection of X. Zhong1, W. Holzgreve2, S. Hahn3; congenital anomalies and TOPs were lower for isolated cases (only 1Prenatal Medicine, Women’s Hospital, University Basel, Basel, one malformation present in the fetus) than for multiple malformations Switzerland, 2Prenatal Medicine, Women’s hospital, University Basel, in the same fetus. Sensitivity varied with the type of malformations Basel, Switzerland, 3Prenatal Medicine, Women’s Hospital,, Basel, : it was high for neural tube defect (79.7%) and urinary anomalies Switzerland. (54.8%) and low for congenital heart defects (25.3%) and for oral Fetal cells, specifically fetal erythroblasts, as well as cell free fetal clefts (27.6%) DNA are present in the maternal circulation. Both are currently being Conclusions: The introduction of routine prenatal diagnosis has investigated as a means for the non-invasive risk free analysis resulted in a significant fall in the birth prevalence of congenital of fetal genetic traits. The origin of cell free fetal DNA is currently anomalies. However this fall varied with the types of congenital unclear. It has been proposed that trafficking fetal erythroblasts anomalies. may be one source. This is partly due to the apoptotic character that a significant proportion of fetal erythroblasts display, and since P0947. Congenital deficiency of alpha fetoprotein and elevations in both fetal erythroblast numbers as well as cell free fetal associated chromosomal abnormality in the placenta DNA concentrations have been noted in several pregnancy related R. Sharony1, A. Amiel1, N. Bouaron1, D. Kidron2, D. Itzhaky3, M. pathologies. Our examination of fetal cell trafficking and release of Fejgin1; cell free fetal DNA in normal and affected pregnancies indicates that 1The Genetic Institute, Sapir Medical Center - Meir Hospital, Kfar no correlation exists between these two fetal molecular and cellular Saba, Israel, 2The Pathology Institute, Sapir Medical Center - Meir species. This is most evident in pregnancies affected by onset of Hospital., Kfar Saba, Israel, 3The Immunology Laboratoy, Sapir pre-term labour, where significant elevations in cell free fetal DNA Medical Center - Meir Hospital, Kfar Saba, Israel. concentrations were detected without any concomitant elevation The role of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is unknown for the most part. in fetal erythroblast numbers. Our data therefore suggest that an Several functions of AFP during fetal life have been suggested: alternative cell type is the source of cell free fetal DNA. Furthermore, regulation of osmotic pressure, mediation of the immune system and it appears that the release of cell free fetal DNA from this cell type is growth control. In this report we describe two cases of congenital affected by pathological placental conditions which are not associated absence of AFP that were identified by the current methods of with an increase in fetal cell trafficking. detection. The pathological examination results, including an immunohistochemical stain, which refine the levels of AFP detected P0950. Numerous NRBCs in the fetal circulation display by the biochemical studies, are enclosed. In order to exclude an apoptotic phenotype chromosomal anomalies in the placentae, we preformed complete S. Hristoskowa, W. Holzgreve, S. Hahn; genomic hybridization analysis on both placentae.Both placentae University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. showed monosomy 16, which was confirmed by FISH. It has been Non-invasive risk free prenatal diagnosis can be achieved by the reported that tissue-specific expression of the AFP gene is strongly analysis of intact fetal cells and cell free fetal DNA in the maternal stimulated by an enhancer present 3.3 to 4.9 kb upstream of the circulation. The relationship between these two fetal cellular and transcription initiation site mapped to 16q22.3-q23.1.An overview of molecular analytes is unclear. Recent data have shown that apoptotic the molecular biology of AFP production is set forth. An explanation fetal cells can be detected in plasma of pregnant women and that is suggested for the lack of symptoms in a newborn of undetected many fetal nucleated red blood cells (NRBCs) in the maternal levels of AFP and the mechanism by which this condition might occur. circulation were TUNEL positive. It has, therefore, been suggested This may shed light on the mechanism by which this rare condition is that the maternal immune system may clear NRBCs by apoptosis and generated and the lack of any symptoms in affected newborns that this leads to the production of circulatory fetal DNA. On the other hand, this apoptotic phenotype may be associated with erythroid differentiation and enucleation. For this purpose we have examined whether apoptosis occurs in fetal Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 276 277 NRBCs that have crossed into the maternal circulation or rather if this reliably determine the RhD zygosity of male partners in pregnancies is a physiological phenomenon of NRBC maturation which occurs at risk for HDN. when these cells are still in the fetal circulation. Our study, performed on fetal blood samples (n=12), showed that P0953. Hirschprung’s disease or Meconium Plug more than 60% of the NRBCs were TUNEL positive. This was true Syndrome-a ten years experience for both cord blood (n=10) samples collected at term as well as those E. Boia1, M. Boia1, M. Puiu2; obtained from early stages of gestation (13-16 weeks: n=2). Virtually 1University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2University none of the fetal lymphocytes exhibited such a characteristic. of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dep. Genetics, Timisoara, Romania. The apoptotic phenotype displayed by NRBCs therefore does not The study’s specific objectives were: to estabilish the rate of appear to be due to an interaction with the maternal immune system. occurancy of the meconium plug syndrome in newborne as a This phenotype may, however, help account for the poor analysis of cause of intestinal obstruction; to certifie the role of different clinical NRBCs by FISH or PCR. presentations of the syndrome in a proper diagnosis; to verifie the main methods used in early differentiation from Hirschprung’s P0951. Cerebral malformations-positive diagnosis disease in neonatal periode. M. Boia1, V. Botiu2, E. Boia3, M. Puiu4, C. Ilie5, N. Pavel6; The authors are studing all newborns hospitalised in our 1University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2University departaments presentind signs and symptoms of intestinal of Medicine & Pharmacy, Neonatology and Puericulture Clinic, obstruction between 1992-2001. Timisoara, Romania, 3of Medicine & Pharmacy, Pediatric Surgery Sumary of results: In the last decade the authors hospitalised 58 and Ortopedy Clinic, Timisoara, Romania, 4of Medicine & Pharmacy, cases of newborns with intestinal obstructions inclouding intestinal Department of Medical Genetic, Timisoara, Romania, 5of Medicine & atresia and stenosis (19 cases), meconium ileus (6 cases), Pharmacy, Neonatology and Puericulture Clinic, Timisoara, Romania, necrotizing enterocolitis (3 cases), Hirschprung’s disease (10 cases), 6District Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. malrotation (4 cases, meconium peritonitis (3 cases) and meconium Purpose: the diagnostic froming of ultrasound detected lesions, plug syndrom (13 cases). After exclouding the other causes of establisment of a correlation between ultrasound and clinical sings, intestinal obstruction, the authors corelated meconium plug syndrom establisment of evolutive stages and terapeutical indications for a with prematurity (84,61%), sweat test significant for cystic fibrosis selective group of premature new-born. (15,38%) and hypoglicemia and encreased glucagon prouction Material and method: The study was made at Neonatology and (7,69%). Puericulture Clinic for a eight years period (1994-2001). In the Conclusion: studied group was involved 27 patients with central nervous system 1. The rate of occurency for meconium plug syndrome in our study malformation which was included in this group by anamnestic, was 22,41% inclouding all. clinical, ultrasound, tomographic criterions . Ultrasound was 2. Prematurity was registred in 84,61% from all cases with meconium essential method for establish positive diagnosis. The examination plug syndrome. was performed with “Sonoage 1500” after a standard protocol of 3. In two cases (15,38%) the sweat test was significant for cystic examination wich included coronar and sagital sections. fibtosis. Results: detected lesions was: cranio-vertebral disrafies 15 cases 5. Hypermagnesemia was not proved as a cause of hypomotility in (55,55%), sindrom Arnold Chiari II - 3 cases (11,11%), sindrom any patient in study. Dandy-Walker - 3 cases (11,11%), corpus calosum agenesis 6. The Gastrografin enema exam was also a therapeutic method, all - 5 cases (18,51%), Galen vein malformation - 2 cases (7,40%), patients begin passing meconium spontaneously after test. arahnoidian cystes - 2 cases (7,40%). 7. Rectal biopsy was capital to exclude Hirschprung’s disease. Most lesions was associated: myelomeningocele - corpus calosum agenesis, myelomeningocele - malformation Arnold Chiari II, sd. P0954. Fetal Chromosomal Analysis of Pregnancies Dandy- Walker - corpus calosum agenesis. Following intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection with All cases of central nervous system malformation presented Amniotic Tissue Culture ventriculomegaly in moderate to severe stages - ventriculoperitoneal H. Samli1, M. Solak1, N. Imirzalioglu2, Y. Beyatli3, S. Simsek1, S. shunt was performed in 2 cases (7,40%). Kahraman4; Conclusions: The most frequent malformative type was cranio- 1Afyon Kocatepe University, Afyon, Turkey, 2GATA, Ankara, Turkey, vertebral disrafies associated with Arnold Chiari malformation II and 3Gazi University, Faculty of Science, Dept of Biology, Ankara, Turkey, III, corpus calosum agenesis, sd. Dandy-Walker. By ultrasound, 4Istanbul Memorial Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey. ventriculomegaly was present in all patients of this study. From January 1996 to December 2000, 98 consecutive patients who had become pregnant after Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection (ICSI) P0952. Determination of RhD zygosity by real-time PCR were studied. Hundred and forty-two fetuses of these patients were Y. Li, W. Holzgreve, B. Zimmermann, X. Zhong, S. Hahn; screened with fetal amniotic tissue culture. Chromosomal anomalies University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. were detected from 6 out of 142 (4.2%) fetuses. Anomalies were as Haemolytic disease of the New-born (HDN), whereby the Rhd follows, ‘46,XX / 69,XXX / 92,XXXX‘, ‘46,XY / 69, XXY / 92,XXYY‘, mother develops antibodies against her RhD fetus, is still a serious ‘47,XY+21‘, ‘47,XY+7‘, ‘47,XXY‘ and ‘45,X0‘. All except one obstetrical problem. In pregnancies at risk for HDN it is useful to pregnancies were terminated with the consent of the couples. Fetal know the RhD zygosity of the partner, since there is only a 50% skin fibroblast cultures were also studied after termination of the chance that the fetus will at risk for HDN, if he is heterozygous. The pregnancy in order to confirm prenatal diagnosis. determination of this has previously been very difficult and unreliable The prevalence of chromosomal anomalies seems to be slightly by conventional antibody assays. increased after ICSI, carrying the risk for transmission of Recent reports have indicated that RhD zygosity can be determined chromosomal aberrations of paternal origin and a higher risk of de by quantitative fluorescent PCR or Taqman real-time PCR. novo, mainly sex-chromosomal aberrations. We have recently developed a multiplex real-time Taqman assay for the simultaneous analysis of the male SRY locus and RhD gene. Our P0955. Isolated fetal choroid plexus cysts and studies have shown that this assay is very reliable for the analysis of association with chromosome anomalies both fetal sex and RhD status using cell free fetal DNA in maternal C. Sayar1, Z. Sahinoglu1, M. Uludogan1, B. Türköver1, N. Elçioglu2; plasma. 1Prenatal Diagnosis Center, Zeynep Kamil Maternity and Children Since one only needs to determine RhD zygosity of the male partner Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Dep. of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara in pregnancies at risk for HDN, we have examined whether our University Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey. Taqman assay can be used for this purpose. OBJECTIVE: Fetal choroid plexus cysts (CPC) are commonly found In our study we examined 39 male blood samples. RhD zygosity at the time of a routine second-trimester scan, but there is much was determined both by the ratio of RhD:SRY or RhD:GAPDH debate as to their clinical significance. The aims of this study were to loci by Taqman PCR. Our study showed that RhD zygosity could define the incidence of CPC in an unselected population and describe quite clearly be classified as either RhD/RhD and RhD/Rhd by both their association with aneuploidy. assays. No discordant results were obtained between the two assays. METHODS: 10594 pregnant women that were subjected to second Our data, therefore, suggest that real-time PCR can be used to 276 Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 277 level ultrasonographic analysis at the Department of Perinatology, Our study showed that: Zeynep Kamil Maternity and Children Hospital has been studied. 109 1. 79,3% would not feel coerced by the introduction of a risk free test. cases of CPCs were identified among these group (1.02%) between 2. 80% would be interested in first using a non-invasive test as 16 and 22 weeks’ gestation. These patients had genetic counseling, preliminary a screening procedure. and biochemical testing and amniocentesis were offered to all 3. If the test result was found to be normal, 84.4% of pregnant women patients. would not elect to have further tests. RESULTS: The majority of the cases 102/109 presented only isolated 4. If the result was abnormal, 56% would elect to have the result CPC and the remaining 7/109 (6.5%) were associated with additional confirmed by invasive tests. ultrasonographic findings. No relationship was found between the 5. Women undergoing IVF treatment, would prefer to have the result diameter, bilaterality or the complexity of the cyst. Aneuploidies confirmed by a further non-invasive test (58.3%). (mostly trisomy 18) were found in 3/102 with isolated CPC (2.94%) Our data, therefore, indicate that pregnant women would not feel and in 3/7 with additional ultrasonographic findings (43%). Advanced coerced to undergo involuntary testing, and that such a risk free test maternal age as an additional risk factor was found in only one of would be especially welcomed by couples undergoing IVF treatment. isolated CPC, but the remaining two had no other risks so far. CONCLUSION: The management of isolated choroid plexus P0958. Interphasic Fish On 162 Uncultured Amniotic cysts remains controversial. Fetus with CPC should be examined Fluids carefully by detailed ultrasound assessment to seek for further minor E. Sala1, N. Villa1, E. Martinoli2, A. Patrizi2, S. Mariani3, N. Strobelt3, E. malformations in a specialized center. The review of the literature Gautiero1, R. Solano1, M. Volonte2, L. Dalpra4; show that the majority of the authors advocate amniocentesis when 1Genetic Laboratory H S Gerardo, Monza, Italy, 2Dep. of Biology the CPC is associated with another ultrasound abnormality. Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 3Dep.of Obstetrics and Gynaecology H S Gerardo, University of P0956. Short Tandem Repeats (STR)Polymorphism Is Milan-Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 4Dep.of Experimental Environmental Useful in Detection of Down syndrome Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Milan-Bicocca, D. Chu1, J. Liou2, P. Cheng3, S. Chang4, C. Sun5; Monza, Italy. 1Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan Republic of China, FISH of uncultured amniotic fluid cells and conventional cytogenetic 2Dept OB/GYN, Chang Gung memorial hospital, Taipei, Taiwan analysis were performed on 83 pregnancies with US abnormalities Republic of China, 3Dept OB/GYN, Chang Gung memorial hospital, and 79 on pregnancies with normal US parameters. The AneuVysionR Lin-Kou, Taiwan Republic of China, 4Dept. OB/GYN, Chang Gung Assay (Vysis) with specific probes for chromosome 13, 18, 21, X memorial hospital, Lin-Kou, Taiwan Republic of China, 5Dept. Clinical and Y, was used. Amniotic fluid samples were obtained between 12 Pathology, Chang Gung memorial hospital, Lin-Kou, Taiwan Republic and 34 weeks’ gestation, 116/162 (72%) being between 15 and 20. of China. In cases with a sole abnormal US finding (n=24) nine aneuploidies The purpose of this study was to determine the number of were detected (1 tris 13, 8 tris 21). In the group with two or more chromosome 21 present in the fetal cells from pregnancies malformations (n=59) there were 18 aneuploidies (9 tris 18, 3 tris 21, complicated with Down syndrome by differentiating the chromosome 2 monosomy X,1 tris 13, 2 triploidy, 1 karyotype: 48,XXY,+21). In this 21s of different parental origins with human chromosome 21- group conventional cytogenetic revealed also three chromosomal specific DNA marker polymorphism. Forty amniotic fluid samples anomalies not detectable by FISH: a trisomy 16 mosaicism, a 4p- and from pregnancies complicated with fetal Down syndrome were a r(13). No sex aneuploidies alone were observed. In the group with analyzed for D21S11 and interferon-α receptor gene intervening normal US, 52 cases were analysed because of maternal anxiety and (IFNAR) sequence. Fluorescence-labeled polymerase chain reaction 27 had positive maternal serum screen or advanced maternal age. In (f-PCR) was performed to amplify these sequences followed by this latter group of pregnancies only two trisomies 21 was detected. polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Data were delineated with The complete concordance between FISH data and conventional automatic DNA sequencer and 35 of 40 (87.5%) fetal Down karyotype analysis observed in our sample, prompt us to consider syndrome samples analyzed for IFNAR showed 3 distinct peaks, the interphase FISH as an useful tool in pregnancies with high risk each peak represented an individual chromosome 21, while 24 of 30 of chromosomal aneuploidies. When ploidy status is known to be (80%) cases analyzed for D21S11 showed 3 distinct peaks. There normal, the overall risk of chromosomal abnormalities is significantly were two Down syndrome samples showed two uneven peaks. By reduced. Otherwise, the findings of three chromosomal anomalies analyzing 98 euploid pregnancies as controls, the ratio of area under undetectable by AneuVysionR Assay confirms that FISH results the peaks was determined to be 1.31±0.22 and 1.96±0.18 (mean ± should be complemented by the conventional chromosomes analysis. SD) for the euploid pregnancies and pregnancies complicated by fetal Down syndrome with two peaks, respectively. Altogether 39 of P0959. Further experiences with the application of STR 40 (97.5%) Down syndrome cases were correctly identified based on analysis for the detection of the most common trisomies either the 3 peaks pattern in at least one of the DNA markers or the by F-PCR relative peak area ratio calculation. It was concluded that polymorphic Z. Ban, C. Papp, B. Nagy, L. Lazar, E. Toth-Pal, Z. Papp; DNA markers are useful in determining the number of chromosome Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. 21 present in fetal cells. The high sensitivity suggested good prospect OBJECTIVE: Prenatal cytogenetic analysis for trisomies requires of this method in application for prenatal detection of chromosome 21 lengthy and work-intensive laboratory procedures. A rapid method aneuploidy. for the detection of the most common trisomies is the fluorescent PCR amplification of small tandem repeats (STR) located on the P0957. Attitudes of pregnant women towards the risk free chromosomes 13, 18 and 21. This method is a potential alternative prenatal diagnosis of fetal aneuploidies using fetal cells to conventional cytogenetic analysis for the screening of these from maternal blood disorders. Recently the method has been reported to be used as a S. Hahn, R. Müller, C. Troeger, J. Bitzer, W. Holzgreve; single screening method for age-related aneuploidies. OBJECTIVE: University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. We compared the results of the routine cytogenetic analysis of A major focus of our group is the development of a risk free non- amniotic fluid and chorionic villus samples to the results of the invasive method for prenatal diagnosis of fetal aneuploidies using fluorescent PCR analysis of the same samples (n=1200). METHODS: fetal cells enriched from the blood of pregnant women. A concern The multiplex fluorescent PCR was performed with 3 primer pairs with the introduction of such a new test is that pregnant women may specific for chromosome 21 (D21S11, D21S1411, D21S1312) and feel coerced to undergo involuntary testing. In order to address this 2-2 primer pairs specific for chromosome 18 (D18S851, D18S51) and issue we have examined the attitude of 145 pregnant women to the 13 (D13S631, D13S258). The capillary electrophoresis and fragment introduction of such a test, consisting of 3 groups: analysis was performed on an ABI 310 Genetic Analyser. RESULTS: 1. Women with a normal pregnancy (n=97). We found 16 cases of trisomy 21, 10 cases of trisomy 18, 7 cases 2. Women judged to have a high risk for a fetal abnormality and who of trisomy 13 and 3 cases of triploidy. We found the same pathologic had undergone an invasive prenatal diagnostic procedure (n=24). samples as the cytogenetic analysis. CONCLUSION: The multiplex 3. Women who had become pregnant following IVF treatment (n=24). fluorescent PCR analysis of STRs proved to be fast and reliable in In addition we examined the attitude of 68 non-pregnant women. the diagnosis of the most common trisomies. It is not replacing the Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 278 279 cytogenenetic analysis of prenatal samples, but in certain cases Environmental Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of like advanced maternal age it is worth considering it as a routine Milan-Bicocca, Monza, Italy. alternative to it. The role of confined placental chromosome mosaicism (CPM) in intra-uterine growth retardation (IUGR) has not yet been well P0960. 12 Years experience in Prenatal Diagnosis: Report established and also the involvement of uniparental disomy (UPD). of 2000 cases The aim of the research is to understand if the IUGR, as the only M. Karimi-Nejad1, R. Karimi-Nejad1, H. Najmabadi1,2, Y. Shafaghati1,2, foetal anomaly, is due to CPM and/or UPD. Up to now a total of F. Azimi1, N. Nabavi-nia1, F. Afrouzan1, A. Karimi-nejad1; 56 consecutive foetuses with IUGR (below the 10th centile) and no 1Karimi-Nejad Genetics and Pathology Center, Tehran, Islamic major morphological abnormalities were recruited for the study. All Republic of Iran, 2Welfare & Rehabilitation University, Tehran, Islamic foetuses were karyotyped at birth and only two showed an abnormal Republic of Iran. chromosome constitution (tris 21). Isolated uncultured placental Over 12 years, more than 2000 prenatal tests have been performed nuclei, prepared from multiple biopsies of placenta at term, were with the following indications: 1300 for chromosomal aberrations, 510 used to perform FISH with Multiprobe-I Kit (Cytocell) specific for hemoglobinopathies, 65 metabolic disorders, 25 muscular dystrophy, each centromere. After FISH a case of tris 15 was detected: 84% 15 fragile X, 6 skin lesions and 1 for ataxia telangiectasia. of the isolated nuclei showed 3 signals. The standard analysis of The indication, results and outcome of chromosomal study of 1250 100 blood and 100 skin metaphases revealed a normal karyotype. amniotic cell cultures mostly at 13-15 weeks are being reported. UPD was excluded using 9 polymorphic loci. The histology of this 662 parous were tested for advanced maternal age; 15 (2.3%) were placenta showed vasculopathy and the cord had 2 vessels. The abnormal, which shows 25 fold increase over general population. delivery took place at 28th week of gestation; the weight of the baby The risk is even higher, 2 of 49 (4.4%) parous with advanced was 540 g (< 10th centile) and after 4 months 2000 g. He showed maternal age who had previous history of offspring with chromosomal severe micropenis, hypospadias, testes not palpable and inguinal aberration. The highest risk is among parous (15%) where one of hernia. The histology of all the other placentas shows the presence of the parents bears a balanced translocation; 3/269 (1%) of parous several features: normal (11/56), chorionitis (5/56), vasculopathy (31/ with history of offspring with chromosomal aberrations showed 56), cord abnormalities (4/56), hydrops (1) and in 7 cases more than unbalanced karyotypes. There are 2 abnormal karyotypes among one pathology was present. UPD tests are in progress and results will 35 parous with low AFP serum, and 1 among 117 pregnancies be discussed. referred for various reasons including check up. Of the 30 abnormal karyotypes, 11 have tri 21, 6 tri 18, 3 mosaicisms, 2 XXY, and P0963. Reproductive Decisions and Dilemas: Experience 8 different karyotypes. Besides chromosomal aberrations, one with Cordocentesis anencephaly, and one full mutation of FMR1 have been detected S. Brankovic-Niksic, S. Nikolic, G. Pilic, T. Kranjac; coincidentally, totalling 32 candidates for therapeutic termination. Institute of Mental Health, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. Rate of spontaneous abortion of unknown reason, two weeks We present our experience in applying cordocentesis as a method following the procedure is less that 0.5 %. The final results were of prenatal diagnosis from 1990-1999. In that period we made 674 reported within 10-14 days. Our experience indicates that early cordocentesis, for various indications. Gravidity weeks were 18- amniocentesis is a safe, acceptable and reliable procedure for 29, and maternal age distribution was 19-43. The psychosocial detection of fetal chromosomal abnormalitites; we recommend it characteristics of genetic advice regarding cordocentesis differ strongly for at risk pregnancies. comparing to other methods of prenatal diagnosis, because fetal malformation has been already seen by ultrasound and pregnant P0961. Evalution of balanced and unbalanced women is “prepared” for potentially bad outcome. The other reason chromosomal abnormalities (except classic aneuploidies) for different approach in genetic counseling is that termination of pregnancy is performed in high gravidity. In our work we analyzed: in 700 amniocenteses, after birth or termination. - complication after the punction T. Yakut1, Y. Kimya2, U. Egeli1, D. Demircioglu1, B. Yigit1; - pathological finding in fetal karyotype 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, University of Uludag, - follow up of the babies Bursa, Turkey, 2Department of Gynecology, University of Uludag, - child mortality at deliverycharacteristics of genetic advice in Bursa, Turkey. cordocentesis and the psychosocial consequences in terminated We wish present our two years experience for prenatal diagnosis pregnancies after cordocentesis. since 1999. During this period, we analysed 700 amniocenteses. Amnion fluid of patients were sent to our laboratory due to three main reasons for referral; advenced maternal age, abnormal maternal P0964. Molecular-cytogenetic study of human serum screening test and abnormal ultrasound assesment. None of spontaneous abortions by comparative genomic cases with chromosomal abnormalities do not include chromosomal hybridization aneuploidies for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X, Y and pericentric D. Azmanov1, B. Zaharieva1, V. Dimitrova2, Z. Karagiozova2, R. inversions of chromosome 9 in these evaluation. Three reciprocal, Rousseva2, T. Chernev2, D. Toncheva1; two Robertsonian, one insertional and one de nova translocations as 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty Sofia, Sofia, balanced abnormality and 4 unbalanced chromosomal abnormalities Bulgaria, 2Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology “Maichin dom”, were detected in these cases. These unbalanced chromosomal Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. anomalies were as 46,XX,der(1) add(q32-44); 46,XY, 21p+; 46,XX, The frequency of spontaneous abortions is about 6-8% of all +mar; 46,XX,(1qh+). Marker chromosome was orginated from recognized pregnancies. Chromosomal aberrations are the main chromosome 15 centromeric region which was detected by using cause for pregnancy loss in more than 50% in the first and 20% in flourescence in situ hybridization (FISH). All fetuses were examined the second trimester of pregnancy. Conventional cytogenetic analysis after birth or termination. Our finding sugests that 50 % fetuses of spontaneous abortions is usually used for detection of structural with unbalanced chromosomal abnormalities (in 2 out of 4) showed and numerical chromosomal aberrations, but disadvantages of the some physcial anomalies, such as low air, hydrocephalus, facial and method are difficult tissue culturing and contamination by maternally cardiac anomalies, while none of fetuses with balanced translocations derived cells. Our previous cytogenetic and molecular genetic studies had any phenotypical abnormality. have indicated that oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes could play a role in fetal development disturbances. P0962. Evaluation Of Histology And Molecular Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) is a molecular-cytogenetic Cytogenetics Of Placenta In 56 I.u.g.r. Cases technique that allows entire genome screening for numerical N. Villa1, E. Sala1, N. Roncaglia2, C. Andreotti2, C. Colombo3, E. and unbalanced structural chromosomal aberrations in a single Gautiero1, R. Solano1, A. Cappellini4, L. Dalpra5; experiment. CGH analysis was performed on materials from 62 1Genetic Laboratory, H S Gerardo, Monza, Italy, 2Dep.of Obstetrics spontaneous abortions with aim to reveal deleted and overexpressed and Gynaecology, H S Gerardo, University of Milan-Bicocca, chromosomal regions in miscarriages. Monza, Italy, 3Neonatal Care Unit, H S Gerardo, Monza, Italy, Normal CGH profiles were found in 33 samples (53.23%). The CGH 4Dep.of Pathology, H S Gerardo, Monza, Italy, 5Dep.of Experimental demonstrated trisomies in 20.97 % of cases (trisomies 3, 4, 5, 8, 13, 14, 14, 15, 15, 16, 16, 19, 19), monosomies in 3.23% (monosomy 278 Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 279 X and 19), hyperdiploidy in 4 cases (6.45 %) and monosomy 9 in combination with gonosomal polysomy in one case (1.61%). Partial P0967. The prospective analysis of prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal gains (1p+; 1p+; 1q+; 2q+; 5p+; 5q+; 7p+; 9p+; 9q+; aneuploidy in Croatia 10p+; 13q+; 16q+; 18p+; 22q+) or losses (16p-) were found in 9 K. Crkvenac-Gornik, D. Muzinic, D. Begovic, I. Tonkovic-Djurisevic; cases (14.52%). In 7 out of 14 amplifications (50%) oncogenic Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, bands were affected which is in agreement with our hypothesis of University Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia. association between oncogenes and spontaneous abortions. The great majority of chromosomal abnormalities (approximatelly 95%) are due to numerical variation of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, P0965. Mosaic trisomy 13 on chorionic villi in a fetus with X and Y. For that reason, prenatal diagnostics is necessary to body wall complex: fortuitous association or pathogenic follow up all pregnancies at risk. During 1978-2001, amniocentesis hypothesis ? was performed on 17 004 pregnant women. There were following B. Doray1, B. Gasser2, B. Viville3, F. Girard-Lemaire1, C. Schluth1, E. indications for prenatal diagnosis; 72% maternal age of 35 and Flori1; higher, 4.9% previous child with Down syndrome, 4.74% medicine, 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Strasbourg, France, 2Service X-ray and viruses, 2.12% ultrasound identification of fetal anomaly, d’Anatomie Pathologique, Strasbourg, France, 3Service de 1.81 malformations in children, 1.5% other chromosomal abberations, Gynécologie-Obstétrique I, Strasbourg, France. 1.06% positive maternal serum screening, 1.17% autosomal Body wall complex (BWC) is a malformative association genopaty, 0.2% history of structural chromosome abnormality in characterized by the presence of abdominal wall defects associated one of the parents.There were found 358 (2.11%) of chromosomal with limb and visceral anomalies. Two distinguishable phenotypes anomalies. Among them 298 (1.75%) are aneuploidies. Results are are delineated: the first one is characterized by craniofacial defects shown in table. whereas the second one includes urogenital anomalies, abdominal sex placental attachment and inconstant anomalies of inferior limbs. INDICATION Trisomy trisomy trisomy CHROMO. TOTAL We describe here a fetus with BWC detected by ultrasound at 16 21 18 13 aneuploidy weeks’ gestation. Direct chromosome analysis of chorionic villi Maternal age 150 39 9 37 235 displayed a trisomy 13 in 20 of 21 cells whereas the cultured cells Previous child with showed a normal karyotype 46,XY. Foetopathological examination 4 1 2 7 Down syndrome demonstrated a male 17-week-old fetus with an inferior celosomy associated with a short umbilical cord, urogenital anomalies and limb Ultrasound defects. Postmortem karyotype from skin fibroblasts was normal. identification of 8 10 6 24 Little is known about the pathogenic mechanisms of BWC. At fetal anomaly present, the three main theories are early amnion rupture sequence Malformations in 4 1 5 10 including all phenotypes of BWC, early vascular disruption involved children in the craniofacial phenotype and early embryonic maldevelopment Other with disturbance of the embryonic folding at the origin of the second chromosomal 1 2 4? 7 phenotype. The latter could result of a malfunction of the ectodermal aberrations placode or rather of a disturbance of the ectodermal cells deposition Medicine, X-ray, into the mesodermal compartment, as suggested by Hartwig (1992). 7 7 viruses To our knowledge, chromosome anomalies have not been reported in Autosomal BWC. Although our results may be fortuitous, it is striking to observe 1 1 genopaty a discrepancy between direct cytogenetic analysis of ectodermal cytotrophoblastic cells and cytogenetic analysis of cultured extra- Num. abberations embryonic mesodermal cells when BWC might result of abnormal in previous 1 3 4 ectodermal and mesodermal interactions. pregnancies Psyche 3 3 P0966. Prenatal diagnosis of a diploid/tetraploid fetus TOTAL 167 53 10 68 C. Schluth1, B. Doray1, F. Lemaire-Girard1, R. Favre2, B. Gasser3, E. Flori1; In conclusion data of this analysis are in concordance with results 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Strasbourg, France, 2Service de from other studies. Maternal age is one of the primary indications for Gynécologie Obstétrique SIHCUS-CMCO, Schiltigheim, France, prenatal diagnosis of aneuploidy and trisomy 21 is the most common 3Institut d’Anatomie Pathologique, Strasbourg, France. aneuploid condition compatible with survival. Tetraploidy is characterized by four complete sets of chromosomes (4n = 92). Although it has frequently been reported in early P0968. The evaluation the effectiveness of nuchal spontaneous abortions, tetraploidy is extremely rare in term translucency measurement in screening for congenital pregnancy. Most of late surviving patients are diploid/tetraploid heart disease mosaics and present severe mental and physical impairment. To our A. S. Latypov, L. E. Teregoulova, L. R. Samoylova; knowledge, only four tetraploidies were ascertained in the prenatal Republic Hospital, Kazan, Russian Federation. stage on amniocytes and/or fetal blood lymphocytes. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate possibility first trimester marker, used We report here on the prenatal diagnosis of a diploid/tetraploid fetus: for Down syndrome screening, named nuchal translucency (NT),for at 11 weeks’ gestation, a karyotype performed on chorionic villi (direct congenital heart defect diagnostics. analysis and cultures) for cystic hygroma showed full tetraploidy. METHODS: An unselected group of 3003 pregnant women with Subsequent amniocentesis was considered as normal (despite the a singleton pregnancy underwent first trimester screening at 10- presence of a tetraploid clone among the 15 analysed). However a 13 weeks’ gestation in 2000-2001. Nuchal translucency (NT) was sonographic examination at 18 weeks’ gestation displayed a complex measured by transvaginal sonography. Invasive procedures for fetal cardiopathy. After termination of pregnancy, chromosome analysis on karyotyping in cases with NT > or =3 mm were performed and fetuses different tissues confirmed diploid/tetraploid mosaicism. with abnormal karyotypes were eliminated. A second trimester This observation and the four previously reported in the literature detailed ultrasound scan was also performed in all cases with emphasize the difficulty of the prenatal diagnosis of true tetraploidy, nuchal translucency thickness. We tried list of all registered cases of first because the features are not specific, often mild or revealed late congenital heart defect in newborns and babies from neonatologists, in pregnancy, second because tetraploidy may be an artifact on in pediatricians, heart surgeons and other sources. vitro cell cultures or a confined placental mosaicism. RESULTS: There were 84 cases with NT>3 mm. In this group was Therefore, in a context of ultrasound abnormalities, when cytogenetic found 17 cases of chromosomal anomalies (21+, 45X, 18+). Twelve analysis displays tetraploidy, caution is advised and karyotypes pregnancies were lost to follow-up .In only 1 case we found two on other tissue samples have to be performed and compared with chamber heart. Other outcomes were normal control cultures. Thus the distinction between artifactual and true CONCLUSION: First trimester nuchal translucency measurement is tetraploidy will be possible. an effective screening test for the prenatal detection of fetuses with Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 280 281 chromosome anomalies, including Down’s and Turner syndromes, but molecular techniques developed for a fast diagnosis of aneuploidies effectiveness in congenital heart defect finding requires further study. rely on the semi-quantification of fluorescent PCR products from short tandem repeat (STR) polymorphic markers. Our objective P0969. Infertile couples and prenatal cytogenetic was to test a chromosome quantification method based on the diagnosis analysis of fluorescent PCR products derived from non polymorphic I. Tonkovic-Djurisevic, D. Muzinic, D. Begovic, K. Crkvenac-Gornik; target genes. An easy to set up co-amplification of portions of Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, DSCR1 (Down Syndrome Critical Region 1), DCC (Deleted in University Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia. Colorectal Carcinoma), and RB1 (Retinoblastoma 1) allowed the From 17 004 prenatal cytogenetic investigations, 889 pregnant molecular detection of aneuploidies for chromosomes 21, 18, and women have had an indication for early amniocentesis because of 13 respectively. Semi-quantitative analysis was performed in a blind infertility. Chromosome analysis of cultured amniocytes with GTG prospective study of 400 amniotic fluids. Four samples (1%) could banding showed 13 (1,46%) unbalanced and (2,92%) balanced not be analysed by PCR probably because of a low concentration of karyotypes. Thirteen cases of pathological karyotype include 7 foetal DNA. Follow up karyotype analysis was done on all samples trisomies, 4 numerical aberrations of gonosomes and 2 unbalanced and molecular results were in agreement with the cytogenetic data translocations , and 10 among them were over the age of 35, with no false-positive or false-negative results. Our gene based that increased the risk.From 26 balanced karyotypes, reciprocal fluorescent PCR approach is an alternative molecular method for a translocation were more common (17; 65.4%) then the robertsonian rapid and reliable detection of aneuploidies which can be helpful for type (9; 34.6%). A total of 889 infertile couples, in 51 cases one of the the clinical management of high-risk pregnancies. parents was already known as a carrier balanced rearrangement.In 20 fetal karyotypes (2.25%) was detected that one of the parents P0972. Deletion 22q11 and conotruncal cardiopathy in was balanced translocation carrier.It was found one case of de four successive pregnancies: contribution of prenatal novo robertsonian translocation. The analysis shows high excess diagnosis. of female (20) over male (6) carriers.Prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis R. Zamir-Brill, R. Gershoni-Baruch; should be performed in pregnancies of infertile couples who have Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. had two or more pregnancy losses. They are at risk for carrying a CATCH 22, an acronym for cardiac defects, abnormal facies, thymic balanced rearrangement since these carriers may lead to offspring hypoplasia, cleft palate, and hypocalcemia is associated with a with an unbalanced karyotype causing serious congenital anomalies. variable deletion on chromosome 22q11 and occurs in patients Many chromosomally imbalanced fetuses are spontaneously aborted with dysmorphologic and cardiological syndromes: DiGeorge, before amniocentesis, but partial trisomies of small rearrangements velocardiofacial and conotruncal/face syndrome. Estimates suggest tend to be maintained in pregnancy. Because of the high incidence that the 22q11.2 deletion occurs in approximately 1/4000 live births, of chromosome abnormalities in spontaneous abortions at infertile making this disorder a significant health concern, so much so that couples, prenatal diagnosis is needed as well. 22q11.2 deletion studies are becoming part of a standardized diagnostic workup for some isolated heart defects. We report P0970. The significance of congenital anomalies to on 4 consecutive 22q11.2 deletion antenatal diagnoses, in an gestational wastage in a Brazilian University Hospital asymptomatic 22q11.2 deletion carrier, ascertained following in utero D. P. Cavalcanti, A. Aguirre, M. A. Pessoto, M. F. Mello; detection of a conotruncal cardiac defect. Her first pregnancy resulted UNICAMP, Campinas - SP, Brazil. in a normal female. The second and 3rd pregnancies were terminated It is described a prospective investigation at the Women’s Hospital following ultrasonographic visualization of conotruncal cardiac defect. (Caism), to determine the precise causes of gestational wastage. FISH analysis of amniotic fluid from the second affected pregnancy This study included all perinatal deaths (PD) occurring in the confirmed the diagnosis of 22q11.2 deletion, for which the mother obstetrical center at the Hospital between Sept/1999 to April/2001. herself tested positive. FISH performed on CVS from her 4th and All PD were analysed with a protocol including genetic-clinical 5th pregnancies were again consistent with the diagnosis of 22q11.2 examination, X-rays, clinical photographs, autopsy, and cytogenetic deletion. Cardiac defects detected on ultrasonograph of the 4th investigation when necessary. From a total of 228 PD, 80 fetus (35%) pregnancy were not visualized during the 5th pregnancy, which was were malformed. The causes of gestational wastage were classified terminated on week 15. The ethical issue imposed by termination of as maternal (85 cases, 37%), fetal (104 cases, 45%), or unknown what seems to be a normal fetus, albeit carrying 22q11.2 deletion, (39 cases, 17%). Fetal causes were more commonly found in the is underlined. This report highlights the importance of offering group of early neonatal deaths. Besides obstetrical causes, the other 22q11.2 deletion testing to parents of affected probands and couples main diagnosis found among PD from maternal origin, were arterial following in utero detection of a cardiac defect. Antenatal knowledge hypertension and infectious diseases. Among PD from fetal causes, of the deletion status provides couples with an accurate diagnosis, 24 cases (23%) were twins. The remaining were all malformed prognostic information, and recurrence risk. foetus distributed as follows: 35 (44%) isolated defects, 15 (19%) foetus with multiple anomalies, and 30 (37%) syndromic fetus. In the P0973. Three cases of deletion 13q isolated group congenital malformations of the CNS (22) followed by Y. Rüsing1, R. Stressig2, K. Marquet3, G. Hickmann1, I. Grund1, P. uro-genital (12) were the most frequent anomalies. Chromosomal Kozlowski1; and disruption syndromes, besides skeletal dysplasias were the 1Praenatal-Medizin und Genetik Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, main syndromes diagnosed. With regard to all the known causes of 2Praenatal-Medizin und Genetik Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, deaths in the whole group, we observed that secondary prevention is 3Gynaecologist, Aachen, Germany. possible in more than half of the deaths with maternal origin. Among Abstract deaths from congenital anomalies of the foetus, prevention by genetic Three cases of deletion 13q counselling and/or prenatal diagnosis is possible in more than 80% of Rüsing Y. 1, Stressig R.1, Marquet K-L.2, Hickmann G.1, Grund I.1, the cases. Koslowski P.1 Partially Supported by FAPESP, grant 98/16006-6. 1Prenatal Medicine and Genetic, Duesseldorf, Germany 2 Gynaecologist , Aachen, Germany P0971. Rapid prenatal diagnosis of common autosomal We present three cases of deletion in the long arm of chromosome aneuploidies by relative semi-quantitative fluorescence 13 discovered in routine amniocentesis because of maternal age and one case with ultrasonografic indication. PCR on uncultured amniocytes Cases 1 and 2 show a structural aberrant karyotype, with breakpoint C. Philippe1, H. Rahil1, J. Solassol2, G. Lefort2, P. Jonveaux1; in 13q31. 1Laboratory of Human Genetics, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, We compare ultrasonografic findings, which showed severe fetal 2Laboratory of Cytogenetics, Montpellier, France. abnormalities at the cerebral features, like holoprosencephalie and Prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities by cytogenetic exencephalie. analysis is time consuming, expensive and requires highly qualified The last one is a special case. Here we present a ring chromosome technicians. Rapid diagnosis of aneuploidies followed by reassurance with deletion in the long arm of chromosome 13. The deleted region for women with normal results can be performed by molecular of the ring chromosome is established by F-PCR (ABI 310). analysis of uncultured foetal cells in less than 24 hours. Today, all 280 Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 281 P0974. Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency due to maternal the molecular level was also observed. Nine out of 275 (3.3%) CVS uniparental disomy for chromosome 14 samples showed frond-specific de novo STR alleles. In two of these M. Blayau1, S. Odent2, C. Dubourg1, A. Dabadie3, V. David1; samples instability was confirmed (one 8bp expansion of D13S742 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Hormonology, Rennes, and one 4bp expansion of D21S1411) by investigation of parental France, 2Medical Genetics, Rennes, France, 3Pediatry, Rennes, DNA, and in seven by the absence of the novel allele from other France. fronds and from cultured cells. Mosaicism for a novel allele at a single Alpha1-antitrypsin is a major inhibitor of serine protease and plays locus was also detected in uncultured material and cultured cells from a crucial role in protecting pulmonary tissue from degradation by one amniotic fluid sample. Eight different STR markers to date have neutrophil elastase. Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency, an autosomal demonstrated novel alleles. Although repeat instability is unlikely to recessive disorder, predisposes individuals to the development of represent an abnormal phenotype, the relatively high frequency of pulmonary emphysema and is also associated with chronic liver somatic mutation in individual villi is surprising. Case results, possible disease. The PI gene is located on the long arm of chromosome 14 mechanisms and implications for the interpretation of QF-PCR results at position 14q32.1. Numerous normal or deficient variants of this will be discussed. gene have been described but two major mutations (Z and S) are responsible for the pathology. P0977. Triploidy/tetraploidy placental mosaicism: a new We report on a child with developmental delay and alpha1-antitrypsin mechanism of foetal triploidy deficiency (ZZ). His mother is heterozygous for the Z mutation but D. Gaillard1, M. Doco-Fenzy1, F. Carre-Pigeon1, H. Sartelet2, M. his father presented with a normal genotype (MM).Exclusion of Lorenzato2; paternity was discarded and then we began a molecular analysis 1Service de Génétique CHU, Reims, France, 2Laboratoire Pol Bouin, to explain the genotype discordance and the particular phenotype Reims, France. of the child. Six microsatellites on the long arm of chromosome 14 Triploidy and tetraploidy are detected in 20% of early spontaneous (D14S264, D14S1057, D14S258, D14S76, D14S67, D14S1162) were abortions and a few fœtuses survive beyond midgestation. Polyploid tested. Analysis of DNA polymorphisms shows no contribution of the mosaicism is very uncommon. We report seven spontaneous father and two chromosomes 14 from the mother with isodisomy for abortions with triploid/tetraploid placental mosaicism, with four empty markers near the PI locus and heterodisomy for the more centromeric sacs at seven to sixteen weeks of gestation (WG) and three cases markers. with placenta and fœtus at sixteen, seventeen and twenty-two WG. Uniparental disomy as a mecanism of recessive disorders may Karyotyping was not available. be evocated when the implicated chromosomic region carries a DNA quantification was carried out after pathological investigation mutated gene.So, cystic fibrosis due to disomy of chromosome 7 has suggestive of triploidy The two oldest fœtuses had severe growth been reported. We report here the first case of alpha1-antitrypsin retardation (-3SD), syndactyly, adrenal hypopoplasia. The histology deficiency due to disomy of chromosome 14. of the seven placentas showed hydropic villi with cisterns, vessels, trophoblast hyperplasia and scalloping of the fibrous villi. A few villi P0975. Prenatal diagnosis of congenital lipoid adrenal exhibited enlarged nuclei. Paraffin embedded placenta sections were hyperplasia (CLAH) by measuring maternal serum used for DNA image cytometry after Feulgen staining, using the CAS unconjugated estriol(MSuE3) in the 1st trimester of 200 image analysis system. At least 200 nuclei were analysed in the mesenchyme of the villi and maternal decidua was used as control pregnancy. (diploid cells with DNA index [DI] near 1). In the seven placentas DI Z. Ben-Neriah1, B. Zelikovitch1, D. Zangen2, G. Bach1; was near 1.5 (triploid nuclei) in 36 to 59% of the cells and near 2 1Dpt of Human genetics, Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, (tetraploid nuclei) in 38 to 51% of the cells. The two oldest fœtuses Israel, 2Dpt of Pediartrics, Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, were triploid (DI near 1.5). Israel. Abnormal fertilization with diandry or digyny are the usual CLAH is a rare autosomal recessive disease, quite common in the mechanisms reported in triploidy. The seven cases of triploid/ Palestinian population in Israel and is usually diagnosed after birth. tetraploid mosaicism give a new insight with a third mechanism The clinical picture is adrenal insufficiency at birth: dark skin, vomiting taking place later during segmentation. It could be due to abnormal and failure to thrive. The phenotype is of a female although the development of the poles of the spindles during mitosis. karyotype is XY. Unless treated early, death can occur shortly after birth. Treatment with steroids and salts is required for lifetime. The P0978. Pregnancy outcomes in women with CPM: 12 basic defect in this disease is no production of any steroid: cortico- mineralo- and sex steroids. The genetic defect is in the StAR gene, cases report. encoding a cholesterol shuttle protein, which transports cholesterol A. V. Gagarina1, T. V. Kuznetzova1, T. K. Kascheeva2, N. G. Pavlova2, into the mitochondria, where the process of steroidogenesis takes I. N. Ogiganova2, V. S. Baranov2; place. 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint- Prenatal diagnosis of CLAH is possible by mutation analysis of Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and the StAR gene, or measuring the MSuE3 during 1st trimester of Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. pregnancy, between 10-13 weeks. We will present our experience Confined placental mosaicism (CPM) is reported to be associated in diagnosing fetuses with CLAH and other types of fetal adrenal with adverse pregnancy outcomes in form of spontaneous abortions, insufficiency in the 1st trimester of pregnancy. We are using a non- preterm births and intrauterine growth retardation. Pregnancy invasive method, which, to our best of our knowledge, has not been progression and perinatal complications in 12 patients with CPM, offered before at such early stage of pregnancy. detected in the first-trimester CVS, were studied. Chromosomes, involved in mosaicism in cytotrophoblast, were different, involving P0976. Somatic microsatellite instability in prenatal 3,7,14,19,21 and X . Average age of pregnant women was 33,7±7,2 years (M±SD), 7 patients were 35 years and older. The mean value samples detected by QF-PCR of maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein was 1,33±0,56 MoM and K. Mann, C. Mackie Ogilvie; maternal serum chorionic gonadotropin (MShCG) 2,49±1,41 MoM, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. abnormal high level of MShCG (>2,0 MoM) was noticed in 5 patients. Mosaicism (the presence of two or more different cell lines) is Uterine artery Doppler velocimetry during pregnancy was performed reported to occur in approximately 1 % of chorionic villus samples with 4-weeks intervals. Average uterine systolic-diastolic ratio and (CVS), although one cell line may be confined to the placenta. pulsatility index was found elevated in women with CPM compared Rapid aneuploidy testing is now being applied in many cytogenetic with control group at 20 (S/D =2,96±0,23 and 2,13±0,05; p<0,001) laboratories either to complement or replace conventional karyotype and 36 weeks of pregnancy (S/D =2,32±0,17 and 1,71±0,05; analysis. Assessment of these technologies includes their ability to p<0,001). Pregnancy complications and adverse outcome were detect potentially significant abnormalities such as mosaicism. registered in 2/3 of women with CPM. Preeclampsia developed in 3 Quantitative fluorescence-PCR (QF-PCR) detects genomic patients. Stillbirth was registered in 4 cases (1 case of spontaneous imbalance by comparing the alleles of amplified STR markers. abortion at 26 weeks and 3cases of preterm delivery before 37 Routine use of QF-PCR in our centre (>3000 samples to date) weeks of pregnancy); intrauterine growth retardation was detected has established that this technology can detect low level trisomy in 3 cases. Morphological signs of the placental insufficiency and villi mosaicism. However, a previously unreported form of mosaicism at Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 282 283 immaturity were observed in all placentas. Our data reflect a possible For over two decades banding has remained the “gold standard” negative effect of CPM on the pregnancy outcome, probably due of cytogenetic analysis, providing the first genome-wide screen for to the placental abnormalities, and supports the previous reports of abnormalities. However, these analyses are complemented with association between CPM and adverse pregnancy outcome. techniques based on fluorescence in situ hybridization-FISH, which steadily increased the accuracy of cytogenetic diagnosis. The basis P0979. Rapid X chromosome dosage by Quantitative of in situ hybridization techniques is the detection of specific nucleic fluorescent Polymerase Chain Reaction (QF-PCR) and acid sequences on cytogenetic level. In our laboratory FISH is one of the routine methods of prenatal prenatal diagnosis of Turner syndrome diagnosis, which previously was introduced and optimized, for V. Cirigliano1,2, M. Ejarque1, P. Cañadas1, C. Fuster2, M. Adinolfi3; molecular cytogenetic diagnostics in oncohematological disorders 1General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Autonoma, Barcelona, of over 50 cases. In this study it was applied for detection of trisomy Spain, 3University College, London, United Kingdom. 21 in 11 cases and also for searching of some aberrations of sex The quantitative fluorescent polymerase chain reaction (QF- chromosomes. Nuclei were prepared from a culture of chorionic villi PCR) is an assay designed to perform rapid prenatal detection of in three cases and amniotic fluid in the others. Hybridization was common numerical chromosome abnormalities. This method is performed with specific X/Y and 21q22 probes, and detected with based on the PCR amplification of highly polymorphic short tandem FITC and spectrum orange. In one sample of all analyzed interphase repeats (STRs). In the course of PCR amplification, a fluorochrome nuclei were found three signals after hybridization with 21q22 probe, is incorporated into the products, which are then visualised indicating that three chromosomes 21 exist (Down syndrome). After and quantified using an automated DNA sequencer. Several using X/Y probe in one case was detected monosomy X, without investigations have documented the accuracy of performing rapid signal for chromosome Y (Turner Syndrome). prenatal diagnoses of trisomies involving chromosomes 21, 18 and Except for the accuracy of the results, with routine implementation 13. of FISH into laboratories a lot of obstacles, like cases of advanced However, due the unavailability of highly specific STR markers, only pregnancy, or problems with cultivating of cells could be overcome. in recent times it has been possible to detect X and Y chromosome FISH is now the complementary method of choice because of the abnormalities. For the detection of Turner syndrome, several X-linked increased sensitivity and speed with which it can be applied to a STRs are included in multiplex PCR assays so that, using up to 4 variety of cellular targets. markers, the likelihood of a normal female to be homozygous for all sequences, is expected to be extremely low (about 2/1000). Here we report a new method for rapid detection of X chromosome P0982. The mutational and haplotype analysis of copy number in all prenatal samples. The test is based on QF-PCR the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in families with amplification of the X-linked HPRT with the autosomal D21S1411 phenylketonuria from the Bashkortostan. used as internal control for quantification. X chromosome copy V. L. Akhmetova, T. V. Viktorova, E. K. Khusnutdinova; number is rapidly and accurately assessed by comparing the ratio Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Scientific Center of between the fluorescent activity of the X specific and autosomal PCR Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. products, thus independently from any calculation of probability. Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a common autosomal recessive genetic In its first clinical application this method allowed distinguishing a rare disorder caused by a large variety of mutations in the phenylalanine normal female foetus, homozygous for all X chromosome markers hydroxylase (PAH) gene. used, from a Turner syndrome. This study repots the results of mutational and haplotype analysis in 56 families with phenylketonuria from the Bashkortostan. Our P0980. Application of fluorescence in situ hybridization results indicate that the R408W mutation account for over 53% PKU in prenatal diagnosis for identification of rare structural in Bashkortostan. Using SSCP analysis followed by sequencing of 7 and 12 exons of the PAH gene we have identified 5 mutations: aberration. R261Q (9,8%), R252W (2,7%), P281L (2,7%), R252P (1%) and B. Pawlowska1, A. Ilnicka1, J. Bogdanowicz1, A. Tomankiewicz- 1315+del4 (1%). Zawadzka1, T. Roszkowski2, J. Zaremba1; We have examined the distribution of haplotypes of four polymorphic 1Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warszawa, Poland, 2Clinic of alleles of the PAH gene (VNTR, MspI(a), STR and PvuII(a) alleles). Obstetrics and Gynecology, Warszawa, Poland. Most common PAH haplotype (380-MspI(a)a-240-PvuII(a)A2) We present results of cytogenetic prenatal investigations in 5 cases appeared in 47% of the PKU chromosomes, but rare occurred on of de novo chromosomal rearrangments impossible to diagnose normal chromosomes (4%). with routine cytogenetic banding techniques. Fluorescense in situ Moreover, we have studied haplotypes associated with PKU hybridization (FISH) with multiple chromosome specific libraries mutations. The most prevalent PAH haplotype 380-MspI(a)a-240- (chromosome painting) and subtelomeric Chromoprobe Multiprobe PvuII(a)A2 was tightly linked to the most common R408W mutation T System (Cytocell) were applied to identify or verify these (67%) and the R261Q mutation (82%). The others mutations detected rearrangments. in this study were associated with various haplotypes. In two cases translocated fragments were so small, that we had to Thus our investigations demonstrated a strong correlation between apply FISH to find out whether the translocations were balanced. the R408W mutation and PAH haplotype 380-MspI(a)a-240- In one case we found a small additional fragment on the short PvuII(a)A2, which correspondents to RFLP-haplotype 2. These dates arm of chromosome 15. FISH enabled us to identify it as a part of suggest a common origin for this mutation from Europen populations, chromosome 2. It coincided with inversion of chromosome 10 in where R408W mutation is strongly associated with haplotype 2. the father. In one case we found de novo pericentric inversion of In addition, we have determined the informativity of PAH haplotype chromosome 3. In the last case the kariotype was mosaic 45,XO/ for molecular diagnostics of PKU in Bashkortostan that was 95,5%. 46,X+mar. In amniocytes the marker was present in 28% of the cells, The data of haplotype and mutational analysis may be used for in leucocytes (obtained by cordocentesis) - in 90 % of the cells. Using prenatal diagnostics and carrier screening in PKU families. painting and subtelomeric probes we found that the marker contained sequences of Y. We also found p-arm subtelomeric region of Y or X chromosome (cohybridization X and Y P0983. Trends in cytogenetic prenatal diagnosis in a p-arm) on both ends of Y. Ultrasonography has shown that the fetal reference hospital in Izmir/Turkey: A comperative study sex was male. for 4 years C. Ozkinay; P0981. Application of fluorescence in situ hybridization Ege University Faculty of Medicine,Dept.of Pediatrics,Subdivision of to chromosome analysis in prenatal diagnosis Genetics and Teratology, Izmir, Turkey. R. Jankova1, B. Zaharieva2, V. Mazneikova3, V. Dimitrova3, P. The aim of the study was to investigate the major changes in the Popivanova3, D. Toncheva2; indications, culture success and abnormality rate for conventional 1Institute of Immunobiology and human genetics, Institutes, Skopje, cytogenetic prenatal diagnosis for amniotic fluid samples between the The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Department of period of January 1998 and December 2001 in our area. Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Univ. Our cytogenetic laboratory provides a prenatal service to obstetrics- Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology “Maichin dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria. gynecology departments of different hospitals in Izmir. Limited 282 Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 283 number of patients (6-8 per week) is randomly accepted for prenatal P0986. Efficiency of Dyna-beads methods for non- cytogenetic study in our center. invasive prenatal genetic diagnosis using fetal cells Over the 4 years period 1023 prenatal cytogenetic tests were G. Ahangari; performed in our center. The most common indication was advanced National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and maternal age for each year. But its rate has increased significantly Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. within the years. Culture success rates have improved. When the Ghasem Ahangari, Sirous Zeinali and Maryam Ebrahimi.Department first two years compared to the last two years the rate of abnormal of Immunology, National Research Center for Genetic Engineering & cytogenetic results were significantly decreased. Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran. Department of Biotechnology, Pasteur The major reason for this observation is probably related to the Institute of Iran,Iran. changes in indications throughout the years. Prenatal genetic diagnosis has become an essential part of modern obstetric care. Recent advancements in molecular technology and P0984. Seven cases of chromosomal mosaicism detected equipments have made fetal diagnosis possible. During the last two in amniocentesis and karyotype, phenotype correlations. decades a number of methods of prenatal genetic diagnosis have C. Gunduz1, A. Alpman1, E. Karaca1, T. Çankaya1, E. Bora1, S. become available and have used either in laboratory research or in Sagol2, H. Onay1, O. Cogulu1, C. Ozkinay1, F. Ozkinay1; routine genetic counseling. Non-invasive prenatal genetic diagnosis 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine,Dept.of Pediatrics,Subdivision by circulatory fetal cells in maternal circulation also taking shape. of Genetics and Teratology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of The advantage of non-invasive methods (fetal cells and DNA in Medicine, Dept. of Obstet Gynecol, Izmir, Turkey. maternal blood) is that they provide an opportunity to make a genetic Cytogenetic test results of 908 amniocentesis performed throughout diagnosis without risk therefore, are applicable for use in mass three years period were evaluated. screening programs. We obtained approximately 20 ml blood from 53 Out of 908 amniocentesis, seven cases (0.77%) were detected women. The mononuclear cells were isolated with ficole. To remove having the chromosomal abnormalities in more than three cells in unwanted maternal white blood cells, antibodies against CD45 and total. In all of these cases, different chromosomal variations were CD14 coated with magnetic beads were used as negative selection. observed in abnormal cell lines. Positive selection methods based on using antibody against CD71 Out of seven cases, four of them were detected with numerical and Dynal magnetic to enrich fetal nucleated erythrocytes. DNA chromosomal abnormalities in mosaic cell line. These were was extracted from fetal cells by a standard phenol-chloroform 46,XY[110]/47,XXY[11]; 46,XY[96]/47,XY,+21[4]; 46,XY64]/ procedure and nested PCR was carried out with appropriate primers 47,XY,+22[12]; 46,XY[35]/47,XYY[15]. The remaining three cases for RhD gene and amelogenine gene was used for sex (X and Y) had structural chromosomal abnormalities in mosaic cell lines. Two determination. These results suggest that identification of fetal sex of these were balanced translocations (46,XY[150]/46,XY,t(2;12)(q and RhD in the maternal blood circulation in 27 or %51 of the case is 23;q24.2)[5]; 46,XY[65]/46,XY,t(7;8)(q22;p23)[5]) whereas the other possible but efficiency of this method compare to others is low. one was a rarely seen chromosomal deletion (46,XX[95]/46,XX del 18(q12.1-qter)[5]. P0987. Evaluation Of A Multiplex QF-PCR Assay For In all of the three cases with mosaic structural chromosomal Aneuploidy Testing abnormalities fetal cord blood showed normal fetal karyotype and the S. Andonova1, E. Simeonov2, D. Toncheva3, I. Kremensky1; outcome of these pregnancies were also normal. 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, University Hospital of Obstetrics Only in one of the four cases with mosaic numerical abnormalities, and Gynecology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Section of mosaicism was also detected in the fetal blood and the family chose Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University, Sofia, abortion. The others’ karyotypes in fetal blood were normal (and one Bulgaria, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, of these resulted in spontaneous abortion while the other two resulted Bulgaria. in normal outcome). Short tandem repeats (STRs) are highly informative polymorphic genetic markers, widely used in the field of quantitative fluorescent P0985. Prognostic Dilemma in Genetic Counseling of PCR (QF-PCR) aneuploidy testing. With the intention to reduce Prenatal Cytogenetic field pipetting errors, cost value and time for analysis, we have developed H. M. Ryu1, J. R. Han1, M. Y. Kim1, J. H. Yang1, Y. M. Kim2, S. Y. a multiplex PCR assay in a one-tube reaction for simultaneous Park2, K. H. Choi1; analysis of two STRs located on chromosome 21 (D21S11 and 1Department of Obstetric and Gynecology, Samsung Cheil Hospital D21S1411), one - located on chromosome 18 (D18S535) and one and Women’s Healthcare Center, Seoul, REPUBLIC OF KOREA, - on sex chromosomes (AMEL). PCR amplification with four Cy-5’ 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Samsung Cheil Hospital and fluorescently-labeled primer sets was performed and PCR products Women’s Healthcare Center, Seoul, REPUBLIC OF KOREA. were separated on ALFExpress sequencer. Because of inability to Objective; With an increasing number of pregnancies being use different fluorescent dyes, STRs were selected with different subjected to prenatal karyotyping, large proportions of fetuses with PCR product lenghts, with reported heterozygosity between 0.90 borderline prognosis are detected prenatally as an incidental finding. and 0.93. To avoid preferential amplification of shorter fragments The couples are faced with a very difficult and personal decision and to receive the expected allele ratio the optimal primer amount for the pregnancy. This study was designed to evaluate prenatal was adjusted between 2-5 pmol of each primer, number of cylces outcome of borderline prognostic cases in prenatal cytogenetic = 25. The multiplex PCR was optimised with human genomic DNA field. Materials and Methods; We reviewed retrospectively of normal controls and trisomic 21 samples, no unspecific products pregnancy outcome of 9,002 prenatal cytogenesis cases during were observed. Reported four-plex PCR assay proved to be rapid, 1990 - 2000. We classified with 4 groups according to prognosis. accurate and efficient - results were in complete accordance with For precise determination of results, several cytogenetic methods those obtained after performance of 4 separated single-plex reactions were performed; repeat sampling, C-banding, R-banding, FISH, among the same 65 investigated DNA samples. CGH, NOR banding and so on. Results; Group I (normal); (N=8661, 96.2%), Group II (balanced cases from parental origin); (N=87, P0988. Applications of two-dimensional electrophoresis 0.97%), Group III (apparently abnormal cases); (N=211, 2.35%, and fluorometric enzyme assay for MPS prenatal Group IV (borderline cases); (N=43, 0.48%). Through several diagnosis cytogenetic studies, targeted fetal ultrasound and genetic counseling C. Chuang1, S. Lin2; for borderline cases, pregnancies were continued and delivered 1Genetics & Metabolism, Dept. of Medical Research, Mackay healthy babies in 3 cases out of 6 de novo balanced reciprocal Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Dept. of translocation, 2 out of 3 de novo robertsonian translocation, 15 out of Pediatrics, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of 25 sex chromosomal aneuploidy, 3 out of 6 marker chromosome, 3 China. out of 3 discrepant results with prenatal samples. Conclusions; For The mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS), a group of heritable disorders, genetic counseling of borderline cases, molecular cytogenetic study are transmitted in an autosomal recessive manner, except for and targeted fetal ultrasound played an important role for option of MPS II(X-linked). The diagnosis of MPS can be achieved by two- pregnancy continuation. dimensional electrophoresis (2-D EP) for MPS typing determination and enzymatic assay for MPS confirmation. In 2000 - 2001, we had Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 284 285 successfully completed prenatal detection by 2-D EP and fluorometric line with the rearranged chromosome 21 and another cell line with enzyme assay in seven unrelated families having previous affected a monosomy 21. A more complex mechanism of formation is also children; 5 with MPS II, 1 with MPS III and 1 with MPS IV. Amniotic considered with a cascade of meiotic and subsequent mitotic errors. fluids (AF) were taken at 14th ~ 18th weeks of gestation. For 5 AF Our cases underline the importance to combine the short-term and with high risk of MPS II, the results showed normal EP pattern, in long-term cultures and emphasises the need for confirmatory studies which the chondroitin sulfate (CS) and hyaluronic acid (HA) were in other tissues when mosaicism is encountered in chorionic villi. demonstrated. The activities of iduronate-2-sulfatase (IDS) were normal in the cultured AF cells. For pregnancy with high risk of MPS P0991. Molecular Diagnostics Of Bulgarian Patients With III, the 2-D EP result showed a composed pattern of CS, HA, and 17p11.2 Duplication/ Deletion Using Two Sets Of Highly heparan sulfate (HS). For pregnancy with high risk of MPS IV, the Polymorphic DNA Markers result showed a composed pattern of CS, HA, and keratan sulfate N. I. Ivanova1, A. K. Jordanova1, A. Kantardjieva1, I. L. Tournev2, (HS). The enzyme activities of alpha-N-acetyl glucosaminidase and B. Ishpekova2, V. Gergelcheva2, M. Daskalov2, I. O. Litvinenko3, S. galactosamine 6-sulfatase were all reduced in the cultured AF cells, Veleva2, V. Mitev4, I. M. Kremensky1; which were corresponding with the 2-D EP results. On the basis of 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, University Hospital of Obstetrics these results the pregnancies were terminated. By reviewing the 2- and Gynecology, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, D EP method, it is definite, sensitive, and easy to perform for MPS 2Department of Neurology, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, prenatal diagnosis, however, a final confirmation is required by 3University Pediatric’s Hospital, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, performing an enzymatic assay of that specific enzyme activity. Bulgaria, 4Department of Biochemistry, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. P0989. Characterisation of the gene defect in 12 patients Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is the most common inherited with sporadic haemophilia B. disorder of the peripheral nervous system. The majority of patients M. Acquila, M. Pasino, D. Caprino, T. Lanza, F. Bottini, P. G. Mori, M. with demyelinating neuropathy (CMT1) have 1,5Mb duplication/ P. Bicocchi; deletion in 17p11.2 chromosome region. It is responsible for nearly Gaslini children’s hospital, Genova, Italy. 80% of authosomal-dominant CMT cases. Previous studies have shown that haemophilia B (HB) is the result We have analyzed a total of 28 CMT1 families with clinical data of several mutations, mostly single nucleotide substitutions, in for authosomal-dominant inheritance for 6 highly polymorphic the Factor IX gene. In order to evaluate the impact of mutation markers closely linked to 17p11.2 region: D17S921, D17S122, analysis on genetic counselling in sporadic and uninformative HB D17S1357, D17S1358, D17S2226 and D17S2227. We have set up familial pedigrees, we re-analysed 12 patients by dHPLC, who had analytical conditions on ALF fragment analyzer to receive reliable previously been studied by restriction fragment length polymorphisms and reproducible gene dosage differences in affected subjects and (RFLPs). In order to perform mutation analysis, the coding regions, controls. We have detected 11 families with duplication and 1 with intron/exon splice junctions , 5’ and 3’ untranslated regions, and the deletion. The combination of markers D17S921 and D17S122 was promoter and polyadenylation site of Factor IX gene were amplified informative in 9 cases. Additionally testing for D17S1357, D17S2227 using the appropriate primers. In all cases unique abnormal dHPLC and D17S2226 revealed another 3 cases of 17p11.2 duplication. chromatograms were found, the specific abnormal fragments were With these five markers we were able to identify duplicated/ sequenced and the mutations were characterised. The distribution deleted and normal alleles in 100% of CMT1A and HNPP families. detected in our screening studies fits with what is reported in the Polymorphic markers have been arranged in two sets based on FIX mutation database. 93% of the mutations occurred in the coding their informativeness and length of repeats. The first one included sequences of the gene. They were all independent mutations, mostly D17S921, D17S122, D17S2227 and allowed correct and fast (9/12) associated to the severe form of the disease. Point mutations molecular diagnosis of 17p11.2 duplication/deletion in 90% of cases. were the most recurrent mutations. Three mutations were novel, The second one comprising D17S1357and D17S2226, we used in unreported in the HB database and none involved CpG dinucleotides. non-informative cases and as a verification test. Marker D17S1358 Ten mutations were single base substitutions, one was a base was informative in only 2 cases and therefore it is not currently insertion, and one was a four nucleotide deletion. By identifying the used in our laboratory diagnostic practice. The described two-step detrimental mutations in affected males, carrier status was correctly procedure is fast, efficient and inexpensive, which makes it suitable diagnosed in all the women we studied. 3/12 de novo events were for routine postnatal and prenatal diagnostics of 17p11.2 duplication/ found in maternal meioses. deletion in Bulgarian CMT1 families. P0990. Discordant prenatal diagnosis due to a mosaic P0992. Recurrence of achondrogenesis type II within the structural rearrangement of chromosome 21 in two same family: evidence for germline mosaicism trisomic 21 fetuses. G. Mortier1, M. Le Merrer2, A. Delezoide3, N. Laurent4, C. Thauvin- S. Brisset, A. Aboura, F. Audibert, V. Gautier, R. Frydman, G. Robinet5, T. Rousseau6, P. Coucke1, L. Faivre7; Tachdjian; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Clamart, France. Belgium, 2Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Trisomy 21 mosaicism associated with a structural rearrangement Malades, Paris, France, 3Service de Foetopathologie, Hôpital Robert is uncommon. We report on two prenatal diagnoses in which Debré, Paris, France, 4Service d’anatomo-pathologie, Dijon, France, karyotypes showed mosaicism with an aberrant cell line including 5Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 6Centre de a rearrangement of chromosome 21. Prenatal diagnoses were Médecine foetale, Maternité, Dijon, France, 7Centre de Génétique, performed because of increased nuchal translucency. In the first Dijon, France. case, analysis of trophoblast cells revealed an abnormal karyotype: Achondrogenesis type II is a lethal skeletal dysplasia, characterized 46,XX/47,XX,+del(21)(q21). The amniocentesis and cordocentesis i) clinically by short-limbed dwarfism with short trunk, anasarca, showed a non-mosaic trisomy 21. In the second case, the trophoblast and disproportionately large cranium, and ii) radiologically by lack direct analysis showed a normal male karyotype whereas the of complete ossification of the vertebral bodies. New dominant long-term culture revealed trisomy 21 mosaicism secondary mutations within COL2A1 have been identified in this disorder. Here to a rearrangement of chromosome 21 (either a Robertsonian we report on two pregnancies of a healthy, nonconsanguineous translocation or an isochromosome): 46,XY/47,XY,rea(21q21q)/ young couple. In the first pregnancy, severe micromelia and 45,XY,-21. Amniocentesis confirmed the trisomy 21 in all cells. generalized edema were noted on ultrasound at 21 WG. Clinical FISH analysis proved that these rearrangements were derived from evaluation of the fetus after termination of the pregnancy revealed chromosome 21. The mechanisms of formation are discussed. The short-limbed dwarfism with short trunk, narrow thorax, large head, first case could be explained by the deletion of one chromosome 21 generalized edema, flat face, short nose with anteverted nostrils, in a trisomic zygote with instability of this de novo marker leading micrognathia and short neck. Radiographs showed typical findings to a normal cell line. In the second case different mechanisms are of achondrogenesis type II, including very short and squared suggested. The rearrangement might occurred postzygotically tubular bones, with irregular metaphyseal spurring, short iliac in a normal embryo with a non-disjunction or a translocation of wings and absence of ossification of ischiatic and pubic bones. The homologous chromatides of one chromosome 21 leading to a cell vertebral bodies were very poorly ossified and bipartite in the dorsal 284 Posters - Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 285 region. Metacarpals and phalanges were small, with punctiform giving rise to a cell line with del(8p) confined to trophoblast and the first metacarpals. Histologic studies confirmed the diagnosis. In othe cell line with inv dup(8) confined to fetal tissues, and a third error the second pregnancy, fetal hygroma was noted at 11 WG and in trophoblast giving rise to a new cell line with isochromosome 8q. similar clinical, radiographic and histologic findings were observed. Molecular analysis of gDNA extracted from amniotic cells of the P0995. Tetrasomy 12p or Syndrome de Pallister-Killian. second fetus revealed heterozygosity for a G316D mutation in Interest of the diagnostic on buccal smear the COL2A1 gene. This mutation was absent in gDNA extracted J. Vigneron1, M. J. Gregoire2, M. Andre3, C. Moret4, J. M. Hascoet3; from the parental blood lymphocytes. Although we could not prove 1Unité de Fonctionnelle de Génétique, Maternité Regionale, Nancy, the presence of the mutation in the first fetus because of lack of France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique, CHRU, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, appropriate materials, we strongly believe that our data are in favour France, 3Néonatologie, Maternité Regionale, Nancy, France, of germline mosaicism. 4Neuroradiologie, Hôpital Central, Nancy, France. We present a new case of 12p Tetrasomy diagnosed on buccal P0993. Prenatal diagnosis of partial trisomy 18 by smear in the neonatal period. quantitative fluorescent PCR (QFPCR) A macrosomia was diagnosed during the gestation. A maternal M. Macek1, M. Matejckova1, M. Brouckova1, J. Marek2, M. diabetes was excluded. Simandlova1, V. Krutilkova1, M. Malikova1, D. Chudoba1, D. Novotna1, At birth, the child was referred to NICU for hypotonia and neonatal E. Kulovany3, V. Povysilova4, M. Havlovicova1; distress. 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague 5, Czech Republic, Clinical evaluation showed a coarse and oedematous face, nuchal 2Kardiocenter of University Hospital Motol, Prague 5, Czech Republic, skinfolds, a mouth with downturned corners, dysplastic ears, a 3Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynaecology of University Hospital Motol posterior cleft palate, an hypopigmented area of the scalp leading to and of 2nd Medical School of Charles University, Prague 5, Czech the hypothesis of Pallister-Killian. Republic, 4Institute of Pathologic Anatomy of 2nd Medical School of The neuroradiologic work-up showed a callosal dysgenesis with Charles University, Prague 5, Czech Republic. abnormal gyration pattern. The aim of this report is to document the importance of the QFPCR The diagnosis was prooved by direct FISH of buccal smear and for rapid prenatal diagnosis. This pregnancy was referred in 24th controlled by fibroblast caryotype. week because of decreased maternal serum hCG (0,23 MoM) and This case report illustrates the importance of perinatal US abnormal ultrasound examination. It revealed ren arcuatus, cardiac manifestations of PKS, the importance of caryotyping any foetus anomaly. Karyotype from amniocytes was 46,XX. QFPCR analysis with unexplained macrosomia justified by the severe psychomotor confirmed normal STR pattern for chromosomes 13,21,X and Y using retardation and the unfavourable pronostic. D13S258,D13S631,D21S11, D21S1414,X22,XHPRT STR markers. Buccal smear allows easy and reliable diagnosis of this condition in a Female sex of the fetus was confirmed. D18S535 STR marker fraction of the time necessary for conventional caryotype on cultured (18q12.2-q12.3) characteristics brought evidence of normal diallelic fibroblasts. pattern with peak ratio 1,2. Repeated examinations of STR D18S51 marker disclosed diallelic type of partial trisomy 18 in 18q21.3 region P0996. Detection of trisomy 21 in a fetus during the with peak ratio 2,41 (2,31-2,60). The mother decided for the abortion investigation for Tay Sachs disease; prenatal cytogenetic of this fetus. In aborted fetus ventricular septal defect, open foramen study should be performed associated with molecular or ovale and ductus arteriosus, pericardial exudate, aplasia of umbilical enzymatic studies artery, ren arcuatus with cystic dysplasia of the caudal kidney pole A. Alpman1, G. Sapmaz1, E. Karaca1, T. Cankaya1, E. Bora1, O. were found. These anomalies correspond to the described features Cogulu1, C. Gunduz1, W. J. Kleijer2, F. Ozkinay1; of partial trisomy 18q21.1. The abnormal chromosome was inherited 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine,Dept.of Pediatrics,Subdivision from the mother as follows from the comparison from parental and of Genetics and Teratology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Erasmus Medical Centre fetal electrophoretic patterns. These STR markers did not allow to Rotterdam Department Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ascertain origin in first or second meiosis, because the mother was A family whose previous 2 children died from Tay Sachs disease homozygous for D18S51 STR marker. QFPCR provides exact, rapid applied for genetic counseling. Tay Sachs disease had been diagnosis from microquantity of cells, determination of parental origin confirmed by enzymatic study in the second child and the mother also in partial trisomies, non detectable by the current cytogenetic was 6 weeks pregnant. They were told that prenatal diagnosis for methods in the range of 270-310 bp as was in this case. Supported Tay Sachs and cytogenetic study for chromosomal abnormalities by grants IGA 6462-3,6411-3,LN-00A079,11130003,00000064203 in chorionic villus sampling (CVS) would be available at the 12th week of gestation. CVS was performed at the week of 12th P0994. Placenta/fetus discrepancies involving structural gestation. Enzymatic study showed a normal fetus for Tay Sachs but abnormalities of chromosome 8 detected in a prenatal cytogenetic study revealed a fetal karyotype of trisomy 21. Genetic diagnosis. counseling was given to the family and pregnancy was terminated A. Soler1, A. Sánchez1, A. Carrió1, C. Badenas1, M. Milà1, A. Borrell2; according to the family’s willing and ethic committee proposal at the 1Servei de Genètica. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Servei 14th week of pregnancy. d’Obstetrícia. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. Cytogenetic study should be offered in all pregnancies, which Confined placental mosaicism is detected in 1-2% of pregnancies, prenatal molecular or enzymatic studies are performed. but most of them involve aneuploidies. Structural mosaicism is a very rare event and difficult to interpret. We describe the case of a P0997. The informative analysis and prenatal diagnosis pregnant woman referred for prenatal diagnosis due to advanced in the families with Duchenne muscular dystrophy in maternal age. Semidirect cytogenetic analysis performed on chorionic Moldova. villi showed a mosaic 46,XX,i(8q)/46,XX,del(8)(p11.2) karyotype, P. Stratulat, V. C. Sacara; demonstrated by FISH. Karyotypes of the parents were normal. An Scientific Research Institute of Mother and Child Health Service, amniocentesis was performed at 15 weeks, when ultrasonographical Chisinau, REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA. examination showed comunicant hydrocephaly. Cytogenetic analysis Introduction: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a severe X- of cultured amniocytes showed a 46,XX,dup(8)(p23p11.2) karyotype. linked disease with an incidence of 1 in 3,500 males. Until recently, The pregnancy was terminated; pathologic findings included the most accurate diagnostic tests for DMD were the determination of club feet, clenched left hand, subcutaneous edema and bilateral serum creatine-kinase levels, muscle biopsy, and EMG. However, the hydrocephaly. Molecular studies using chromosome 8 microsatellites application of recombinant DNA technology to the diagnosis of DMD performed on parents’ blood and fetal tissues revealed a maternal has resulted in the development of more accurate tests. meiotic origin of the inv dup(8p) with deletion of distal p23 region and Methods: 81 families with increased risk of DMD passed clinico- duplication of remaining 8p, in agreement with other published cases neurological, CK test, muscle ultrasonography investigations and (Floridia et al. 1996). We propose a model to explain the cytogenetic molecular study. MPCR’s were performed for deletion detection (18 findings, which includes a first maternal meiotic error giving rise to a different exons of dystrophin gene were tested in patients DNA) and large dicentric isochromosome 8 present in the ovum, a second error RFLP-analysis (pERT87-8/TaqI, pERT87-15/BamH1 and 16 intron/ in one of the first zygote divisions with misdivision of the dicentric 8 TaqI polymorphisms).Posters - Sensory Genetics 286 287 Results and Discussion: About 76 % of probands were proved to be (cryptophtalmos) and 96% (syndactyly), and of minor criteria varied carriers of dystrophin gene deletion by MPCR. The given test highly is between 81% (renal agenesis/laryngeal anomalies) and 23% (cleft informative at the patients from Moldova. The analysis of informative lip/palate). Different renal anomalies were present in 96% of fetuses. families with MDD/B on the three intragenic polymorphisms pERT87- Severe form of the syndrome should be more frequently diagnosed 8/Tag1, pERT87-15/BamH1 and 16intron/Tag1 has revealed high of in-utero regarding a very poor prognosis and high perinatal lethality. polymorphism 16intron/Tag1 (47,36 %) and low percent of informative Furthermore, a high recurrence risk of 25% among sibs warrants was determined at the pERT 87-15/BamH1 polymorphism (21%). diagnosis for appropriate genetic counselling, the prenatal diagnosis Smaller percent of informative has given polymorphism pERT87- being also much facilitated in further pregnancies in the cases with 8/Tag1 (41,77 %). These dates coincides with theoretical accounts of positive family history. Therefore, we are emphasizing the frequency populations frequencies of the pERT87-8/Tag1, pERT87-15/BamH1 of renal agenesis and laryngeal anomalies among fetal population and 16 intron/Tag1 alleles which were counted by Hardy-Weinberg and suggesting these two features should integrate major diagnostic equilibrium. criteria of Fraser syndrome in fetuses. Conclusion: The algorithm of molecular researches, selected by us, allows to define informative in 76 families (93% cases) and, P 21. Sensory Genetics accordingly, to conduct clinical, preclinical and prenatal diagnosis in DMD families. P1000. Retinitis pigmentosa, metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, and brachyodactyly: an affected P0998. Systematic follow up of 151 infants after brother and sister diagnosis of nuchal anomalies at the 1st trimester I. Durbala1, I. Dimofte1, L. C. Enache2, D. P. Balaban3, A. Popa1, V. C. Baumann1, R. Delagarde2, E. Vuillard3,4, J. Oury5; Broasca Madar4; 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Clinical 1Medical Genetics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Constanta, Genetics unit,hopital Robert Debre, Paris, France, 3prenatal diagnosis Romania, 2Cell and Molecular Biology Deparment, UMF “Gr.T.Popa”, unit, Paris, France, 4Hopital Robert Debre, France, France, 5prenatal Iasi, Romania, 3Biochemistry Department, Faculty of Medicine, diagnosis unit ,Hopital Robert Debre, Paris, France. Constanta, Romania, 4Management and Public Health Department, AIMS: to assess developmental outcome of infants with nuchal Faculty of Medicine, Constanta, Romania. anomalies at first trimester scanning and normal conventional A brother and sister, children of normal parents, are described. karyotype. They had retinitis pigmentosa, causing near blindness as a result DESIGN : Between 1994 and 2001, abnormal nuchal thickness was of very narrow fields of vision, associated with metaphyseal observed in 360 pregnancies. All measurement were performed by chondrodysplasia and marked shortening of the metacarpals and the same observer (EV). Nuchal anomalies were subdivided in nuchal terminal phalanges. thickening, nuchal translucency, and cystic hygroma. The fetuses Autosomal recessive inheritance is suggested with a common were karyotyped, other anomalies were carefully sought and prenatal biochemical cause for all this defects. genetic counselling given accordingly. This apparently new association of retinitis pigmentosa with a RESULTS : For 184 fetuses, the parents finally elicited to terminate systemic bone dysplasia emphasis that this not common clinical the pregnancy. 176 children were delivered (18 of them with diagnosis has a variety of different possible causes. scanning anomalies). All delivered babies were examined by one examiner (CB), and clinical follow up at 3, 6, 12 and 24 months P1001. De novo translocation t (13; 18)(q14, q23) in a girl was offered. 21 were lost to follow up. Among the remaining 151 with disproportional short stature, congenital glaucoma, newborns, 136 (90%) were considered to have normal psychomotor development at age 2. Among these, 21 (15%) had malformations unusual face, persistent ductus arteriosus and muscular (prenatally detected in 17 cases) : 12 isolated (8.8%) and 9 multiple hypotonia (5.3%). In 15 cases, (10%) delayed psychomotor development B. I. Dimitrov, D. M. Avdjieva, E. G. Simeonov, I. Boneva, A. was shown, either isolated (7 cases) or associated with identified Andreev; (cyto)genetic syndromes (8 cases, 7 of them diagnosed postnatally). University Pediatric Hospital, Section of Clinical Genetics, Sofia, Ultrasonographic anomalies most predictive of an abnormal Bulgaria. neurodevelopmental outcome were : nuchal hygroma, persistence of Kamelia, K.S., a female patient, born at term(W-3000 gr.,L-46 cm.), US anomalies in 2nd trimester, and presence of associated CHD. from second uneventful pregnancy of unrelated young parents was CONCLUSIONS : Neonates presenting a nuchal anomaly during investigated because of disproportional rhizomelic short stature pregnancy are at high-risk for psychomotor developmental delay, and dysmorphic face, reminding hypo/ achondroplasia. The first even when neonatal evaluation appears “normal”. pregnancy was aborted spontaneously. Otherwise, the family history was unremarkable. P0999. Fraser syndrome : Report of 5 additional fetal At admission the patient manifested disproportional short stature with shortening of the long bones of limbs, high forehead with cases and review of the literature prominent tubera, depressed nasal bridge, low set dysplastic J. Martinovic1, N. Laurent2, A. L. Delezoide1, T. Rousseau3, C. ears, hypertelorism, short neck, congenital bilateral glaucoma and Esculpavit1, L. Faivre4, N. Morichon-Delvalez1, M. Vekemans1, E. congenital heart disease (persistent ductus arteriosus). Cytogenetic Justarbo2, P. Sagot3; testing disclosed a de novo translocation t(13;18)(q14;q23) in the 1Service d’Histo-Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Departement de patient. Progressing shortening of long bones and initial metaphyseal Génétique, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Service changes of both ulnae (hypoplasia, irregularity, cupping of the ends) d’Anatomie et de Cytologie Pathologique, Centre Hospitalier have been observed during 1 year follow-up. Universitaire, Dijon, France, 3Clinique Gynécologique et Obstétricale, Authors discuss the differential diagnosis and genetic basis of Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Dijon, France, 4Centre de Génétique, this unusual case of skeletal dysplasia, caused by structural Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Dijon, France. chromosomal aberration. The aim of this paper is a review of the diagnostic criteria of the Fraser multiple malformation syndrome (MIM 219000) in its severe fetal form. We based our study on the review of the literature, and P1002. Study Of The Wolfram Syndrome Gene (wfs1) In report on the five additional fetal cases from two non-consanguineous Spanish Patients With Diabetes Mellitus And Deafness sibships. E. Domenech, M. Gomez Zaera, V. Nunes; We reviewed 21 detailed fetal descriptions of Fraser syndrome Cancer Research Institute, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. from the literature (Thomas et al., Boyd et al., Ramsing et al.), and Wolfram syndrome (WS) is an autosomal recessive compared total of 26 fetal cases to 68 pediatric cases reviewed by neurodegenerative disorder characterised by early onset Gattuso et al., the last representing viable milder form of the Fraser diabetes mellitus and progressive optic atrophy, as well as other syndrome. clinical features such as deafness, diabetes insipida, renal tract A quantitative estimate of the frequency of the principle clinical abnormalities and diverse psychiatric illnesses. manifestations in the fetal versus pediatric population was obtained. A gene (WFS1) localized on 4p16.1 has been described, encoding The sensitivities of major criteria in fetuses varied between 77% a putative 890 amino acid transmembrane protein, WFS1. Recently, 286 Posters - Sensory Genetics 287 a new locus for WS has been identified on 4q22-24, providing the hearing impairment was found. The majority of homozygous for additional evidence for the genetic heterogeneity of this syndrome. 35delG mutation have severe or profound hearing loss. Only one This work aims to describe possible nucleotide changes in the WFS1 homozygous has significant asymmetrical hearing impairment. Two gene in a Spanish population affected with diabetes mellitus (DM, heterozygous patients have mild hearing impairment, but both of n=38), neurosensorial deafness (F, n=48) or both conditions (DM+F, them are from deaf families. n=48) vs. control group (C) of 48 healthy individuals. We have confirmed that 35delG mutation of the Cx26 gene accounts We have identified a total of 18 nucleotide changes in the WFS1 for a large proportion of cases with congenital NSHL and especially in gene: 3 mutations (D729N, L751I and V871M, the latter previously cases with unknown reason. More over hearing loss have considered described), 4 new polymorphisms (1294C>G, 1308C>G, 1364C>T to be acquired in some of 35delG homozygote before identification of and 2438T>C) and 11 previously known polymorphisms. The analysis this mutation. Thus molecular genetic analysis will allow appropriating of the association of the polymorphisms with diabetes mellitus or genetic counseling. Other Cx26 mutations are under study. deafness has revealed, when comparing DM and DM+F groups vs. control group, statistical differences in the allelic and genotypic P1005. Does molecular testing really improve genetic distribution of the following changes: 1185T>C, 1832G>A, 2433G>A counselling ? example of Cx26 in non syndromic isolated and 2565A>G. deafness Our data suggest that some changes in heterozygosis in the WFS1 R. Bernard, N. Levy, S. Sigaudy; gene can contribute to the diabetes mellitus and deafness phenotype, Département de Génétique Médicale, Marseille, France. in the population studied. Hearing impairment is frequent : 2/1000 individuals present with This work has been supported by the MCYT, SAF 99-0079. E. deafness occuring in childhood. Half of which is now considered as Domènech has a FPI grant from MCYT. having an hereditary origin. Around 70% of genetic cases are non- syndromic and most of them involve the connexin 26 gene. Here P1003. Brachydactyly-Symphalangism-Deafness we present a multidisciplinary approach toward genetic counseling Syndrome (BSDS). A clinical-genetic study of 18 patients and molecular exploration in inherited deafness. Based on our in two families experience, two types of situations are particularly critical and will M. Bembea1, C. Jurca1, S. Bembea2, R. Spineanu1, M. Barbu1; thus be discussed. 1Clinical Children Hospital, Oradea, Romania, 2Clinical Adults One concerns the identification of a single mutation in CX26 among Hospital, ORL Department, Oradea, Romania. patients affected with profund, bilateral, prelingual deafness. In such Introduction: (Multiple Synostoses with Brachydactyly; Brachydactyly- a situation, genetic heterogeneity as well as a possible autosomal Symphalangism Syndrome 186500, MIM) is a rare entity, and dominant mode of inheritance have to be considered. Besides, the diverse names reflect the uncertainty in the definition of the some mutations in CX26 have been reported as not being disease syndrome. Objective: The comparison of clinical-genetic aspects causing. Further explorations in non coding sequences (5’ UTR exon, between the patients of two families and a correlation with data promoter, introns, enhancer…) have thus to be discussed. In addition, obtained from review. Patients and method: Our clinical-genetic deletions in the Connexin 30 gene, adjacent to CX 26, have been study comprises 18 cases personally examined in two not connected reported in a digenic association in patients carrying heterozygous families (a family with 14 cases, another family with 4 cases). CX26 mutations. Results: The cases offer a complete and well-defined clinical picture The second point concerns the identification of disease causing of a rare syndrome that has as definitory elements: brachydactyly+sy mutations leading to a prenatal diagnosis request from parents. This mphalangism+progressive deafness+autosomal dominant inheritance aspect has to be carefully considered since the French National Ethic pattern. The syndrome is characterized by complete penetrance Comittee was unfavourable to termination of pregnancies in case and variable expressivity. They are surprisingly similar in what the of mutations in CX26. To date, in France, no pluridisciplinary center extension of finger morphologic lesions is concerned, but different of prenatal diagnosis access to prenatal diagnosis in deafness. We in what the onset age and the degree of hearing loss is concerned. wish to discuss the difficulties raised by the recent identification of The large number of cases, on more generations, with constant genes in sensory disorders with regard to the improvement of genetic association of the three anomalies, offers a good opportunity for gene counseling. investigation by linkage analysis. The role of Nog gene is discussed. Conclusions: The description of a large series of 18 examined cases P1006. Evaluation of Relation between Glaucoma and belonging to two families shows the association of three distinct Antioxidative System (GST-M and GST-T) Polymorphisms pathologic changes: Brachydactyly-Symphalangism-Deafness A. C. Ozkilic1, M. Guven1, M. Unal2, K. Devranoglu2, T. Ulutin1; (BSD Syndrome). This definition of the syndrome, including all three 1Medical Biology, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty,Istanbul University, pathologic changes, is distinguishing this syndrome from other Istanbul, Turkey, 2Ophtalmology,Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty,Istanbul resembling entities classified in the MIM catalogue. University, Istanbul, Turkey. Recent studies have been pointed out to the important role of P1004. Incidence of connexin-26 mutation 35delG and oxidative mechanisms in the opthalmological diseases such as sensorineural hearing loss with unknown reason. glaucome and cataract. Glutathione S-transferase (GST), one of T. G. Markova1, I. A. Shagina2, S. M. Megrelishvili1, N. G. Zaitseva1, the enzymes of antioxidative system, has an important function A. V. Polykov2; in defending against oxidative damages. µ (GST-M) and θ (GST- 1St.-Petersburg ENT and Speech Research Institute, St.-Petersburg, T) are the isoenzymes of GST whose polymorphisms are shown Russian Federation, 2Moscow Research Center for Medical Genetics, to affect the tendency toward different kinds of diseases. We Moscow, Russian Federation. searched the relation between glaucoma and GST-M and GST-T Connexin-26 (Cx26) mutations account for 30-60% of non-syndromal polymorphisms that play role in oxidative defense mechanisms. hearing loss (NSHL) in European and American populations. Only Results of 46 glaucoma patients (45-71 years of age) were compared one mutation 35delG is responsible for 70-80% of detectable Cx26 with 53 normal control cases (48-68 years of age) lacking in an mutations. The hearing impairment has been described as severe or ophtalmological disease. Significant relation was obtained between profound for these patients. Recently some studies confirmed a high GST-M null (with deletion) genotype and glaucoma (x2 : 4.02 , p: carrier frequency, 2,14%, for 35delG mutation in Russia, but there 0.04) whereas there was no statistical significance between GST-T was no data about frequency of this mutation between NSHL in the null genotype and glaucoma (x2 :0.13 , p:0.71) According to this study country. assessing the pre-results of a wide-spread research, GST-M null We have studied 75 unrelated individuals with congenital NSHL in genotype in Turkish population have an effect on tendency toward order to evaluate the prevalence 35delG mutation. Most of patients glaucoma. have had NSHL with unknown reason. We did not exclude patients with some risk factors for acquired hearing loss. In a total this mutation was found in 44% of the patients tested and was presented in 42% of sporadic cases. The hearing loss in homozygous and heterozygous individuals varied from moderate to profound. No evidence of progression of Posters - Sensory Genetics 288 289 P1007. Linkage analysis of a three generation pedigree and have 15 children, 6 of them are affected and one of these is with Autosomal Dominant Vitreoretinochoroidopathy newborn. We have carried out the linkage analysis with candidate (ADVIRC). genes and revealed the LOD score of 3.53 on chromosome 15 N. A. Hart-Holden1, G. C. M. Black2, P. D. Watson1, B. A. Lafaut3, L. between D15S123 and D15S979 in 38 cM interval. The absence of M. Messiaen4, B. Loeys4, A. P. Read1; recombination did not allow to refine this interval. The photoreceptor 1Dept. Medical Genetics, St Marys Hospital, Manchester, United cell-specific nuclear receptor gene (PNR) is a candidate gene from Kingdom, 2Dept. Clinical Genetics, St. Marys Hospital, Manchester, this locus. The mutations in it are known in some cases of RP with United Kingdom, 3Dept. of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, late onset. We have screened PNR and detected the delA481 in Ghent, Belgium, 4Dept. of Human Genetics, Ghent University maternal chromosome, which segregated with affected status. It is a first frame shift mutation in PNR; other reported mutations were in Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. frame. We have not found the second mutation in this family in this Autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy (ADVIRC) is a rare gene during sequencing the coding part of paternal chromosome. condition, which was first described by Kaufman et al. (1982). Lafaut et al reported a three-gene pedigree with ADVIRC, on which we have performed linkage analysis. A number of vitreoretinal disorders have P1010. Linkage to 18qter differentiates two clinically been localised to a region of chromosome 11 (11p14-11q23) and overlapping syndromes: Congenital Cataracts Facial include dominant familial exudative vitreoretinopathy 1 and 3 (EVR1 Dysmorphism Neuropathy and Marinesco-Sjögren and EVR3), dominant inflammatory vitreoretinopathy (VMD2) and syndromes. dominant neovascular inflammatory vitreoretinopathy (VRNI). Due to C. Lagier-Tourenne1, D. Chaigne2, J. Gong3, J. Flori4, D. the relative richness of this region in retinal genes with overlapping Christmann5, J. Flament3, J. L. Mandel1, M. Koenig1, H. Dollfus6; phenotypes, initial analysis was performed for markers D11S1902 1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2Clinique Sainte Odile, Strasbourg, France, (11q13.3) and D11S527 (11q13.5). Further linkage analysis was 3Service d’ophtalmologie, Hopitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, performed yielding two recombinants. Evidence that the ADVIRC France, 4Centre médico-chirurgical et ostétrical, Schiltigheim, France, locus is centromeric to marker D11S929 was provided with a 5Service de radiologie, Hopitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, France, crossover in individual 5, in which segregation occurred with marker 6Fédération de génétique, Hopitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, D11S922 (11p15.5) but not with D11S929 (11p14). A crossover France. in individual 10 at D11S4139 (11q13.3) indicates that the locus is The Marinesco –Sjögren (MS) syndrome is an autosomal recessive centromeric to this marker. In this individual segregation occurred disorder characterized by somatic and mental retardation, congenital with D11S1362 (11q14.1) but not with D11S4139. Of the number of cataracts and cerebellar ataxia. Peripheral neuropathy and acute candidate genes in this region, the most likely to be associated with rhabdomyolysis have been also occasionally described. CCFDN ADVIRC is PAX6. Normally associated with aniridia, PAX6 has been syndrome (Congenital Cataracts, Facial Dysmorphism and implicated broadly in human anterior segment malformations (Hanson Neuropathy) is a recently reported condition considered to be a et al 1994, Mirzayans et al 1995). differential diagnosis of MSS (Tournev et al, 1999). CCFDN has been diagnosed, so far, only in a specific Gypsy group in Bulgaria. This P1008. Nance-Horan syndrome: refinement of the gene disorder was mapped by linkage analysis to 18qter (Angelicheva et localization on Xp22.13 and analysis of 5 candidate al, 1999). genes We performed the clinical and molecular study of two A. Toutain1, B. Dessay1, N. Ronce1, D. Trump2, C. Moraine1, B. consanguineous families with patients initially reported to have MS Franco3; syndrome. The patients of the first family, originating from Turkey, had 1Genetics Department, Tours, France, 2Department of Medical a classical MS syndrome especially with a pronounced cerebellar Genetics, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Telethon Institute of Genetics atrophy on MRI and an evocative muscle pathology. Linkage to and Medicine, Naples, Italy. 18qter was ruled out. Nance-Horan syndrome (NHS) is an X-linked condition characterized The three affected siblings of the second family, of Gypsy origin, by congenital cataracts, dental abnormalities, dysmorphic features, differed clinically from the previous family by the presence of and mental retardation in 30% cases. Previous studies have mapped microcornea, marked peripheral neuropathy and a discrete cerebellar the disease gene to a 2 cM interval on Xp22.2 between DXS43 and atrophy. The molecular findings were consistent with the diagnosis DXS999. We report additional linkage data resulting from the analysis of CCFDN syndrome. Indeed, all three affected siblings were of 11 independent NHS families. A maximum Lod score of 9.94 (theta homozygous over four consecutive 18qter markers (D18S1122 to = 0.00) was obtained at the RS1 locus and a recombination with the D18S70), confirming linkage to the CCFDN locus and excluding the locus DXS1195 on the telomeric side was observed in two families, diagnosis of MS syndrome. thus refining the location of the gene to an interval of around 1 Mb on This study emphasizes the clinical overlap between the MS and Xp22.13. Direct sequencing or SSCP analysis of the coding exons of CCFDN syndromes which are however distinct genetic entities. 5 genes (SCML1, SCML2, STK9, RS1 and PPEF1), considered as Further molecular studies should lead to a better delineation of these candidate genes on the basis of their location in the critical interval, syndromes. failed to detect any mutation in 12 unrelated NHS patients thus making it highly unlikely that these genes are implicated in NHS. P1011. ACE gene insertion-deletion polymorphism and risk of advanced retinopathy of prematurity in Kuwaiti P1009. Linkage study and detection of a new mutation Arabs in PNR gene in large family with inherited retinitis M. Z. Haider, M1, L. V. Devarajan, M1, M. Al-Essa, M1, H. Kumar, M2; pigmentosa 1Kuwait University, Safat, Kuwait, 2Ibn Sina Hospital, Ophthalmology A. Polyakov1, V. Fedotov2, O. Khlebnikova3, N. Vasserman1, A. Dept, Kuwait. Dergacheva1, S. Tverskaya1; Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a disease characterized by 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian neovascularization which occurs in infants with short gestational Federation, 2Genetic Counseling Department of Diagnostic Center, age and low birth weight and leads to retinal detachment and Voronezh, Russian Federation, 3Institute of eye diseases, Moscow, blindness. In a proportion of ROP cases, the disease progresses to Russian Federation. advanced stages despite rigorous intervention. The genotypes for Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a heterogeneous group of eye diseases, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) gene insertion/deletion (I/D) which includes some autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant polymorphism were determined in 181 Kuwaiti premature infants by inherited types of disorders caused by mutations in different genes. using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method. The incidence of As usual the clinical history of RP starts within the first decade with I/D genotypes was compared in ROP cases (n = 74) and controls night blindness, followed during the second and the third decade (n = 107) and within the two subgroups of ROP patients; one in by slow reduction of the visual field. Here we are reported about which ROP regressed spontaneously (stage 1-3; n = 53) and two, in large families from Voronezh province with inborn night blindness, which it progressed to advanced stages (stage 4-5; n = 21). When hemeralopia, cataract and retinal pigmentary degeneration the ROP cases were considered collectively, the incidence of DD detected on first year of life. The parents are not consanguine genotype was almost identical to that in controls. The incidence of heterozygous ID genotype was higher in controls and the incidence 288 Posters - Sensory Genetics 289 of II genotype was higher in ROP cases compared to controls (p P1014. Mutations in CLDN14 are a rare cause of non- < 0.01). In contrast to this, when ROP cases were divided in two syndromic recessive childhood deafness. subgroups the incidence of DD genotype was significantly higher in advanced stage ROP cases compared to spontaneously regressed M. Wattenhofer1, V. Falciola1, A. Pampanos2, R. Rabionet3, N. Scamuffa1, C. ROP cases (p < 0.04). The incidences of ID and II genotypes were Rossier1, M. B. Petersen2, X. Estivill3, S. E. Antonarakis1, A. Reymond1; not significantly different amongst the two subgroups of ROP patients. 1Medical Genetics, Geneva University, Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, The data suggests that the presence of DD genotype of ACE gene 2Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece, 3Medical and Molecular Genetics I/D polymorphism in Kuwaiti premature infants is associated with a Center, Institut de Recerca Oncologica, Barcelona, Spain. higher risk of progression of ROP to advanced stages. Approximatively 50% of early-onset deafness cases are genetic and 50% of recessive cases are due to mutations in the GJB2 gene. The P1012. Linkage analysis in otosclerotic families claudin CLDN14 gene on chromosome 21, encoding a member of F. Di Leva1, L. Strollo2, A. P. D’Adamo3, M. Carella3, A. Caravelli1, G. the tight junction protein family, is mutated in two DFNB29 Pakistani Auletta2, W. Livi4, A. Renieri5, M. D’Urso1, P. Gasparini3, E. Marciano2, families. To determine if CLDN14 mutations are an important A. Franzè1; contributor to the etiology of childhood deafness, we screened 1IIGB-CNR, Naples, Italy, 2Institute of Audiology, Department of the CLDN14 single-coding exon on 366 chromosomes of non- Neuroscience and Behavioural Sciences, University “ Federico II “, syndromic recessive deaf patients from Spain and Greece, negative Naples, Italy, 3TIGEM, Via P. Castellino 111, Naples, Italy, 4Institute for GJB2 gene mutations. This study allowed us to define multiple of Otorhinolaryngological Sciences, University “Le Scotte, Siena, polymorphisms in the CLDN14 gene. Italy, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, University University “Le Scotte”, An amino-acid substitution, G101R, found in a Greek patient in Siena, Italy. heterozygozity and leading to G101R is likely to be pathogenic. This Otosclerosis is the single most common cause of hearing impairment variant has not been found in the remaining 365 chromosomes and among white adults with a prevalence of 0.2-1%. Mean age of onset affects a conserved residue of the claudin family. Gly101 is within the is in the third decade and 90% of affected persons are under 50 second transmembrane domain of this tight junction protein family years of age at the time of diagnosis. Long-term follow up suggests and is preserved in 18 of the 20 described CLDN proteins. Unlike the that about 10% of these persons ultimately develop a profound modification observed in our patient the two remaining CLDN present neurosensorial hearing loss across all frequencies. The etiology of small hydrophobic residues at this position (Ala and Val). R101 has otosclerosis is unknown and its genetics is poorly understood. The been transmitted by the hearing father and cannot therefore be majority of studies indicate autosomal dominant inheritance with considered as a dominant mutation. We have investigated newly reduced penetrance or heterogeneity or digenic recessive inheritance identified 5’UTR exons for a potential maternally-inherited mutation or digenic inheritance, but of an X-linked dominant gene and an in this patient and found no potential second mutation. We are autosomal recessive gene. Other studies suggest that otosclerosis currently examining the pathogenicity of the G101R substitution in may be a xenogenetic disease that requires a specific host genotype a functional assay. Our results indicate that mutations in CLDN14 and exposure to a specific viral pathogen for the disease phenotype do not substantially contribute to the non-syndromic deafness in the to be expressed. Mediterranean population. To elucidate the pathogenesis of the otosclerosis, identification of the responsible genes is essential. Until now, genetic linkage in P1015. Mitochondrial DNA mutations and deafness in the otosclerosis has been demonstrated only in two families. The first portuguese population OTSC locus was identified on chromosomes 15q25-q26, and recently H. Caria1,2, T. Matos1, I. Galhardo3, M. Simão3, A. O’Neill4, Ó. Dias3, the second on chromosome 7q34-q36. Both OTSC loci are very large M. Andrea3, C. Correia1, G. Fialho1; of 14.5 and 16 cM, respectively. We have selected Italian families 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Lisbon, Portugal, 2High with otoslerosis and we have realized a linkage exclusion/association Scholl of Health, Politecnic Institute of Setubal, Setubal, Portugal, analysis. Based on this strategy, we have excluded the linkage of 3Center of ORL, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Center of some families to known OTSC loci suggesting the existence of at ORL, Hospital Egas Moniz, Lisbon, Portugal. least one new OTSC locus. We have also evidence that one of our Mitochondrial DNA mutations have been implicated in hearing families is linked to OTSC1 locus. loss, existing several mutations already reported in deaf families. However, despite the increasing number of reports implicating mtDNA P1013. Spectrum of connexin 26 gene (GJB2) mutations mutations in hearing impairment, the frequency of these mutations as in families from Bashkortostan with inhereted non- cause of nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing impairment (NSSHI) syndromic hearing loss. remains unknown. Some of those mutations, namely A1555G and L. U. Dzhemileva, I. M. Khidiatova, E. K. Khusnutdinova; A7445G, have been describe in different ethnic populations raising Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. the possibility that such mutations are more frequent than initially Recent findings that a high proportion of non-syndromic hereditary thought. Screening for mtDNA mutations might thus be worthwhile in sensorineural hearing loss is due to mutations in the gene for many cases of familial hearing impairment. connexin 26 indicate the crucial role that the gene product plays In the present study, we have analysed 30 NSSHI families with for normal functioning of the cochlea. Mutations in the GJB2 gene possible maternal inheritance, as well as 500 unrelated normal account for the large proportion of pre-lingual hearing impairment hearing individuals, for the presence of A1555G and A7445G with a prevalence up to 50% in autosomal recessive cases and still mutations, by using restriction digestion and when relevant, direct undefined prevalence in sporadic cases. sequencing of PCR products. Three other mutations affecting Ninety-seven subjects affected by non-syndromic sensorineural mitochondrial tRNASer (UCN) gene at nt 7472, 7510 and 7511 were hearing impairment were unrolled in the study. The patients had also studied. The results obtained represent an additional contribution either a family history of childhood hearing deficit or represented for the genetic characterization of the portuguese population. sporadic cases. Cx26 mutations we found in 58% of subjects. We identified the prevalence of the 35delG allele in the patients of P1016. Mutations in the connexin 26 gene in German, sporadic cases with non-syndromic hereditary sensorineural hearing Hungarian and Polish patients with hearing impairment loss from Bashkortostan to be 52% of chromosomes screened. B. Haack1,2, T. Tóth3, M. Wróbel4, I. Sziklai3, W. Szyfter4, H. Zenner2, Screening the patients of 97 subjects we identified 66% 35delG N. Blin1, M. Pfister2, S. Kupka1,2; mutation homozygotes and 20% heterozygotes. In addition to above 1Department of Anthropology and Human Genetics, University of mutations several types of mutations - del235G, 313-314delAA, Tübingen, Germany, 2Department of Otolaryngology, University 360delG, del314A were identified. The 35delG mutation was present of Tübingen, Germany, 3Medical and Health Science Center, in 86% of all Cx26 mutations identified. Also we observed two Department of Otolaryngology, University of Debrecen, Hungary, new mutations del314A and 360delG in the patients. The possible 4Department of Otolaryngology, University of Medical Sciences, implication of the connexin genes mutations in the pathophysiology Poznan, Poland. of some progressive adult deafness opens new prospects in the Mutations in the connexin 26 gene (GJB2) encoding a gap-junction fine diagnostic of the ear diseases and eventually may lead to new protein have been identified in many patients with childhood hearing therapeutic strategies applied to the cochlea. impairment (HI). One single mutation, 35delG, accounts for up to Posters - Sensory Genetics 290 291 70% of all analyzed European patients with HI inherited in autosomal coding region of the GJB2 gene, which revealed the W24X (2 alleles), recessive manner and 10% of patients with HI of unknown origin, L90P (2 alleles), 291insA (1 allele), and R184P (1 allele) mutations. respectively. Therefore we screened our collectives containing 291 The patients were also screened for the known mtDNA mutations German, 55 Polish and 90 Hungarian patients and corresponding A1555G, A7445G, 7472insC, and A3243G. The homoplasmic control subjects for this and other connexin 26 mutations by PCR, A1555G mutation was detected in two cases, one sporadic case SSCP and sequencing. For German patients with sporadic hearing and one family with hearing disabled members in both paternal impairment the 35delG frequency was 0.1 and for Polish cases 0.43, and maternal lineages. The A7445G mutation was detected in one respectively. For Hungarian individuals the allele frequency was 0.41. sporadic case of mild hearing loss. We conclude that GJB2 mutations All patients showing heterozygosity for 35delG or conspicous SSCP- are responsible for a large proportion of prelingual, non-syndromic results were sequenced. This study revealed several new patient- deafness in the Greek population, and that routine screening related mutations (e.g. G59V, D66A, I82M, K112E, R127H) and new for mtDNA mutations in congenital/childhood onset deafness is gene variants resulting in amino acid substitutions. In summary, more warranted. than 20 new allelic changes were detected and for most of them, patterns of inheritance were documented. P1019. Deletion of GJB6 in recessive non syndromic deafness P1017. Association of the T14709C mutation of A. Roux1, N. Pallares-Ruiz1, M. Mondain2, P. Blanchet3, M. mitochondrial DNA with maternally inherited diabetes Claustres1; mellitus and deafness in an Italian Family. 1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire, CHU, Montpellier, France, L. Rigoli1, D. C. Salpietro1, R. A. Caruso2, C. Di Bella1, G. Calabro’1, 2ORL Pediatrique, CHU, Montpellier, France, 3Service de Genetique V. Procopio1, M. Rigoli1, I. Barberi3; Medicale, CHU, Montpellier, France. 1Unità Operativa di Genetica ed Immunologia Pediatrica, Messina, Congenital profound deafness has a known genetic origin in more Italy, 2Dpt.Patologia Umana, Messina, Italy, 3Dpt. Scienze Pediatriche than 50% of the cases. If the majority of the non syndromic hearing Mediche e Chirurgiche, Messina, Italy. impairment (NSHI) show an autosomal recessive inheritance A maternal effect in the transmission of non-insulin dependent associated to more than 25 loci, abnormal pattern in the GJB2 gene diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) suggests the involvement of genetic (connexin 26) is most commonly observed. Other connexin genes factors encoded by mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in its pathogenesis. have been more rarely involved and attention was given to GJB6 In this report, the np 3243, np 7445 and np 14709 mt mutations, gene (connexin 30). We have shown that a homozygous deletion and the 10.4 Kb deletion in 10 Italian families (Southern Italy) with of a minimal 250 kb region encompassing this gene causes NSHI. maternally inherited diabetes mellitus and/or deafness have been More strikingly, real time quantitative PCR has evidenced that the analysed.The np 3243, np 7445 mutations and the 10.4 KB deletion association of this deletion in trans of the GJB2 gene 35delG or were not found in any of the subjects of our study. Instead,in a family E47X mutations is also associated with NSHI. Finding this deletion the mutation T14709C was found in three probands and in their in several unrelated families prompt us to suggest that this mutation diabetic mother. In this pedigree, a 16-year-old boy became deaf at is not rare. To assess the origin of this deletion, haplotype analysis the age of 12. The sister, who was diagnosed as having deafness at was performed in the DFNB1 region (encompassing the GJB2 and the age of 6, was affected by a severe myopathy and complained of GJB6 genes): the preliminary data do not favor the hypothesis progressive muscle weakness and exercise intolerance. A diagnosis of an ancestral mutation. The cloning of the deletion borders is of mitochondriopathy was based on a deltoid muscle biopsy that under progress. Sequence analysis of these regions should help to showed a large number of ragged-red fibres. The brother, a 10-year- elucidate whether this deletion arise from a hotspot mutational event. old boy became deaf and developed diabetes at the age of 5 and 8 years, respectively.Their mother, a 60-year-old female was diagnosed P1020. High frequency of 35delG mutation in Connexin as having NIDDM at the age of 57 years. The clinical phenotypes 26 gene in Czech population and among Czech recipients of our subjects carrying the T14709C mtDNA mutation are different. of cochlear implantate. Identification of all mtDNA alterations or of interactions of mtDNA with P. Seeman1, P. Lesny2, D. Groh2, V. Boleslavská3, E. Seemanová, nuclear genes would be required for the correct evaluation of the Prof2, D. Rasková3, Z. Kabelka, Doc2; pathogenic mechanism in maternally inherited diabetes mellitus and 1Charles University Prague, Praha 5, Czech Republic, 2Charles deafness. University Prague, Praha, Czech Republic, 3University Hospital Motol, Praha, Czech Republic. P1018. Prevalence of GJB2 and mtDNA mutations in Mutations in Connexin 26 gene (Cx26) are the most common known childhood deafness in the Greek population. genetic cause of sensorineural prelingual deafness. The mutation A. Pampanos1, M. Grigoriadou1, T. Iliades2, N. Voyiatzis2, J. 35delG was reported to be by far the most common in Cx26. Most Economides3, P. Leotsakos3, P. Neou4, M. Tsakanikos4, T. Antoniadi5, European patients with prelingual nonsyndromic deafness are I. Konstantopoulou6, D. Yannoukakos6, K. Gronskov7, K. Brondum- homozygotes for 35delG. Nielsen7, E. Papadopoulou8, J. Gyftodimou1, A. Skevas9, M. B. No data about the heterozygotes frequency of this common mutation Petersen1; in Czech population were available befor our study. 1Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece, 2Aristotle University of In order to estimate the carrier frequency of 35delG in Cx26 gen in Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, 3”Aghia Sophia” Children’s Czech population with normal hearing, we screened 503 randomly Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4”P. & A. Kyriakou” Children’s Hospital, choosen DNA samples from healthy relatives of our neurologic Athens, Greece, 5”MITERA” Maternity and Surgical Center, Athens, patients and from patients with different neuromuscular disorders Greece, 6National Center for Scientific Research “Demokritos”, without hearing loss. Screening was done by allele specific PCR and Athens, Greece, 7The John F. Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, positive samples were confirmed by fluorescent fragment analysis. 8University General Hospital of Crete, Heraklion, Greece, 9University 17 individuals out of 503 were heterozygous for 35delG, which of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece. represents a frequency of 1:29,6. Mutations in the GJB2 gene have been shown as a major contributor Further we tested 29 Czech patients - recipients of cochlear to prelingual, sensorineural, non-syndromic deafness. Mitochondrial implantate, with nonsyndromic congenital - prelingual deafness DNA (mtDNA) mutations have been reported in several unrelated with normaly hearing parents. 14 of them were homozygous for families, but a more precise estimate of the prevalence of these 35delG and 2 were heterozygotes, which represents that 51,7 % of mutations as causes of non-syndromic, childhood hearing impairment investigated alleles were 35delG. Direct sequencing of all these 29 has not been well established. In the present study, patients were patients is in progress. First prenatal diagnosis for Cx26 mutation in examined by an extensive questionnaire to exclude syndromic forms Czech Republic was performed in a family with a congenitaly deaf and environmental causes of deafness. The 35delG mutation was child. found in 42.2% of the chromosomes in 45 familial cases of prelingual, Our data are consistent with most European countries. To our non-syndromic deafness (18 homozygotes and 2 heterozygotes) knowledge these are first data about frequencies of Cx26 35delG and in 30.6% of the chromosomes in 165 sporadic cases (45 mutation in patients with congenital deafness which received cochlear homozygotes and 11 heterozygotes). Patients heterozygous for the implantation. Supported by IGA and by VZ 11100003. 35delG mutation were analyzed by direct genomic sequencing of the 290 Posters - Sensory Genetics 291 P1021. Connexin 26 Mutations In Neurosensory Non cleavage and that this may lead to abnormal sodium homeostasis of Syndromic Deafness the inner ear. P. Primignani1, F. Sironi1, C. Curcio1, P. Castorina2, U. Ambrosetti3, D. guipponi@wehi.edu.au A. Coviello1; 1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Medicina di P1023. Expression of connexin 32 in the developing Laboratorio, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milano, Italy, 2Settore mouse peripheral auditory system Specialistico di Genetica Medica, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, N. López-Bigas1,2, L. Simonneau3, M. Arbonés2, X. Estivill2; Milano, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Otorinolaringologiche, IRCSS 1CGMM-IRO, L’hospitalet (Barcelona), Spain, 2Genetic Regulation Ospedale Policlinico di Milano, Milano, Italy. Center, Barcelona, Spain, 33- Laboratoire de Neurobiologie de Hereditary deafness occurs in about 1:2000 newborns and l’Audition-Plasticité synaptique, INSERM U254, Montpellier, France. approximately 70% of the cases are non syndromic and the major Several connexin genes (GJB2, GJB3, GJA1, GJB1 and GJB6) have proportion is due to autosomal recessive inheritance (80%) (Non been found mutated in patients with non-syndromic and/or syndromic Syndromic Recessive Deafness - NSRD). GJB2 is the gene more deafness. GJB1, the gene encoding connexin 32 (Cx32) cause often involved and encodes the gap-junctions protein connexin 26 X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome, which is characterized (Cx26). More than 60 different Cx26 mutations are described but one by peripheral neuropathy, and in some cases progressive hearing is particularly common, the 35delG, a deletion of a guanine within loss. In order to understand better the physiology and the function a stretch of six Gs residues that starts at position 30 of the coding of the connexins in the inner ear we have analyzed the expression region. The 35delG mutation accounts for about 60% of the mutated of Connexin 32 (Cx32) by RNA in situ hybridization and by GJB2 alleles. immunohistochemistry during the mouse cochlea organogenesis from We analysed by direct sequencing the GJB2 the gene in 138 NSRD early otocyst (E12) up to the mature organ in adult. patients and identified mutations in 88/276 chromosomes analysed; As previously described in the literature for other connexins, such 26.1% (72/276) showed 35delG mutation, while the remaining as connexin 26, (GJB2), connexin 30 (GJB6), connexin 43 (GJA1) showed 12 different mutations (31del14, G12V, W77R, E47X, V95M, and connexin 31 (GJB3), various subtypes of fibrocytes, either in 310del14, 35insG, M34T, 167delT, L90P, D179N and H100L). We the spiral limbus or along the spiral ligament, differentially express also found two allele variants: V27I and V153I (http://www.iro.es/ Cx32. Also, we describe different levels of Cx32 expression within the cx26deaf.html). The 35delG was present in about 68% of all Cx26 sensory cells and within the various supporting cells that compose mutations identified. Two out of twelve were novel mutations but while the organ of Corti. A huge expression is also present in the basilar H100L was identified in a family with a recessive form of hearing loss, membrane cells and in the Reissner membrane cells of ectodermal the D179N mutation was present in a subject where the subsequent origin, as in subsets of the cellular elements of the cochlear ganglion. family history showed a dominant hearing loss segregation. These data are discussed in relation to the cochlear development In conclusion our findings confirm that the 35delG mutation of the GJB2 gene is the most common cause of NSRD in our population, P1024. Mutation screening of the CYP-1B1 gene in but many other mutations are also present indicating that the patients with primary congenital glaucoma, and among complete sequence is needed for an appropriate molecular diagnosis healthy Gypsies. and genetic counselling. L. Kalmar1, A. Bors1, H. Andrikovics1, V. Homolya1, K. Senyi2, G. Hollo2, A. Tordai1; P1022. Mutations of TMPRSS3, the transmembrane 1Institute of Haematology and Immunology, National Medical Center, serine protease causing deafness DFNB8/10 fail to Budapest, Hungary, 21st Institute of Ophtalmology, Semmelweis activate the amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channel University, Budapest, Hungary. (ENaC) in vitro Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is an autosomal recessive M. Guipponi1,2, G. Vuagniaux3, M. Wattenhofer2, K. Shibuya4, M. disorder associated with unknown developmental defect(s) in the Vasquez5, L. Dougherty1, N. Scamuffa2, E. Guida6, M. Okui4, J. anterior chamber, which leads to a severe eye disease. In the Kudoh4, C. Rossier2, M. Hancock1, E. Hummler3, P. Marzella6, P. majority of PCG-cases, the disease causing mutation is located in Marzella6, N. Shimizu4, N. Shimizu4, H. S. Scott1, S. E. Antonarakis2, the CYP-1B1 gene (GLCA3, cytochrom-P450-1B1). The type of the B. C. Rossier3; mutation shows large heterogenity in the Caucasian population. 1WEHI, Melbourne, Australia, 2Division of Medical Genetics, CMU, Recently a single ancestral mutation was found in an isolated Geneva, Switzerland, 3Institut de Pharmocologie et de toxicologie, Slovak Gypsy population of PCG-patients. All of the patients were Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Department of Molecular Biology, Tokyo, homozigous for the Glu387Lys (G1505A) mutation in the CYP-1B1 Japan, 5Department of Morphology, CMU, Geneva, Switzerland, gene, the carrier frequency was 10% among healthy Gypsies. The 6Department of Otolaryngology, Melbourne, Australia. aim of our study was to identify the disease causing mutations in The TMPRSS3 gene which is mutated in autosomal recessive Hungarian PCG-patients. To predict the significance of the Glu387Lys deafness DFNB8/10 encodes a transmembrane serine protease mutation in Hungary, a population study was performed in two healthy also containing LDLRA and SRCR domains. To investigate the Gypsy groups (Northern Hungary [NH]: n=207, Southern Hungary expression pattern of TMPRSS3 we isolated the mouse ortholog. [SH]: n=150) by PCR-RFLP. We found significant differences The mouse Tmprss3 gene maps to MMU17 and encodes a protein between carrier frequencies of the two healthy Gypsy groups (NH: with 88% identity to the human ortholog. RT-PCR on rat and RNA 2,9%, SH:0%). We analysed 24 PCG-samples (11 Gypsies, 13 non- in situ hybridisation on mouse cochlea, respectively, revealed that Gypsies) for the presence of the Glu387Lys mutation and, found it is principally expressed in the spiral ganglion and epithelial cells 10/11 homozygous Gypsy patients, while this mutation was not supporting the organ of Corti and semi-quantitative RT-PCR on present among non-Gypsy patients. In the absence of the Glu387Lys mouse tissues showed strong expression in the stomach. Transient mutation, direct sequencing of the coding regions are performed expression of a TMPRSS3-ECFP protein in HeLa cells showed a to identify the disease causing mutation. In conclusion, we found primarily localization within the endoplasmic reticulum. The amiloride- the Glu387Lys mutation in Hungary with significant geografical sensitive sodium channel (ENaC) is regulated by channel activating differences, which contradicts the Slovakian endemic theory, but serine proteases (CAPs). ENaC is expressed in many sodium confirms the Northern (Slovakian) Gypsy origin of the mutation. reabsorbing tissues including the inner ear where it colocalizes Among the Hungarian Gypsy PCG-patients, the most common with TMPRSS3 and is likely to be involved in maintenance of low disease causing gene defect is the Glu387Lys mutation. sodium concentrations in the endolymph. Functional studies in a Xenopus oocytes expression system demonstrated that TMPRSS3 P1025. Analysis of lmx1b gene in open angle glaucoma increased ENaC currents and that a significant fraction of TMPRSS3 patients is catalytically processed. In contrast, six TMPRSS3 missense M. Trigueros1, A. Giménez2, D. Valverde1; mutations causing deafness that fall in all identified domains except 1Universidad de Vigo, departamento de genética, Vigo, Spain, the TM and a S401A mutant in the catalytic triad of TMPRSS3 2Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. all failed to activate ENaC and to undergo proteolytic cleavage. Nail patella syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. TMPRSS3-related deafness and these data indicate that important The syndrome is characterized by dysplasia of the nails, hypoplasia signalling pathways in the inner ear are controlled by proteolytic of the patella, elbow dysplasia, progressive kidney disease and open Posters - Techniques for Mutation Detection 292 293 angle glaucoma. hybridization to a generic micro-array containing covalently Families have been studied whit OAG and NPS, but the results bound oligo-probes complemetary to the different tags, allows suggest that the NPS and OAG phenotypes in the families studied the simultaneous analysis of 27 frequently occurring single-base result from mutations in a single gene, lmx1b. mutations in the beta-globin gene. We present the comparison of the The gene lmx1b encoding the Lim homeodomain protein lmx1b results obtained by micro-array analysis and direct sequencing to plays a central role in dorso-ventral patterning of the vertebrate limb. discuss the feasibility of this approach. The observation of a phenotype similar to NPS in mice prompted to consider lmx1b as a candidate gene for NPS.By the moment is not P1028. Arrayed primer extension resequencing assay of known the exactly mechanism of this gene. TP53 tumour suppressor gene We have studied samples of 92 patients by PCR and SSCP and H. Roomere1, A. Meiel1, N. Tõnisson2, J. Zernant2, A. Kurg1, H. identified three mutations in the coding region of the gene. />The Pavel2, G. Slavin2, P. Hainaut3, A. Metspalu1,2; mutations found are the following,in the exon 3 an insertion of a T in 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology University of Tartu, Tartu, position 434 that leads to a stop codon. In exon 8, an heterozygous Estonia, 2Asper Biotech Ltd., Tartu, Estonia, 3International Agency for G--C transversion in position 1051 and in other sample, one insertion Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. of G in position 997 leading to a stop codon. We have developed and evaluated APEX (arrayed primer extension) - based test for resequencing of TP53 tumour suppressor gene. P1026. Implications of the exons 1 and 2 of the MYOC Identification of TP53 gene mutations is important, because there is gene in patients affected by open angle glaucoma a correlation between the mutation type and the prognosis of cancer. M. Saura1, S. Bernal2, D. Valverde1; Using the APEX test we can get full mutation data for the sequenced 1Universidad de Vigo, Departamento de Genética, Vigo, Spain, region of the gene at both DNA strands in a single assay. 2Hospital San Paul, Barcelona, Spain. A patient DNA sample is amplified, digested enzymatically, and PURPOSE: The myocilin/trabecular meshwork-inducible annealed to arrayed primers, which promote sites for template- glucocorticoid response (MYOC/TIGR) gene was identified as a gene dependent DNA polymerase extension reaction using four that cused open-angle glaucoma. Glaucoma is a group of disorders fluorescently labelled dideoxy nucleotides. The TP53 gene test spans characterized by progressive excavation of the optic nerve head exons 2 to 9 plus introns 2 and 8. 98 individuals were analysed to with associated loss of the visual field. Glaucoma is a higly prevalent obtain data on performance of the chip in a large-scale study. An disorder and is estimated to be the third most common cause of average of 97,5% of the arrayed p53 gene sequence was identified blindness worldwide. The mode of inheritance is autosomal dominant from either sense or antisense strand and 81% from both strands. A with reduced penetrance. The MYOC gene has been mapped at common polymorphism in exon 4 (Arg72Pro) was found with minor 1q23-q25. The MYOC gene consists of three exons; most known allele frequency of 0.26. mutations map to the exon 3. Genomic DNA from 11 tumour samples was sequenced in a OBJECTIVES: Mutation identification in the exons 1 and 2. blind test. The results were predominantly concordant with TTGE Implication of mutation in this patology. (Temporal Temperature Gradient Electrophoresis) plus dideoxy METHODS: DNA from 92 patients with primary open-angle glaucoma sequencing. GenoramaTM imaging system and genotyping software was screened for PCR-SSCP analysis. Nucleotide sequence was were used for imaging and semiautomatic sequence analysis. determinated by automated sequencing. The fact that our assay can simultaneously perform mutation RESULTS: Five mutations were identified in the exon 1, some of detection and correct identification of codon 72 status adds further them have been mapped in the promoter region. In the exon 2 no weight to its usefulness as Arg72Pro polymorphism has recently been mutations were present. proposed to play a role in tumorigenesis. P 22. Techniques for mutation detection P1029. Gene assembling, a new approach in mutation detection techniques - An application for BRCA genes P1027. scanning Population screening for beta-thalassemia point V. R. Yassaee1, A. Dalton2; mutations; development of a Micro-Array based Single 1The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2North Trent Base Extension approach. Molecular Genetics laboratory, Sheffield Children’s Hospital, United C. L. Harteveld1, C. H. M. van Moorsel2, I. F. A. C. Fokkema1, Kingdom. M. Yavarian3, R. van Zwieten2, M. de Haas2, D. Roos2, J. T. den Many disease susceptibility genes are large and consist of many Dunnen1, P. C. Giordano1; exons in which point mutations are scattered throughout. There 1Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, has been an increasing demand for rapid and accurate method for Leiden, Netherlands, 2Sanquin Research at CLB, Amsterdam, scanning of point mutations in BRCA genes particularly. Netherlands, 3The Thalassemia Medical Centre, Medical Faculty, Meta-PCR is a new method for creating chimeric DNA molecules Bandar Abbas University, Pasteur Laboratory, Bandar Abbas, Islamic using a modified PCR reaction (Wallace et al 1999) that allows Republic of Iran. maximizing the length of sequence that can be scanned by Beta-thalassaemia is an autosomal recessive trait, which may occur downstream technique. at a high incidence in populations living in areas endemic for malaria. Here we present data to demonstrate the assembles of exons 2, Carriership for this trait is believed to provide a selective advantage 20,23 and 24 of the BRCA1 gene and their subsequently analysis by of survival after a Plasmodium falciparum infection, which is the direct sequencing. inducer of malaria tropica. Homozygotes or compound heterozygotes, The BRCA1 exons 2 and 20 are hot spot regions that are known on the other hand, suffer from a severe microcytic hypochromic to harbour particularly deleterious mutations. In order to avoid anemia known as beta-thalassaemia major, which results in early missing any mutation in these two exons, the above four exons were death (without proper treatment) or life-long transfusion and assembled in the following order of preferences: 23 20, 2 and 24. chelation therapy dependence. The majority of molecular defects However, the order of fragments can be predetermined by primer causing beta-thalassemia are point mutations affecting beta-globin design. gene expression. The total number of different beta-thalassaemia We verified by direct sequencing that the order and sequence of causing mutations known to date is approximately 180. However a the component exons in the Meta-PCR products were as predicted. limited number of mutations occurs in different populations. Once Meta-PCR products from three previously ascertained heterozygotes the spectrum of beta-thalassemia-causing mutations is known for a for BRCA1 mutations were directly sequenced and gave the same certain population, a screening strategy for efficient diagnosis can be sequence patterns. applied. The feasiblity of a micro-array based approach using Single Scanning of each exon of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes individually Base Extension was tested in an immigrant-Dutch and an Iranian represent a tedious task. Meta-PCR technique might be circumvents population from Hormozgan. A total of 18 different mutation-specific this problem and is likely to be useful for clinical molecular diagnostic oligonucleotide primers were selected, covering approximately 90% laboratories, helping them to fulfil the demand for scanning of of the Dutch and 86% of the Iranian beta-thalassemia mutations. The complex genetic disease at the lower cost. use of tagged-oligoprimers for mutation detection and subsequent v.r.yassaee@shef.ac.uk292 Posters - Techniques for Mutation Detection 293 P1030. Mutation Detection by High Throughput Single P1032. Diagnostic Mutation Scanning Using Microtitre Strand Conformation Polymorphism using Automated Array Capillary Electrophoresis Fluorescent SSCP Capillary Array Electrophoresis: Validation of Sensitivity. G. R. Taylor1, D. Cuthbert-Heavens2, A. Smith1, C. F. Taylor2, R. S. P. S. Andersen1, C. Jespersgaard1, J. Vuust1, M. Christiansen1, L. A. Charlton1; Larsen2; 1St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2Cancer 1Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2University of Research UK, Leeds, United Kingdom. Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Mutation scanning can, in principle, provide a rapid screen of Detection of unknown mutations requires identification of any candidate exons or genes prior to a full sequence analysis, nucleotide substitution in a gene and is achieved through DNA saving time and reducing costs. Single Stranded Conformational sequencing. For large genes or large number of samples, this is a Polymorphism Analysis (SSCP) has been a popular method time-consuming process, necessitating methods that rapidly identify for scanning due to its simplicity (1). The only other method DNA fragments containing mutations, the exact nature of which may of comparable ease is Denaturing High Performance Liquid then be determined by DNA sequencing. One such screening method Chromatography (DHPLC)(2). We previously compared DHPLC with is Single Strand Conformation Polymorphism (SSCP) analysis, in an improved Fluorescent SSCP (3). The two methods were of similar which DNA fragments differing in only one nucleotide position may be sensitivity. Here we report the adaptation of SSCP to a capillary separated on the basis of sequence-specific conformation of single array format the enables automated sampling and re-running of the stranded DNA. Polyacrylamide slab gel electrophoresis was originally same samples at different temperatures. Run times were reduced employed for the single stranded DNA separation; recently, however, from 18 hours using the Applied Biosystems 377 to less than 1 hour SSCP analysis carried out using capillary electrophoresis (CE- using the 3100. We analysed 66 samples and controls from exons SSCP) has been introduced as a high-throughput screening method, in hMSH2, hMLH1, p53, VHL and Menin using three different buffers and with the advent of multicapillary instruments, SSCP analysis (Tris-borate, Tris-taurine and Tris-MES) each at 5 temperatures. All using capillary array electrophoresis (CAE-SSCP) may increase mutations were detected, although to achieve this level of sensitivity the throughput several fold. In the present study, we have validated we needed to use more than one buffer system. Some mutations the mutation detection sensitivity of CAE-SSCP by constructing and were more “detectable” (that, seen under more conditions) than analysing a panel of 68 mutants representing all types of substitutions others. We used the MFOLD (http://bioinfo.math.rpi.edu/~zukerm/) as well as insertions and deletions in different sequence contexts single stranded DNA structure analysis program to investigate the in four exons from human genes. PCR amplicons, 150 to 300 bp in detectability of various mutations with the aim of making SSCP more length, labelled with fluorescent dyes, were analysed by CAE-SSCP predictable. at three different temperatures (18, 25, and 35 °C) on a 16-channel 1. Orita M et al (1989) Genomics 5 (4):874-879 ABI3100 Genetic Analyzer. Results were collected as data points and 2. Underhill PA et al (1997)Genome Research 7:996-1005 analysed with ABI Genescan and Genotyper software. The overall 3. Ellis LA, Taylor CF, and Taylor GR (2000) Human Mutation 15:556- mutant detection level was found to be 96%, confirming the usefulness 564. of this particular method for high throughput mutation detection. P1033. Mutation detection assay for ABCR (ABCA4) P1031. Pyrosequence Analysis for Detection of Mutations Gene, based on Arrayed Primer Extension technology Associated with Hereditary Hearing Loss in the Connexin M. Külm1, K. Jaakson1, S. Tarrikas1, A. Hutchinson2, R. L. Allikmets2, 26 Gene and Mitochondrial DNA A. Metspalu3; A. Ferraris1,2, E. Rappaport3, S. Toth4, F. Lysholm4, J. Williamson4, R. 1Asper Biotech Ltd., Tartu, Estonia, 2Columbia University, New York, Restagno5, B. Dallapiccola2, P. Fortina3; NY, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, 1Department of Pediatrics, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, The ABCR gene arrayed primer extension (APEX) assay was 2Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Patologia, Universita’ designed for the detection of over 300 variants currently described La Sapienza and Istituto CSS Mendel, Rome, Italy, 3Department in ABCR (ABCA4) gene. Mutations in the gene are associated with of Pediatrics, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, University of at least five inherited retinal dystrophies: Stargardt disease (STGD), Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 4Pyrosequencing, fundus flavimaculatus (FFM), cone-rod dystrophy (CRD), retinitis Inc., Westborough, MA, 5Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, pigmentosa (RP) and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Ospedale Infantile Regina Margherita, Torino, Italy. We have used Arrayed Primer Extension (APEX) technology for Hereditary hearing loss (HHL) is one of the most common identification of ABCR gene mutations as an alternative to mutation congenital disorders and is highly heterogeneous. Mutations in detection based on SSCP plus dideoxy sequencing. The genomic Connexin 26 (CX26) gene account for about 20% of all cases of DNA sample is amplified and annealed to arrayed primers, which childhood deafness. This number approaches 50% in documented promote sites for DNA polymerase extension reactions using four recessive cases of non-syndromic hearing loss. In addition, a single fluorescently labelled dideoxynucleotides. The oligonucleotide array mitochondrial DNA mutation, A1555G, in the 12S rRNA gene, is scans a total of 349 mutation sites (the vast majority of mutations associated with familial cases of progressive deafness. Effective currently known in the ABCR gene) from both strands. The ABCR screening of populations for HHL necessitates rapid assessment chip was validated with 150 STGD patients and 100 controls in a of several of these potential mutation sites. Pyrosequencing links blind test. The same DNA samples were previously analysed with a DNA synthesis protocol for determining sequence information the SSCP technology. Differences in SSCP and chip results were to an enzyme cascade system which generates light whenever controlled by sequencing. The APEX based technology determines pyrophosphate is released during primer strand elongation. We the existing genetic variation with 97% efficiency. assessed the ability of Pyrosequencing for detecting some of the The APEX method provides efficient tool for mutation and common mutations causing HHL. Genomic DNA samples were polymorphism analysis both for scientific and clinical research. collected from peripheral blood or dried blood spots using standard The ABCR gene APEX assay can be applied as screening tool in protocols. Mitochondrial DNA was coisolated with total genomic ophthalmic genetics. DNA. Detection of the most common CX26 mutations in individuals of Caucasian (35delG), Ashkenazi (167delT) and Asian (235delC, P1034. Rapid detection of DMD/BMD carriers by V37I) origins was confirmed by Pyrosequencing analysis. A total of quantitative Real-time PCR 41 different mutations in CX26 gene and the mitochondrial A1555G F. Joncourt, B. Neuhaus, K. Jostarndt, S. Kleinle, S. Gallati; mutation were also confirmed. Genotyping of up to 6 different Human Molecular Genetics, Children’s University Hospital, Berne, adjacent mutations was achieved, including simultaneous detection Switzerland. of 35delG and 167delT. In addition, tests of the ability to quantitate Two thirds of Duchenne and Becker (DMD/BMD) muscular dystrophy Mt DNA heteroplasmy were successful. Major advantages of the cases are due to deletions in the dystrophin gene on Xp21. Pyrosequencing approach include high throughput genotyping of While most deletions are readily detected in patients by PCR, the disease-causing mutations, accurate and reproducible results, and identification of female carriers in affected families remains difficult in assay flexibility. Experimental conditions can be optimized for a high some cases, e.g. when no informative markers are available in the degree of standardization and cost-effectiveness. deleted region.Posters - Techniques for Mutation Detection 294 295 Using the Light cycler technology we have developed a simple and We have validated this strategy for 55 microsatellites, most of them rapid assay for the direct detection of carriers of exon 44, 45 and 49 on the X chromosome. We have tested successfully multiplex for up deletions in the dystrophin gene. Primer pairs for each exon were to 4 microsatellites. designed to give specific and efficient PCR under identical conditions. The products were quantified using SybrGreen and the ratios P1037. Pure sample preparation: A prerequisite for high between the potentially deleted exon and a non-deleted reference quality molecular analyses exon were calculated. We have analysed 16 known carriers and 16 R. Burgemeister, K. Schuetze; non-carriers in 8 independent assays: in all cases the correct status PALM Microlaser Technologies, Bernried, Germany. was reliably detected (mean ratios: carriers 0.52, non carriers 1.11). State-of-the-art molecular analyses need the handling with extremely There was no overlap between the ratios of carriers and non-carriers: pure samples to yield a good result. This is important e.g. for carriers ranged from 0.33-0.69, non-carriers from 0.85-1.35. single cell genetic analyses (like in fetal cells in maternal blood, We are currently adapting the assay to a number of other exons in preimplantation diganosis or in disseminated tumor cells), for frequently deleted in the dystrophin gene and we are testing the microarray technologies and for single chromosome preparation. possibility of adapting the protocol to other conditions involving gene Thus pure sample preparations are indispensible for various fields in deletions or duplications such as CMT/HNPP and NF. The method medicine and biology. has the advantage that no specific labelled hybridisation probes are To obtain pure samples is one of the most thrilling tasks in needed. It offers a reliable, rapid and inexpensive possibility for the modern molecular science. An up-to-date tool in this topic is Laser detection of heterozygous carriers of deletions in the dystrophin as Microdissection combined with Laser Pressure Catapulting. This laser well as in a number of other genes. technology simply utilizes the force of focused laser light to eject a selected specimen from the object plane and to directly lift it into the P1035. A rapid, accurate and quantitative method for cap of a routine microfuge tube. This completely non-contact Laser analysis of the methylation status of imprinted genes, Pressure Catapulting technology avoids any danger of contamination using primer extension and IP RP HPLC. with unwanted specimen. In every case where the comparison of M. M. Matin, D. P. Hornby; different cell types (genetic, expressional or proteomic) is important Transgenomic Research laboratory, Department of Molecular Biology, for research or diagnosis, a precise differentiation between selected University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, United Kingdom. cells is mandatory. We have developed a rapid, accurate and quantitative method for Any kind of tissue from various sources (also archival histological the detection of methylation differences at specific CpG sites based samples or living cells) and even subcellular structures can on bisulphite treatment of DNA followed by primer extension and be captured using this laser method. Wherever precise ion-pair reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography (IP micromanipulation is required or where the procurement of RP HPLC). The application of the method is illustrated by analysis of homogenous samples is obligatory for the subsequent analysis differentially imprinted alleles arising from Prader-Willi and Angelman of specific genetic or proteomic alterations, the PALM MicroLaser syndromes. system is a key technology. In order to convert unmethylated cytosines to uracil, plasmid and genomic DNA samples were treated with sodium bisulphite and the P1038. The GenoSNIP assay - A novel method for SNP targeted sequence was then amplified using oligodeoxynucleotide genotyping by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry primers specific for the bisulphite-deaminated DNA. The PCR M. Kostrzewa1, K. Fahr1, T. Elßner1, W. Pusch2, J. Wurmbach3, T. product(s) from this step was used as a template for a primer Wenzel1; extension reaction and the products were subsequently analysed 1Bruker Saxonia Analytik GmbH, Leipzig, Germany, 2Bruker Daltonik chromatographically using IP RP HPLC. This method eliminates the GmbH, Bremen, GHANA, 3Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany. need to use restriction enzymes to determine the methylation status After completion of the Human Genome Project, intensive exploration of the amplicon and also circumvents the need for radio labelling for of diversity in different individuals is one of the main objectives in the quantitative measurements. Finally, this method removes the human molecular genetics. In particular, analysis of single nucleotide need for nucleotide sequencing since it is not solely reliant on the polymorphisms (SNPs) is expected to have an enormous impact presence or absence of one or more PCR products, as is the case in future human medicine, e.g. by determination of risk factors for with related methods. common diseases, causes of multifactorial diseases, and modulators of pharmacologic effects. P1036. Fluorescent analysis of microsatellite markers MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry has been shown to be one of the using a unique fluorescent primer : a simple technique most valid methods for SNP genotyping. Combination of analysis validated on 55 CA or tetra repeats speed, accuracy of results, cost-effectiveness, and automation M. Cossée, M. Guiot, S. Samimi, V. Biancalana; capabilities makes MALDI-TOF one of the most promising SNP- Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique, Strasbourg, France. typing technologies for medical research and diagnostics. On Study of microsatellite (CA or tetra repeats) segregation around a the other hand, drawbacks of the technique are complex sample locus is a tool widely used. Traditionally, such a study is performed preparation and high purification requirements before MALDI with two flanking specific primers, one being labelled (radioactive measurement. or fluorescent) for detection. Use of radioactivity is inconvenient Here, we present a novel method for MALDI SNP typing sample in a diagnostic setting, and implies an additional step of kination preparation, GenoSNIP. An UV-cleavable site is introduced into for each microsatellite analysed. For fluorescent analysis on a primer which hybridizes adjacent to the polymorphic site. This automated sequencers, labelled primers are commercially available, photolinker creates an abasic site in the primer and does not prevent but are rather costly and have a limited lifetime. This aspect is a annealing to the target sequence. The primer is converted by single real limitation when such primers are used infrequently for genetic nucleotide extension to products specific for the corresponding counselling of very rare diseases. alleles. Subsequently, these products are cleaved by UV light For each microsatellite, we use its two unlabeled specific primers, resulting in very small molecules, usually pentamers, which can and a unique fluorescent primer, in an single reaction. One of be measured with very high sensitivity, accuracy, and resolution in the specific flanking primers is tailed with a common 5’ sequence a MALDI-TOF MS instrument. We present different designs of the selected by Warner et al (1996) for the TP-PCR technique. Primer GenoSNIP assay including a simple pipetting protocol which is fully sequences were chosen in order to define the best combination compatible with the 384 microtiterplate format. The genotyping of between one of the specific primer and the other with the several common genetic risk factors is demonstrated. common tail. Detection is achieved with a fluoresceinated primer corresponding to this common sequence. In the early amplification P1039. A Comparison of Software Tools for Comparative cycles, specific primers give rise to a product with the tail. A particular Sequencing molar ratio of primers ensures that the specific primer with the J. M. Sorenson1, K. Gunning1, G. Chappell1, Q. Doan1, P. Suri1, R. tail is exhausted in the early amplification cycles. This allows the Paul1, A. Pradhan1, B. Kshirsargar1, G. Mason1, P. Honebein2, G. fluoresceinated primer to amplify preferentially from the end of Denisov3, M. Schoppe4, A. Pronyaev4, L. Johnston-Dow1; products from previous amplification rounds. 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, 2Systems Integration Solutions, 294 Posters - Techniques for Mutation Detection 295 San Francisco, CA, 3Paracel Inc., A Celera Business, Pasadena, CA, 4.0 software. Contrary to expectations, LNA oligonucleotides 4Group Logic, Arlington, VA. produced weaker signals than normal 10-mers in APEX reactions. At The release of version 1.1 of SeqScape™ software marked the the same time LNA oligonucleotides gave equal or 2-6 times higher introduction of basecalling quality values and assembly-based SNP signals in hybridization. Probably LNA monomers interfere in DNA identification into a desktop comparative sequencing software tool. polymerase reaction with such oligonucleotides. SeqScape™ software is compatible with Windows NT®/Windows® In conclusion, 10-mers could be effectively used for APEX method 2000 OS and contains fully integrated basecalling, trimming, in oligonucleotide microarray format on glass slides. Addition of LNA sequence assembly, alignment, and sequence comparison tools for monomers into DNA oligonucleotides did not improve performance of fast and accurate sequence comparisons and variant identification. these oligonucleotides in APEX reactions. We present here a comparison of the features, ease of use, and robustness of algorithms between SeqScape™ software and other P1042. Applications Of Genetic Analyzer (genescan) In available comparative sequencing software tools. We also critically The Diagnosis Of Genetic Diseases evaluate the accuracy of analysis results from SeqScape™ software M. García-Hoyos, M. J. Trujillo, C. González-González, J. Gallego, version 1.1 versus Sequencher™ software. Highlights are presented D. Cantalapiedra, C. Ramos, C. Ayuso; of new algorithm features in development for the next version of Department of Genetics. Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. SeqScape™software, including the ability to detect and identify Diagnostic methods for genetic diseases have suffered great heterozygous frameshift mutations using direct sequencing. development in the last years because of the technologic advances. One of these new methods is based in an automated genetic analysis P1040. Multiplex PCR of Short Fluorescent Fragments: by capillary electrophoresis. a simple, fast and reliable method for the detection of The ABI Prims® 310 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) make heterozygous genomic rearrangements use of two software packages: Sequence Analysis and GeneScan. T. Frebourg1,2, F. Charbonnier2, F. Casilli1, G. Raux1, P. Saugier- The GeneScan program is used in our laboratory to analyse Veber1,2, N. Drouot2, M. Tosi1; the fragments obtained after DNA amplification by a PCR using 1INSERM EMI 9906, Faculty of Medicine, Rouen, France, fluorescence-labelled primers: 2Department of Genetics, CHU, Rouen, France. Indirect studies: haplotypes analysis by small tandem repeat (STR) The detection of heterozygous genomic deletions and duplications markers in 56 families. is technically difficult and represents a serious limitation to the - Duchenne/Becker Muscular Dystrophy. complete diagnosis of many genetic diseases. We have developed - Prader Willi and Angelman syndromes. Multiplex PCR of Short Fluorescent Fragments, a simple method - Charcot-Marie-Tooth 1A /Pressure Palsie (HNPP). which is based on: (i) the simultaneous amplification of several short - XLRP. genomic sequences using fluorescently labeled primers, (ii) the use Rapid detection of the major chromosome aneuploidies (13, 18, 21, X of a limited number of cycles, (iii) the superposition of the fluorescent and Y) and fetal sex determination in 47 cases. electropherograms and, (iv) comparison, between patients and Direct studies: expansion of unstable repeats in 34 cases. controls, of the peaks representing the fluorescence of each - Huntington´s disease. amplicon. This method has already been adapted to the following - Myotonic dystrophy. genes: MSH2, MLH1, MSH6, C1NH, SMN, BRCA1 et RB1. It has - Fragile X syndrome. already been included into our diagnostic routine of the HNPCC Similar results were obtained when compared with previous syndrome, of the hereditary forms of breast and ovarian cancer conventional methods. and of retinoblastoma and has improved the genetic counseling Therefore GeneScan program allows a reliable and reproducible of spinal muscular atrophy. Moreover, this method has allowed analysis. us to characterize precisely the boundaries of a large number of Besides, other advantages of this technique are: heterozygous deletions or duplications. This method is much more - More accuracy distinguishing homozygote from heterozygote status. sensitive and rapid than the Southern blot technique commonly used, - More authomatic and easier technique. is better suited than quantitative real time PCR to the analysis of - Avoiding the use of radioactive products. genes containing large numbers of exons, and appears to be more This technology has led to the innovation and improvement of the flexible than the MAPH (Multiplex Amplifiable Probe Hybridization) diagnostic methods. method, particularly because it can be rapidly adapted to large numbers of genes. P1043. SeqScape™ Software: Further advances in Applied Biosystems’ Sequence Comparative Analysis P1041. DNA sequence analysis using ten-mer Tool for Variant Identification oligonucleotides microarray and allele-specific primer K. M. C. Gunning, Q. C. Doan, L. A. Johnston-Dow, J. M. Sorenson; extension. Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA. M. Teder1, M. Nelis2, L. Nagirnaja2, A. Kurg2, A. Metspalu2; In biological research, the end goal is obtaining a high quality 1Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of Molecular and Cell result in a timely and cost effective manner. Applied Biosystems Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. has developed more efficient and handsfree methods by which The aim of this project was to test 10-mer oligonucleotides for this sequence data can be obtained with the development and sequence analysis by arrayed primer extension (APEX) method in improvements to automated sequence analysis. Following in this microarray format on glass slides. vein, downstream applications are required to allow the researcher to Firstly, 256 oligonucleotides, consisting of constant GAATTC part in fully analyze and understand the data generated. Further advances 5’end and a variable 3’ end part, containing all possible tetramers, in data analysis with SeqScape™ software v1.1 now mean this were chosen. Twenty synthetic oligonucleotides of 50bp length, goal is accomplished in an organized and competent way. The next containing EcoRI restriction site, were used as templates in this revision of the software tool is in progress which includes improved system. Reaction mixture for APEX contained all four fluorescently functionality of the Reference Data Group, the use of discontinuous labeled ddNTP-s, thermostable DNA polymerase and denatured numbering, better definition of Intron/Exons and Primer locations as templates. During optimization different template concentrations well as features to support haplotyping and ORF recognition. These, were tested at temperatures ranging 20°C - 45°C. The nucleotide coupled with the implementation of library searching and tree drawing in the fifth position from the EcoRI site was correctly identified in all tools will benefit a larger range of comparative analysis researchers. templates. Additionally, access control and an audit trail are becoming more Secondly, to further improve APEX specificity with thermostable important in the realm of pharmacogenomics. By providing these DNA polymerase, we tried to raise Tm’s of 10-mers by including sophisticated capabilities the user achieves a more valuable and one, two or three LNA monomers into different positions of comprehensive analysis of their data and progresses faster to an three oligonucleotides. The reactivity of original and modified effective outcome. oligonucleotides was tested in APEX and hybridization experiments at temperatures ranging 30°C - 50°C. Fluorescence signals were scanned by Array Scanner 428 and quantitated by ArrayPro Analyzer Posters - Techniques for Mutation Detection 296 297 P1044. Predicting the Optimal PCR primer annealing 1. We detected 25 changes in BBS4 and 18 changes in BBS6 temperature for use with the Transgenomic OptimaseTM subsequently revealed to be SNPs or novel mutations. polymerase. 2. Screening of BBS2 revealed 6 changes including a C. Lowes1, H. Lamb1, K. O’Connor1, J. Walter2; two-base deletion and single base substitution, a 100% 1Transgenomic Ltd, Newcastle, Northumberland, United Kingdom, detection-rate. 2Transgenomic Ltd, Crewe, Cheshire, United Kingdom. Conclusions OptimaseTM polymerase is a novel proof reading polymerase. MCHA is superior to slab gel HA in particular its ability to detect point mutations. The assay is simple and rapid with up to 96 samples The high fidelity of this enzyme finds particular applicability to analysed in 40 minutes permitting resolution of fragments up to mutation detection using Denaturing High Performance Liquid 650bp thus reducing the overall number of analyses required. We Chromatography (DHPLC). Empirical determination of the optimal have found adaptation of HA provides a rapid and accurate screening primer annealing temperature (Ta) during PCR has been carried method for mutation detection in BBS. out using 29 different human genomic primer sets for Optimase polymerase (Transgenomic Inc), Ampli Taq Gold (Perkin Elmer) and Pfu (Stratagene) using optimal conditions for each enzyme and a P1047. Comparative sequence data analysis using gradient thermal cycler (Hybaid). The results from this work enable a SeqScapeTM software for high throughput mutation simplified strategy for successful prediction of the primer annealing scanning in DNA diagnostic analyses temperature to be determined. In summary prediction of the primer A. L. J. Kneppers, M. J. R. van der Wielen, D. J. Verbove, M. Tm using an equation that takes into account the monovalent salt Losekoot, E. Bakker; concentration, primer length and GC composition is critical and is Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. different for each enzyme buffer composition. In addition we indicate The identification of disease causing small mutations in human the necessity to distinguish between primer Tm and Ta. We show genetic diseases is generally performed using indirect mutation here for the OptimaseTM DNA polymerase an ideal where the Ta is 2- scanning techniques such as SSCA, DGGE or DHPLC and 3oC higher than the predicted Tm for optimal PCR amplification. subsequent sequencing of PCR amplified products. Direct sequencing is relatively straightforward and therefore suitable P1045. Demonstration of Hot start characteristics in for automation of the complete procedure from reaction setup Transgenomic OptimaseTM Polymerase to purification of PCR products and sequencing reaction. The H. Lamb1, C. Lowes1, K. O’Connor1, J. M. Walter2; availability of automated pipetting stations and large capacity DNA 1Transgenomic Ltd, Newcastle, Northumberland, United Kingdom, sequencers enables the use of this method for high throughput 2Transgenomic Ltd, Crewe, Cheshire, United Kingdom. mutation scanning. However, a major drawback of this approach is the large amount of sequence data to be analyzed both efficiently The use of so-called “Hot Start” techniques has been employed to and accurately. Furthermore, the available sequence analysis improve specificity, sensitivity and yield of the polymerase chain software is usually not developed for comparative mutational reaction (PCR). Although efficient amplification by PCR enzymes analysis and therefore not entirely suitable. Recently the SeqScapeTM is optimal at elevated temperatures there is a possibility that some software (Applied Biosystems) was introduced, allowing base calling, amplification may occur during sample set up particularly if this sequence assembly, alignment and comparison, all combined in one procedure is carried out at room temperature. For this reason the analysis. Prior to the analysis, for each amplicon a fragment specific choice of a “HotStart “ enzyme is thought to convey a significant analysis definition is setup containing analysis defaults, reference advantage. Numerous permutations of this technology are available sequence and base variants previously identified. This results in including omitting an essential component until the tubes are at clean sequence data and easy identification and characterization of 70oC, physically separating the components using a barrier material homo- and heterozygous base variants and has led to a significant such as a wax plug and enzyme inhibition by the use of antibodies or reduction in manual data editing in our laboratory. However, for chemical inactivation. We have isolated, characterised and developed a novel proof reading polymerase (OptimaseTM polymerase). This correct identification of heterozygous deletion or insertion mutations, extended data management and quality assurance improvements are high fidelity DNA polymerase has been shown to have minimal required. This approach has enabled us to standardize our mutation activity at ambient temperature. We demonstrate the reality of detection method and perform more than 2000 DNA diagnostic tests routinely setting up PCR reactions at room temperature and also annually in over 700 amplicons and 50 different genes in an efficient being able to store samples for twenty four hours, prior to cycling, and accurate procedure. with no adverse effects on yield, misincorporation rate or amplification specificity. P1048. Automated screening by DHPLC detects LDLR mutations in FH patients from New Zealand P1046. Multiplex capillary heteroduplex analysis (MCHA): C. F. Bunn1, P. George1, A. Fellowes1, C. Lintott2, R. Scott2, H. A rapid and sensitive method for detection of mutations Walker3, J. Mann3; in Bardet-Biedl syndrome genes. 1Canterbury Health Laboratories, Christchurch, New Zealand, 2Lipid B. E. Hoskins, P. J. Scambler, P. L. Beales; and Diabetes Research Group, Christchurch Hospital, Christchurch, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom. New Zealand, 3Department of Human Nutrition, University of Otago, Background Dunedin, New Zealand. Six Bardet-Biedl syndrome loci (BBS1-6) have been mapped and Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is a common inherited disease, three identified (BBS2, 4 & 6). Inheritance in some families is with premature vascular disease occurring 10-20 years earlier than complex with multiallelic participation, making linkage unreliable. in polygenic hyperlipidaemia. FH is easily and effectively treated. These factors hamper our ability to efficiently screen for mutations in Although founder effects occur, countries with heterogeneous BBS patients. populations have an array of mutations; thus a gene screening Aims approach is the appropriate first step for mutation detection. To develop a rapid and cost-effective mutation assay for BBS genes. Methods previously used to screen for LDLR mutations lack Methods sensitivity, therefore samples from patients in NZ are being screened PCR amplification using fluorescent oligonucleotides for BBS2, 4 & 6 for LDLR mutations by denaturing HPLC (DHPLC). DHPLC has are denatured with like wild-type PCR products to generate potential numerous advantages: analysis is rapid, inexpensive and automated. heteroduplexes to be analysed on the MegaBACE 1000. Throughput Sensitivity and specificity range from 96-100%. can be greatly enhanced by multiplexing compatible fragments. Seven patient samples plus controls are screened simultaneously in Between 70 and 95 Bardet-Biedl pedigrees were analysed for the a largely automated process. After PCR setup in two microtitre plates presence of heteroduplex formation. by a Tecan robot, all exons are amplified under one set of conditions. Results Samples are then analysed by DHPLC and duplicate abnormal We adopted two approaches using MCHA; 1. “blind” screening products sequenced by direct sequencing. of BBS pedigrees for mutations in BBS4 and BBS6 followed by Eight novel mutations were characterised from 27 different mutations sequencing. 2. screening for known mutations in pedigrees previously (in 52 patients). Seven novel mutations are in the EGF domain, sequenced for BBS2 mutations. with the eighth in the membrane-spanning domain. The majority of 296 Posters - Techniques for Mutation Detection 297 mutations are localised in the EGF domain and not the ligand-binding profiles was detected with DHPLC with 100% correspondence to the domain as previously reported. variant-containing regions previously identified by direct sequencing. The diversity of LDLR mutations highlights the importance of Our results confirms that DHPLC is a highly sensitive and specific analyses that target both known and novel mutations, especially in technology for DNA sequence variant detection. heterogeneous populations. As effective clinical management of FH is aided by early diagnosis, mutation detection programmes must take P1051. APEX scaling up. Optimisation of the high into account the incidence of novel mutations. Automated setup for throughput Arrayed Primer Extension based DNA DHPLC appears ideally suited to LDLR mutation analysis in clinical variation analysis for accurate and affordable large-scale and research settings. projects. K. Kepp1,2, M. Remm3, E. Lõhmussaar1,2, U. Gerst-Talas2; P1049. Novel Sample Preparation Technology for Rapid, 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu University, Tartu, High-Throughput Purification of Genomic DNA from Estonia, 2Asper Biotech Ltd., Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian Biocentre, Blood and Tissue Culture Cells Tartu, Estonia. F. M. Holder1, D. Qu2, F. Igoe2, S. Kabachus2, M. Smith2; The hybridisation of complementary strands of DNA is the underlying 1Whatman International Ltd., Maidstone, United Kingdom, 2Whatman principle of all microarray-based techniques for the analysis of DNA Inc., Newton, MA. variation. Arrayed Primer Extension based microarray technology With the explosive growth in disciplines such as genomics, puts Sanger sequencing, where a polymerase is used to extend diagnostics, transfusion medicine and human ID there is an one strand of DNA primed by other strands, on a chip. The increasing need for fast, simple and high-quality sample preparation oligonucleotides arrayed on a glass chip hybridise to the sample systems. New developments in filter media are bringing about a DNA, then a polymerase and fluorescent terminator nucleotides revolution in DNA isolation, purification and storage procedures. are added. Four colours are used, each corresponding to a DNA Using our expertise in filtration technologies, Whatman has nucleotide. The arrayed oligonucleotides are synthesized so that developed a range of novel and complementary systems for the they are just one nucleotide from the site of the expected mutation. purification of nucleic acids from whole blood and other sample types. Incorporation of the dye terminator nucleotide gives us an exact These unidirectional vacuum-based systems offer maximum flexibility, readout of what is at the site of the mutation. This dual selection enabling purification of DNA from up to 10 ml of blood in 30 minutes feature gives the chip a higher signal-to-noise ratio for increased whilst minimising risks inherent in multiple-step extraction protocols. reading accuracy compared to the traditional hybridisation only chip. A new 96-well format is now available (Gen96) which is designed Asper Biotech has been running routine custom assays with 3,000 to process small volume blood samples (5-75 µl) and tissue culture different oligos on a chip, but we are nowhere near the limit. Along cells (2500 – 1x106 cells per well) in under 30 minutes. Genomic DNA side with the substantial increase of the number of oligos of the chip, recoveries of up to 90% of total are observed and the gDNA yielded application of multiplex PCR of ultimate importance in reduction of is of high quality, suitable for PCR based techniques including STR the assay cost-per-SNP. We have devised proprietary software for analysis. Gen96 incorporates patented FTA™ technology, lysing prediction of matching and grouping the hundreds to thousands of cells on contact. Once the sample has dried this technology protects primer pairs before the start of the wet lab experiments. the immobilised gDNA from degradation, bacterial colonisation, UV In the current poster presentation we demonstrate the performance of and free radical damage. Viruses and other microorganisms are our in silico results through PCR lab to the chip, as well as piling up inactivated, offering user safety and simple shipment of samples. smaller subarrays to a large chip with increased complexity. The system is therefore ideal for remote sampling applications, with samples able to be stored at room temperature for months prior to P1052. Deletion/Duplication Detection In The 79-Exon extraction without loss of DNA integrity or performance. DMD-Gene Using A Porous Micro-array System. M. E. Kalf1, S. White1, A. Chan2, Y. Wu2, G. van Ommen1, M. P1050. High sensivity and specificity of denaturing Breuning1, T. Raap1, J. den Dunnen1; high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) for 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2PamGene, mutation analysis of the FBN1 gene in patients with ‘s Hertogenbosch, Netherlands. Marfan syndrome. DNA deletions and/or duplications are a frequent cause of genetic A. Mori1, S. Ansaldi1, M. Grasso1, A. Pilotto1, C. Lucchelli1, L. disease. Detecting these is a critical aspect of DNA diagnosis, yet Lanzarini2, M. Diegoli3, L. Tavazzi2, E. Arbustini1; due to technical problems this analysis is often not performed. We 1Cardiovascular Pathol. and Molec. Diagn. - Res.Transplantation have tested Multiplex Amplifiable Probe Hybridization (MAPH) as Lab. , IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Cardiology Division, a tool for detecting such mutations in the DMD-gene, which cause IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Pathology Duchenne and Becker Muscular Dystrophy (DMD/BMD). MAPH is a - University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. quantitative technique, with probes being recovered by PCR following Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder of the hybridization to immobilized genomic DNA. connective tissue that principally involves the cardiovascular,ocular We have analyzed the PCR-products using micro-array technology, and skeletal systems. The incidence is estimated to be 1:5000, with in particular porous microarrays (PamChipTM). Compared to planar 25% sporadic cases. The leading cause of death is related to the arrays, the PamChipTM has several advantages, including the larger cardiovascular involvement, in particular aortic root dilatation and active surface area, the possibility to vary hybridisation stringency rupture. during analysis and significantly decreased hybridization times. The disease is caused by alteration in FBN1 gene (65 exons, located 60-mer oligos specific for individual exons were spotted on the at 15q15-q21.1). Causal mutations are scattered throughout the gene PamChipTM substrate. Following MAPH the PCR products were and are largely unique to individual families. fluorescently labeled and hybridized on the microarray. Sufficient The FBN1 gene was analyzed in 29 unrelated patients suspected signal was obtained within 10 minutes. By comparing spot intensities to be affected by Marfan syndrome. To develop an efficient and between controls and patients it was possible to detect deletions faster method capable of identify all possible mutations in this gene, and duplications in both males and females, including one and two we introduced DHPLC technology in the analysis of 25 exons in exon duplications that were missed by other techniques. Preliminary which mutations recur. We first analysed the FBN1 exons and exon- results show a high level of reproducibility, suggesting that even flanking non coding regions gene coding regions with automated smaller changes might be detectable, including mosaic cases. sequencing of all 65 exons (ABI PE- 373 DNA Sequencer) to This proof-of principle has encouraged us to explore the possibility identify mutations and polymorphisms. Then, DHPLC analysis of expanding the number of probes used within one hybridization. was carried out on the WaveTM DNA Fragment Analysis System The high throughput capabilities of the PamChipTM should help (Transgenomic, Cheshire, UK). DNA fragment elution profiles were laboratories to cope with the ever increasing number of genes which displayed using the Transgenomic WAVEMAKER-TM software. need to be screened for deletions or duplications. Chromatograms were analysed and amplified fragments showing alterations were re-confirmed by automated sequencing. Overall, by direct sequencing we indentify 19 variants (14 in coding regions and 5 in intronic sequences). A corresponding number of heteroduplex Posters - Techniques for Mutation Detection 298 299 P1053. A systematic mutation screening approach procedure). We illustrate their use on two publicly available cancer for syndromic and nonsyndromic forms of mental microarray datasets: a melanoma dataset with survival and gene retardation in human Xp21.1-Xp11.23 expression measurements for 15 individuals on 3613 genes; and J. Ramser1, G. Wen2, I. Martinez Garay3, M. Dufault1, H. Hellebrand1, a lymphoma dataset with 40 individuals and 4026 genes. Although S. Engert1, C. Schwartz4, M. Platzer2, A. Meindl1; there are several unadjusted p-values smaller than 0.01, none of 1Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 2Institute of the genes appears particularly promising once adjustment is made Molecular Biotechnology, Jena, Germany, 3University of Valencia, for multiple testing. The lack of significant findings with either the Valencia, Spain, 4Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC. FWER or FDR controlling procedures could be due to the small sample size, but also points to limitations of current approaches. Apart from 7 syndromic forms of MRX which include Prieto and Firstly, FWER controlling procedures may simply be too stringent in Renpenning, more than 20 non-syndromic MRX families can be some microarray applications. Secondly, FDR controlling procedures, mapped completely or partially to the Xp21.1-11.22 region. Therefore, while less conservative than FWER controlling procedures, need we are establishing a detailed gene catalogue for a region flanked to be refined to take into account the joint distribution of the gene by markers DXS1237 and DXS146. This interval encompasses expression levels. approximately 12 megabases and is under investigation via mapping and genomic sequencing at both the Sanger Centre (UK) and within our group. Exploring the genomic data, we have identified about P1056. Construction of a microarray on 5q31-q33 region 120 functional genes, including 65 known genes, 55 novel genes to identify genes controlling resistance or susceptibility including transcripts with unknown function like e.g. the ones of the to parasitic diseases as schistosomiasis and malaria. KIAA series, spliced ESTs and genes based on exon prediction only. C. Chevillard1, B. Loriot2, N. Crapoulet1, R. Tagett2, R. Houlgatte2, C. In addition 31 pseudogenes have been found. Assuming that the NGuyen2, A. Dessein1; region of interest is a representative part of the X chromosome due to 1INSERM U399, Marseille, France, 2INSERM U136, Marseille, its extreme variance in gene densities, we expect about 1000-1200 France. genes for the entire chromosome. Schistosomiasis affects 200 million people and is a major public Of the 120 putative functional genes, 10 have been associated with health problem. Our group performed studies on the causes of high genetic diseases, including one, TM4SF2, that is mutated in some infections in an endemic area of Brazil. Certain subjects appeared families suffering from MR. Detailed expression studies, including in to to be predisposed to high infections whereas others always silico as well as wetlab experiments, are in process. Immobilization exhibited low infection in spite of high exposure. This suggested that of the genes on membranes and subsequent RNA-hybridization host-specific factors were important in the control of infection. Using approaches will allow the establishment of expression profiles in a segregation and linkage analysis, it was shown that there was strong wide variety of tissues. A systematic approach for mutation screening evidence for the control of infection by a major locus (SM1, located on the genomic and/or cDNA level has already been established and in the 5q31-q33 region which contains a number of gene that encode screening is underway for the Prieto and the Renpenning syndrome. cytokines that play an important role in the regulation of immune Finally, cSNPs are being collected and documented. response against parasites. Immunological studies performed on the same population showed that SM1 control is linked to the P1054. ABI Prism® 3100 Genetic Analyzer: Further differentiation of the T helper cells into Th1 or Th2 lymphocytes. advances to expand productivity Furthermore, it was also reported that blood parasitemie in K. M. C. Gunning, E. E. McIntyre, C. M. Wike, K. M. Chansky, B. F. Plasmodium falciparum are controlled by a locus located in the same Johnston, J. M. Bourey, A. M. Wheaton, C. L. Brown; region. This region is containing a large number of genes. In order to Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA. facilitate the analysis of this locus we have developed a systematic Applied Biosystems has always placed a large emphasis on expression level analysis of the 5q31-q33 interval by microarray continuous innovation. The 3100 system opened the doors for technology. The target will be a I.M.A.G.E. clone set arrayed on nylon many researchers interested in speeding up their access to genetic support. The probe will be labeled with 33P. Indeed combination of information by providing a flexible platform that automated the nylon array with 33P labeled radioactive probes provides 100 fold process of genetic analysis. In order to keep pace with discovery, better sensitivity, making it possible to perform expression profiling we have expanded this platform by further increasing the realm experiments using submicrogram amounts of unamplified total RNA of possibilities, yet maintaining the quality and dependability one from small biological samples. expects from Applied Biosystems. With the addition of the 80cm array for long read sequencing, and the 22 cm array for SNP P1057. Genome-wide survey of genes associated with analysis, we have increased the throughput of the instrument and coronary atherosclerosis and aortic aneurysm using allowed substantial cost savings to the investigator. When coupled polymorphic microsatellite markers and microarray with improvements to the Data Collection software the average technology investigator has acquired a more automated system, capable of J. Taguchi1, G. Tamiya2, K. Okamoto2, S. Koide2, S. Handa2, H. allowing continuous operation for more than 24 hrs. We will discuss in Inoko2; detail how these features will expand your research capabilities and 1Tokai University, Hachiouji, Tokyo, Japan, 2Tokai University, Isehara, present a cost effective and handsfree solution, ready to decipher the Japan. unknown in molecular research. The aim of this study is to exclusively identify genes related to coronary atherosclerosis and aortic aneurysm by genome-wide P1055. Multiple testing in the survival analysis of association analysis using polymorphic microsatellite markers. microarray data Microsatellite markers showed linkage disequilibria with disease- J. A. Correa1, S. Dudoit2, D. R. Goldstein3; related alleles spanning from 100 to 200 kilobases (kb). For the 1Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, 2UC Berkeley, Berkeley, purpose of genome-wide association studies, we finished identifying CA, 3UCLA, Los Angeles, CA. 30,000 polymorphic microsatellite markers from the human genome DNA microarrays are increasingly being used to study the molecular draft sequence which can cover whole genome. We then genotyped basis of complex diseases like cancer, often aiming to identify genes pooled DNA from 100 to 200 healthy Japanese individuals using potentially influencing important clinical outcomes (e.g. survival). To those markers to confirm microsatellite polymorphism, allele identify genes, survival is modeled (Cox proportional hazards) as a frequency and heterozygosity. We have simultaneously started to function of sets of gene expression levels. In its simplest version, the apply those markers to conduct a genome-wide association study modeling is done one gene at a time. Prioritizing results for follow-up of atherosclerosis-susceptibility genes. We also investigated gene requires a realistic assessment of the significance of a relevant test expression in aortic aneurysm tissue using GeneChip (Affymetrix) U95 sets. statistic for the thousands of simultaneous comparisons made with a We report here our findings to date of different susceptibility locations typical microarray. within the genome. For example, we found strong association in the We have studied the performance of several multiple testing area from 7q32.3 to 7q36.3 confirmed by two different normal and procedures for survival data (including Bonferroni, Westfall and diseased DNA pools. By narrowing the area, we believe there should Young maxT family-wise error rate (FWER) controlling procedure, be unknown gene related to coronary atherosclerosis. In addition, and Benjamini and Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) controlling we found about 4700 known genes expressed in aortic aneurysm 298 Posters - Therapy for Genetic Disorders 299 tissue. Genes of osteopontin, apolipoprotein E, metalloproteinases to multisystem abnormalities, and the clinical findings also overlap and cathepsin D were highly upregulated. We believe the information with other mitochondrial diseases. These disorders are therefore gathered from DNA microarray technology would complement our best classified on the basis of pathogenic mtDNA variations. In order genome-wide association studies. This combined approach should to systematically screen patients with biochemically determined or accelerate identification of atherosclerosis-related genes. suspected complex III deficiency for single-nucleotide DNA variations, we have established a cytochrome b SNP microarray. This tool P1058. SNP analysis and linkage disequilibrium map of consists of covalently attached allele-specific primers representing the human chromosome 22 using APEX arrays. all 90 SNPs and mutations of MTCYB found to date. In contrast to E. Lõhmussaar1,2, J. Zernant2, R. Mägi2, K. Kepp1, T. Puurand2, other SNP detection methods, only one PCR product comprising the N. Tõnisson2, I. Valvas2, G. Slavin2, R. Andreson1,2, A. Kurg1, M. complete MTCYB mtDNA and therefore all variations, is used as a Remm3,2, A. Metspalu1,2; target. The subsequent primer elongation protocol allows the typing 1Institute of Molecular And Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Asper Ltd., of all 90 variations in one reaction. To test if this method is suitable Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. for detecting heteroplasmy, we have mixed MTCYB DNA targets Sequence variants in the human genome are responsible for the with known polymorphisms from two different samples. Material from genetic component of disease, individuality and drug response. approximately 70 patients is currently being analysed to detect novel In order to find associations between SNPs and phenotype, large cytochrome b phenotype-genotype correlations. sample sets need to be genotyped with high-density markers. Our next aim will be the extension of this microarray to cover mtDNA With chromosome 22 fully sequenced and a SNP map constructed encoded polypeptides of complex I. across 22q, we have performed genotyping of Estonian and German samples and CEPH families with 1279 SNP markers. An array with P1061. Accurate SNP genotypes determined using 5200 oligonucleotides was designed to genotype each SNP twice a multiplex ligation/PCR based assay (OLA/PCR) in from both DNA strands simultaneously using APEX technology. Allele combination with a universal DNA microarray frequencies, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and heterozygosities were M. H. Wenz, A. Bach, J. Day, F. de la Vega, E. Friedlander, K. calculated for each genotyped marker. Hayashibara, D. Holden, S. Johnson, R. Koehler, L. Leong, D. We have characterised the patterns of linkage disequilibrium and Maglasang, T. Paner, D. Ridzon, S. Short, P. Wu; calculated D’ for the whole 33Mb of chromosome 22. Our results Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA. demonstrated that along the chromosome the pattern of LD is highly One of the expected consequences of the Human Genome Project is variable, where regions of high LD are interspersed with regions of the practical utilization of extensive genetic diversity of populations. little or no detectable LD. It appears that SNPs from public databases Public and private efforts have discovered polymorphic repeat will need additional testing in order to find out useful SNPs in respect sequences, as well as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of genotyping technology. Construction of LD maps across the human for genotyping. Several different databases now contain millions genome and identifying haplotypes in individual genomic regions will of candidate SNPs. In order to realize the full potential of SNP facilitate the identification and characterization of genetic variants genotyping in large-scale population studies, sensitive, accurate responsible for common complex diseases. and cost effective methods have to be established for scoring SNP genotypes. We have developed a ligation/PCR based assay (OLA/ P1059. MassARRAY™ Analysis of Fragmented Nucleic PCR) that uses a universal DNA microarray for SNP-specific assay Acids: Applications in Typing, Sequence Validation, and product identification. Genomic DNA is interrogated with multiplex Targeted SNP Discovery sets of ligation probes specific for selected SNP loci. After ligation, C. P. Rodi1, N. Storm2, B. Darnhofer-Patel1, R. Hartmer3, L. Leppin1, the resulting products are simultaneously amplified in a universal S. Böcker1, M. Denissenko1, D. van den Boom1; PCR reaction. The minimum single tube multiplex level has been 1Sequenom, Inc., San Diego, CA, 2Sequenom, Inc., Hamburg, shown to be ~50 loci, translating into a consumption of approximately Germany, 3Sequenom, Hamburg, Germany. 1 ng of gDNA per SNP genotype. We have assembled several The MassARRAY™ System is widely used to do high-throughput multiplexes and tested these against 28 different CEPH DNA samples scoring of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using the to demonstrate the feasibility of this approach. We will present data MassEXTEND™ assay. A new application for high-throughput genetic that describe the reproducibility and accuracy of this assay. analysis is presented which we call Fragmentation. Single-stranded nucleic acid is created and in four separate reactions fragmented at P 23. Therapy for Genetic Disorders positions corresponding to each of the four bases. Using a reference sequence, such as the now available human genome, the precision, P1062. An anti-BRCA1 ribozyme act as a radiosensitizer accuracy, and resolution of MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry allows in a melanoma cell line one to definitively identify each resulting peak. Taken together, the C. Hesling1, M. D’Incan2, C. D’Incan1, P. Souteyrand2, Y. J. Bignon1; collection of peaks creates a sort of biological barcode that supports 1Laboratoire d’Oncologie Moléculaire, Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont- high throughput typing. It also allows one to quickly and accurately Ferrand, France, 2Hôtel-Dieu CHRU, Clermont-Ferrand, France. perform sequence validation, key to many European patents. Recent Background: Melanoma tumors are known to be radioresistant. software developments now also allow us to use this technology Recent studies showed that BRCA1 (BReast CAncer 1) is part of in high-throughput, targeted SNP discovery. In contrast to other a multiprotein complex called BASC, involved in recognition and techniques such as SSCP and dHPLC, in the majority of the cases repair of aberrant DNA structures such as the double strands breaks Fragmentation not only detects SNPs, but can also definitively induced by X-ray irradiation. identify and locate the polymorphisms. This allows for the facile and Aim of the study: to determine the role of BRCA1 expression in the quick design of a MassEXTEND assay for accurate, high-throughput radioresistance of melanoma cell lines. SNP scoring. Materials and Methods: The A375 melanoma cell line was transfected with a vector expressing an anti-BRCA1 ribozyme. Clones with P1060. Development and application of a cytochrome b diminished mRNA expression determined by real time quantitative SNP microarray to screen patients with mitochondrial RTPCR were irradiated and cell survival assays performed. Results: Two clones, c88 and c91, exhibited a residual BRCA1 complex III deficiency expression of 60% and 50% respectively. Both had increased U. A. Nuber1, F. Erdogan1, F. A. Hol2, H. H. Ropers1; radiosensitivity compared to non transfected lines and lines 1MPI for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2University Medical transfected with the vector alone. Clone 88 was cultivated for two Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. months, after which it recovered a normal BRCA1 level of expression Complex III is the second enzyme in the electron transport chain and interestingly also its radioresistance. of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, and consists of several Discussion: Our data suggest that in melanoma as it has been shown polypeptide subunits. One of these, cytochrome b, is encoded by in BRCA1 mutated breast cell lines, BRCA1 expression is involved in mitochondrial (mt) DNA. So far, mutations in MTCYB and a nuclear radioresistance. Work is in progress to study the pathways impaired encoded gene, BCS1L, have been found as cause of complex III after BRCA1 down regulation using a multigenetic approach with deficiency. Patients with cytochrome b mutations may show widely DNA chips. varying clinical phenotypes, ranging from pure exercise intolerance Posters - Therapy for Genetic Disorders 300 301 P1063. Bisphosphonate therapy for osteogenesis introduced fragment. We transfected U87 cells with a mutagenized imperfecta DNA fragment homologous to exon 3 sequence of the VEGF gene. N. Huzjak1, I. Barisic1, A. Resic1, V. Kusec2, D. Anticevic3, D. Dodig2, The corrective fragment was complexed with cationic liposome (Gene D. Primorac4; Porter, GTS) at different liposome to DNA charge ratio (+/-).The 1Childrens University Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Clinical fragment was designed to insert a stop mutation in the wild type Hospital Centre Rebro, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Clinical Hospital Centre sequence in order to create a truncated and unstable VEGF protein. Salata, Zagreb, Croatia, 4Clinical Hospital Centre Split, Split, Croatia. In addition, a unique Dde I restriction site was also inserted as a Background: Severe osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a hereditary positive marker for replacement. Recombination at the appropriate disorder characterised by increased bone fragility and progressive genomic locus and expression of the modified CFTR mRNA were bone deformity. So far, no effective medical treatment is available. As assayed using PCR amplification and restriction analysis. ELISA test secondary osteoporosis is an important feature of OI, antiresorptive was also performed to quantify residual VEGF protein secreted by activity of the aminobisphosphonates may improve clinical outcome cells. Molecular DNA analysis shows recombinant restriction pattern in children. (DdeI) for lipid/charge ratio (+/-) from 42/1 to 2.7/1.The recombinant Aim: to assess the clinical impact of the administration of allele was absent at neutral charge of the complex.This study extends bisphosphonates in Croatian OI patients. the efficacy of SFHR as a gene targeting techniques to introduce Methods: We report results of 1-3 years treatment with intravenous gene modifications able to inhibit expression of selected genes. pamidronate (APD) in seven children (four girls) of age 3 months Work supported by Ministero dell’Istruzione e Ricerca Scientifica - 11 years at entry, with severe OI. Pamidronate was administered in cycles as monthly infusions at a daily dose of 1-1,5 mg/kg during 6 P1066. Persistent failure of RNA/DNA oligonucleotides months following pause for three months, or the same dose for three (chimeraplasts) in gene correction : targeting the HPRT days every four months. gene Results: Following treatment DEXA measurements showed a J. Albuquerque-Silva1, G. Vassart1,2, J. Lavinha3, M. J. gradual increase in bone density in all patients. Number of confirmed Abramowicz2,1; fractures decreased in all. The reduction in pain and improvement 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 2University in well-being and ability were impressive in two boys who had been Hospital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 3Instituto Nacional de confined to a wheelchair and now they walk using crutches. Acute Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal. phase reactions were noted during first infusion cycle in two children Initial studies of gene correction using chimeric RNA/DNA and asymptomatic hypocalcemia in three children. Three children oligonucleotides (RDOs), also named chimeraplasts, reported gained excessive weight. exciting rates of correction of point mutations (up to 40% in one in Conclusion: although bisphosphonates do not correct basic vivo model). However, the technique has not yet held its promises in abnormalities in OI, they significantly alter the natural course of the the fields of transgenics and gene therapy, and some groups reported disease and improve patients’ quality of life. For the time being they persistent failures. seem not only effective but also devoid of any adverse effects on In order to implement the technique in our laboratory, we targeted bone growth and remodelling. the HPRT gene. HPRT+ and HPRT- cells can be readily selected in HAT and in 6-thioguanine (6-TG) medium, respectively. The gene P1064. Liposuction - a less invasive surgical method of is expressed ubiquitously and is located on the X chromosome so debulking plexiform neurofibromas that only one allele is to be mutated in male (XY) cells. We aimed D. Babovic-Vuksanovic1, U. Bite1, S. Babovic2; at introducing a previously reported human mutation, which leaves 1Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 2Olmsted Medical Center, Rochester, virtually no residual enzymatic activity in functional assays. We MN. introduced mutated and control RDOs in human male, diploid cell Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant lines by transfection or direct microinjection. In all experiments we disorder in humans. The hallmark of NF1 is development of failed to observe any significant difference in the number of 6-TG- neural tumors. Plexiform neurofibromas are a major source of resistant clones between controls and RDO-treated cells. Moreover, morbidity associated with NF1. These tumors are often large and resistant clones did not result from specific mutagenesis but merely inconveniently located, leading to disfigurement and compromise from the background noise of the selection process. of vital structures by compression and tissue infiltration. Surgery Our experiments were designed to meet criteria defined to address still remains the only therapeutic option for patients on whom a criticisms expressed about early reports dealing with RDOs. In view tumor is causing disability or pain. In many patients tumors are not of potential artifacts and the lack of reproducibility of published completely resectable and there is a high rate of tumor re-growth. reports, we consider that conversion mediated by chimeric RDOs still Surgical removal of tumors is associated with high risk of damage of awaits validation. We hope that confrontation of negative as well as surrounding vital structures as well as with significant hemorrhage. positive results will help solving the problem of reproducibility of this Also, surgical debulking of tumors sometimes leads to extensive potentially promising methodology. scaring which may be very disfiguring. We report a novel approach in surgical therapy of plexiform neurofibromas using liposuction in two P1067. PAC based engineering and expression of a patients. This method is less invasive than a conventional surgical genomic CFTR-GFP fusion gene. tumor debulking. The procedure is well tolerated and post surgical A. Laner1, A. Ramalho2, S. Cattani1, S. Christan1, B. Marques2, S. recovery is short. Liposuction may be a prefered surgical method for Beck2, M. Amaral2,3, D. Schindlbauer4,1; debulking of superficial plexiform neurofibromas in patients with NF1. 1Dept. Medical Genetics, Childrens Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, 2Centre of Human Genetics, National P1065. In Vitro Modification Of Human Glioblastoma Cell Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Faculty of Line Using Sfhr Technique Sciences, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Institute of Human E. Bonifazi1, F. Sangiuolo1, M. Lais1, G. Maira2, A. Mangiola2, G. Genetics, Technical University, Munich, Germany. Novelli1; We engineered and initially analyzed expression of a 145 kb fusion 1Tor Vergata University, Department of Biopathology, Human gene. Starting from a genomic P1 based artificial chromosome (PAC) Molecular Genetics Unit, Rome, Italy, 2Institute of Neurosurgery, clone of the cystic fibrosis conductance regulator gene (CFTR) and Catholic University, Rome, Italy. the enhanced green fluorescence protein (EGFP) cDNA, a seven Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a positive effector step cloning procedure resulted in a genomic CFTR-EGFP fusion of angiogenesis, encouraging neovascularization and growth of construct (CG2). It contains approximately one half of the genomic cancerous cells.We used an innovative gene modification approach CFTR gene locus from position -60 kb to exon 10, the EGFP based on Small Fragment Homologous Replacement (SFHR) cDNA replacing CFTR exons 10-24, and 2 kb of 3’ sequences of technique for down-regulation of VEGF expression in human the CFTR gene. Lipofection of the human lung sarcoma cell line glioblastoma cell lines (U87). SFHR allows the modification of HT1080 resulted in integration of one or possibly few copies of the specific genes in situ by a gene targeting approach. The method is construct into a host chromosome. Expression and correct splicing based on the introduction of small fragments of DNA into cells, that of the synthetic 10 exon gene has been confirmed by RT-PCR. pair and replace the homologous endogenous sequence with the Since expression of the primary transcript of CG2 requires intact 300 Posters - Y chromosome, Infertility 301 transfer of a minimum of 77 kb, the reporter should be useful for the P 24. Y chromosome, infertility development of large DNA transfer protocols. The reporter within it’s own chromatin context now allows the analysis of transgene P1070. Yq microdeletions and male infertility in Iran expression within target tissues L. Abbasi Moheb1, A. Hatami1, M. R. Seddighi Gilani2, P. Afsharian2, S. Mollah Mohammadi1, K. Javan1, H. Najmabadi1; P1068. An engineered genomic CFTR-GFP fusion gene 1Genetics Research Center the Social Welfare and Rehabilitation is expressed and correctly spliced on human artificial University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Andrology chromosomes. and Clinical and Experimental Genetics,Royan Institute, Tehran, D. Schindelhauer1,2, A. Laner2, S. Christan2, S. Cattani2, A. Islamic Republic of Iran. Ramalho3, B. Marques3, S. Beck3, M. Amaral3,4; Male factor is the cause of infertility in about 50 percent of infertile 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University, Munich, Germany, couples. 3-20% of infertile men with severe oligozoospermia or 2Medical Genetics, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, azoospermia have microdeletions of the long arm of Y chromosome 3Centre of Human Genetics, National Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo (Yq) consistent with the location of AZF (Azoospermia Factor) in Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 4Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisboa, Yq11.23. Lisboa, Portugal. Recent Studies have shown the presents of 4 regions on the interval To assess co-lipofection of telomerized components cloned into a 6 of Y choromosome associated with male infertility. These are ditelomeric P1 phage based artificial chromosome vector (pTAT) AZFa, AZFb, AZFc and AZFd which are involved in the process of as a means to incorporate genomic genes into human artificial spermatogenesis. DAZ and RBM are two multicopy gene families, chromosomes (HAC), we use our recently engineered, telomerized which are expressed only in testis and have an important role in CFTR-EGFP fusion gene construct CGT21 (138 kb) which expresses spermatogenesis. They are located at AZFc and AZFb respectively. a 77kb primary transcript under the control of the CFTR promoter. Microdeletions in these regions cause severe oligozosspermia or Comparably small amounts (100 ng) of CGT21 and telomerized alpha azoospermia. satellite DNA of chromosome 17 (a17T, 200 kb) where sufficient to In this study DNA was extracted from blood lymphocytes of 120 generate a large number of co-transfected, blasticidin S resistant azoospermic or severe oligozoospermic men in whom all known clones. Presence of the centromere efficiently changed the fate of causes of infertility had been excluded. Twenty one Y specific STSs the transferred gene from integration to HAC formation in 5 out of 5 of deletion intervals 5 and 6 were selected for typing all subjects. lines analyzed, out of which 3 expressed and correctly spliced all 10 Of the 120 oligo/azoospermic men, 8 (6.6%) had deletions of more exons. Low copy HACs were detected by FISH in only 10-50% of than one STSs. All of the patients had microdeletions in AZFc metaphases, regardless whether on or off selection. Nevertheless, (interval 6D), in which 75% of the cases had deletion in DAZ gene. the majority (>87%) of single cell derived subclones which have Fifty percent of these individuals their deletion extended in AZFb been isolated after having been off selection for 30 generations, region (Interval 6A).No microdeletions were detected in AZFa and grew upon re-selection, indicating stable HACs in virtually all cells. RBM. While two of the lines presented stable HACs without integration after 60 generations, one HAC line showed an increasing proportion P1071. Clinical, cytogenetic and molecular genetic of metaphases (up to 40%) with integrations in two independent findings in patients with sterility or repeated pregnancy (painting probe) host chromosomes, indicating secondary events in loss. this HT1080 cell clone. The data suggest that de novo HAC formation R. Gaillyová1, P. Kuglík2, A. Oltová1, B. Ravèuková1, J. Žáková3; from naked DNA is an efficient means to stably transfer genomic 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Jihlavská copies of genes which can be engineered ad libitum in PACs. 20, 639 00, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kotláøská 2, 611 37, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Centre P1069. Safety and efficacy of recombinant acid alpha- of Assisted Reproduction,1st Clinic of Gynaecology/Obstetrics, glucosidase (rhGAA) in patients with classical infantile University Hospital, Jihlavská 20, 639 00, Brno, Czech Republic. Pompe disease In our study, cytogenetic and molecular genetic analyses were L. Klinge, V. Straub, U. Neudorf, K. Goerlinger, T. Voit; performed in 305 patients with sterility or repeated pregnancy loss Children’s Hospital, University of Essen, Essen, Germany. from the Centre of Assisted Reproduction. Purpose: Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive muscle-wasting Cytogenetic examinations using karyotyping of peripheral blood were disorder caused by deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme GAA. performed in all 305 individuals. Chromosomal abnormalities (mainly Classical infantile Pompe disease is characterized by progressive numerical aberrations of gonosomes, balanced translocations or cardiomyopathy, muscle weakness, respiratory insufficiency and inversions) were detected in about 10% patients. death in early infancy. Methods: Evaluated are data of four patients DNA analyses were performed in two groups of 214 patients with with classical infantile Pompe disease participating in two separate reproductive failures. In the first group of patients (infertile men with Phase 2 open-label, multinational multicenter studies. Two patients oligo- or azoospermia) we performed molecular analyses of the Y are treated with rhGAA derived from milk of transgenic rabbits 40 by the PCR of sequences-tagged sites (STS-PCR) and mutation mg/kg IV weekly and two patients with CHO-cell derived rhGAA 10 analyses of the most common mutations in the CFTR gene. In mg/kg IV weekly. Safety is evaluated by recording adverse events, the second group of patients (positive family history or repeated vital signs, physical examination, antibodies to rhGAA and routine pregnancy loss) we studied Leiden mutations of the factor V gene clinical lab tests. Clinical efficacy endpoints include ventilator-free (G1691A) and the most common CFTR mutations. In all tested survival, left ventricular mass, motor and cognitive development, patients we diagnosed 7 carriers of CFTR mutations (dF508, dele and growth. Muscle biopsies are performed at baseline, 3 months, 2,3(21kb), G542X), 7 carriers of Leiden mutations G1691A (1q23) and 12 months. Two patients have been treated for more than one and 4 men with the microdeletion of AZFc region on Yq chromosome. year and two for three months by now (mean age at enrollment 6,6 Our results of the complex screening programme in couples months, range 2,6-14,5). Results: Initial safety data indicates that with sterility or repeated pregnancy loss from the Moravia region the treatment is generally well-tolerated. There has been an overall demonstrate chromosomal and / or gene disorders in 15,4% of improvement in left ventricular mass, cardiac function, skeletal patients. muscle function and histologic appearance as evidenced by reduction In 8 patients with repeated IVF failures or spontaneous abortion we of muscle glycogen. Younger patients and those with less advanced performed preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) of numerical disease have shown the best clinical response. Conclusions: Our abnormalities for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y using data suggest that rhGAA appears to be well-tolerated and capable fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Two of the women have of improving cardiac status and skeletal muscle function in patients become pregnant after PGD. with classical infantile Pompe disease. Further long-term safety and efficacy data are required to assess the potenial of this therapy. P1072. Molecular detection of Y chromosome microdeletions: a Slovak study. R. Behulová1, R. Mezenská1, R. Weisenpacherová1, M. Lukácová1, J. Simko2; 1Centre of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, Posters - Y chromosome, Infertility 302 303 22-nd Gynecologic-Obsteric Clinic, Komensky University, Bratislava, growth retarded boy with an otherwise normal physical examination Slovakia. was delivered at 39 weeks. At age 4, the child had short stature (- Male factor infertility accounts for about half of the cases of couple 3SD) without mental retardation. Radiological examination of the infertilty. Microdeletions of the long arm of the human Y chromosome wrist was normal. Blood karyotyping confirmed the chromosomal are associated with spermatogenic failure and have been used to rearrangement. C-banding showed a dicentric chromosome, and define three regions of Yq (AZFa, AZFb, AZFc) that are recurrently FISH with centromeric probes confirmed the presence of both deleted in infertile males. Several genes have been identified within chromosome Y and 22 centromeres on the derivative chromosome. this region and have been proposed as candidates for infertility. About FISH using a TUPLE1 probe did not show any rearrangement at 10-15% of azoospermic and about 5-10% of severely oligospermic 22q11 or at the ARSA locus. Using a subtelomeric probe, a deletion men have Yq microdeletions. The deletions are associated with a of the distal Yp region was shown, whereas SRY was not deleted wide range of histological pictures ranging from Sertoli cell only as shown by FISH. A set of two probes encompassing the SHOX syndrome to spermatogenic arrest and severe hypospermatogenesis. region were used for FISH and demonstrated a deletion of this gene. Assisted reproduction techniques such as in vitro fertilization and The karyotype was thus 45,X,der(Y;22)(p11;q11).ish del(Y)(p11p11) Intra Cytoplasmic Sperm Injection alone represent an efficient (SRY+,SHOX-). therapy for these patients. However the potencial of these techniques Haploinsufficiency of SHOX may result in isolated growth retardation to transmit genetic defects causing male infertility raises the need or in Leri-Weill dysostosis, which is not an obvious diagnosis in for a systematic genetic screening and genetic counselling of these our patient, but may appear at a later age. Although other loci patients. may have been deleted, no other genes seem to have resulted in We have investigated 168 infertile men (67 with azoospermia, 61 haploinsufficiency in our patient. with oligoasthenospermia, 26 with oligospermia and 11 with other diagnosis). For each patient, five multiplex PCR analyses were P1075. Cytogenetic Analysis And Y Chromosome performed on DNA isolated from leukocytes derived from peripheral Microdeletion Results In Infertile Males Undergoing blood to screen 10 sY- sequences on Yq. Microdeletions were Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) detected in 11/168 (6,5%) infertile men. Seven of the 67 azoospermic A. Guney1, A. Biricik2, E. Tetik2, H. Berkil2, S. Kahraman3; men (10,7%) had such deletions. Of the 61 oligoasthenospermic men 1Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul 2 (3,2%) had deletion, 1 of the 26 oligospermic man had deletion, Memorial Hospital, Reproductive Genetics Unit, Istanbul, Turkey, and among other diagnoses microdeletion was detected in 1 man. 3Istanbul Memorial Hospital, Reproductive Endocrinology and ART Unit, Istanbul, Turkey. P1073. Molecular analysis of the Yq microdeletions in Infertility affects approximately 15% of all couples. Among these male with azoospermia and oligospermia and in children couples male factors are the aetiology in about 50% of cases. of liquidators of Chernobyl accident consequences from Besides many different factors in male infertility, chromosomal Ukraine. aberration and Y chromosome deletion screening became one of the O. A. Yasinskaya1, S. G. Malyarchuk1, V. M. Zinchenko2, L. A. standart procedures of ART clinics. Livshits1; We report the cytogenetic and chromosome microdeletion results 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine, 2”ISIDA- of 315 men with azoospermia or severe oligospermia. After IVF” clinic, Kiev, Ukraine. clinical examination, seminal fluid and hormonal tests, cytogenetic Male infertility is caused by many different exogenous and investigation was performed by GTG-banding. The screening of endogenous factors. In addition to chromosomal anomalies, microdeletions in 18 loci of the Y chromosome was performed microdeletions in the azoospermic factor region (AZF) in the long arm by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. In 16 months we have of Y-chromosome have been detected in men with azoospermia or performed 315 semen analysis according to WHO guidelines in sever oligospermia. We have screened 105 men with azoospermia 157 azoospermic (50%) and 158 oligospermic (50%) patients. and oligospermia - patients of “ISIDA-IVF” clinic involved in ICSI Cytogenetic analysis was performed in 256 cases of the group (intracytoplasmic sperm injection) program as well 70 boys - sons and abnormality detected in 26 (10,2%) patients including 12 of fathers-liquidators (Chernobyl eccident clean-up workers). Our translocations, 8 Klinefelter syndromes, 3 invertions, 1 marker study consists of 11 primer pairs that are homologous to previously chromosome 15 carrier, 1 47,XYY, 1 mosaic 45,X(8%). Microdeletions identified and mapped sequence tagged sites (STS). The STS of AZFa, AZFb, AZFc and AZFd regions of chromosome Y were primers tested on each subject were sY84, sY85 (AZFa); sY117; detected in 1, 6, 11 and 11 patients respectively. Frequency of sY124, sY134 (AZFb); sY141, sY146; sY240, sY254 (DAZ), abnormal karyotype (10,2%) and frequency of Y microdeletions sY255 (DAZ), sY158 (AZFc). The samples were analysed for Y- (4,1%) suggests the need for genetic testing of ART candidates and chromosome microdeletion by multiplex-PCR. The PCR products the requirement for genetic counselling. were analyzed on a 1,8% agarose gel. SRY was used as internal controls of PCR reactions. Any de novo deletions was not found P1076. Partial deletions of the DAZ gene cluster in males in the group of liquidators children. In five of the 105 infertil men with idiopathic infertility (4,76%) it was shown 1 deletion of at AZFb (0,95%) and 4 deletions L. Stuppia1, A. Gaspari1, V. Gatta1, G. Calabrese1, E. Morizio1, D. of at AZFc (gene DAZ) (3,81%) regions prevailing which majority Fantasia1, I. Antonucci1, R. Mingarelli2, G. Palka1; is concentrated in AZFc region. During patients research we have 1Università “G. D’Annunzio”, Chieti, Italy, 2CSS Mendel Institute, made a conclusions: a) the damage of genes from AZFb region Roma, Italy. results in impairments of last stage spermatogenesis; b) deletions in About 10% of infertile males show microdeletions of the Y AZFc region are critical for early stage spermatogenesis. The genetic chromosome, the majority of which involving the AZFc locus. The consultating and preimplantation sex analysis were recommended for DAZ gene maps within AZFc with four copies (DAZ1-4) and is the patients with found deletions. considered as the major candidate for infertility. Since the PCR approach used for the screening of the Y chromosome can detect P1074. Dicentric chromosome (Y;22) resulting in a only deletions of all the DAZ copies, so far it is not know whether or microdeletion encompassing SHOX in a boy with short not partial deletions of the cluster are related to a spermatogenesis stature and no dysosteochondrosis. failure. We studied the presence of partial deletions of the DAZ C. Borie1, J. Léger1, O. Dupuy1, A. Lebbar2, C. Pignal1, A. Thaly1, M. gene cluster in 42 infertile patients and in 67 fertile controls. This Vitu1, P. Czernichow1, P. L. Eydoux1; study was based on the presence within the DAZ sequence of three 1Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France. intronic SNPs able to distinguish among the four gene copies. The We report a 4 year-old child with short stature, and a dicentric STSs sY581, sY586 and sY587 were PCR amplified and digested chromosome with a deletion of the distal part of chromosome Yp. with Sau3A, Taq I and Dra I restriction enzymes, respectively. The parents were not consanguineous, and did not have any relevant Absence of the band specific for DAZ2 was evidenced in 13 patients history of genetic disease. The pregnancy was uneventful, until (30.9%) and in 10 controls (14.9%). Thus, the absence of DAZ2 intra-uterine growth retardation was noted. Prenatal karyotyping appear compatible with normal spermatogenesis, but is two times showed a (Y;22) translocation. No structural fetal abnormality was more frequent in infertile males, suggesting that this condition could shown at ultrasound examination, and the pregnancy went to term. A make patients prone to other genetic or environmental factor able 302 Posters - Y chromosome, Infertility 303 to reduce their fertility. On the other hand, the loss of DAZ1-DAZ4 The aim of the study was the ascertainment of the Y chromosome and DAZ2-DAZ3 was detected only in 4 patients, but never in microdeletions frequency in 197 Czech men with severe reproductive controls, suggesting that this condition is not compatible with normal disorders, characterised by different types of abnormal sperm spermatogenesis. Experiments with Fiber FISH analysis are in counts (SC) and morphology, referred for reproductive genetic progress in order to confirm these results with a different approach. counselling. For Y chromosome microdeletions detection multiplex PCR with amplification of STS markers for AZFa (sY84, sY86), P1077. An Inherited Three Base Pair Deletion In A Sp1 AZFb (sY127, sY134), AZFc (sY254, sY255) and ZFY and SRY was Binding Site In The 5’ Non-coding Region Of Sry Gene Is used. Microdeletion frequency was analysed in four groups of males according to their sperm count: I. (azoospermia - 64x), II. (SC<1x106/ Associated With Sex Reversal ml - 19x), III. (SC 1-20x106/ml - 101x), IV. (SC>20x106/ml - 12x). J. G. Assumpção1, A. T. Maciel-Guerra2, A. P. Marques-de-Faria2, M. The Y chromosome microdeletion was found in 8/197 (4.1%) P. De Mello1; examined males. Nevertheless, these microdeletions were detected 1Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Universidade in azoospermic males only in 7/64 (10.9%). The AZFc (sY254, Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil, 2Dept. de Genética sY255) deletion was disclosed in 4/64 (6.3%), AZFc (sY254, sY255) Médica, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil. deletion combined with AZFb (sY127, sY134) deletion in 2/64 (3.1%) The condition named 46,XY pure gonadal dysgenesis is and AZFc (sY254, sY255) deletion combined with AZFb (sY134 characterized by a female phenotype with full development of only) deletion in 1/64 (1.6%). Microdeletion of AZFc (sY254, sY255) unambiguous female genitalia, normally developed Müllerian was also disclosed in one man referred with necrospermia without structures and streak gonads. Male to female sex reversal in 46,XY an exact sperm count. The 10.9% frequency of Y chromosome individuals results from failure of testis development and is presumed microdeletions in Czech azoospermic men does not differ from so far to be due to mutations in the SRY gene or in other genes involved as reported range of its prevalence and no AZFa deletion was found. in the sexual differentiation pathway. The majority SRY mutations The study was supported by grants: IGA 6462-3, IGA 6411-3, described so far were found within the coding region, mainly in the LN00A079, 111300003, 00000064203 HMG-box conserved domain. We have tested a female patient with 46,XY pure gonadal dysgenesis for mutations in the SRY gene. SRY complete open reading frame and 380 pb of the 5’ flanking P1080. Number Of Ctg Repeats In Dmpk Gene And Male region were amplified by PCR and directly sequenced. Sequence Infertility analysis revealed no mutations within SRY coding region. However, N. Teran1, T. Kunej1, B. Zorn2, B. Peterlin1; a three base pair deletion was found in the 5’ flanking sequence. 1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and This deletion involves a Sp1 binding site motif and is located next Gynecology, University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia, to a potential WT1 responsive element. This is the first report of 2Andrology Centre, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, a mutation in these putative SRY regulatory elements associated University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia. with sex reversal. Familial investigation revealed that the father BACKGROUND. The clinical picture of trinucleotide repeat diseases: bears the same deletion and two cousins were referred to have myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), fragile XA syndrome (FraXA) and sexual ambiguity. Polymorphism was discarded, as it was not spinobulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA), is manifested as reduced found in unrelated males. Different patient studied previously had infertility in men. The principle feature in adults with severe form the R30I familial SRY mutation within a phosphorylation site and of DM1 and SBMA is testicular atrophy, and for FraXA syndrome it is associated to pure and partial gonadal dysgenesis as well as macroorchidism is characteristic. Several studies have reported to normal phenotype. Those two mutations might influence sex that fertile males with a higher number of CAG repeats in normal determination depending on the in vivo environment. range of androgen receptor have an increased risk of impaired spermatogenesis. In DM1 hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, leading P1078. The Leri-Weill and Turner-Syndrome homeobox to azoospermia and impotence, is frequently observed. An increased number of CTG repeat in infertile males could represent a risk of DM1 gene SHOX encodes a cell-type specific transcriptional among offspring conceived by intracytoplasmic injection of sperm activator (ICSI). R. J. Blaschke, E. Rao, A. Marchini, B. Niesler, M. Burnett, G. A. The aim of this study was to compare the distribution of number of Rappold; CTG repeats in normal range between infertile and fertile group of University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. males to evaluate the involvement of CTG repeat number in male Functional impairment of the human homeobox gene SHOX causes infertility. short stature and Madelung deformity in Leri-Weill syndrome and PATIENTS. The number of CTG repeats in 107 infertile men (38 has recently been implicated in additional skeletal malformations with azoospermia and 69 with oligoasthenoteratozoospermia), ICSI frequently observed in Turner syndrome. To enhance our candidates, and in 102 fertile men with no sign of myotonia or muscle understanding of the underlying mechanism of action, we have weakness was determined. established a cell culture model consisting of four stably transfected RESULTS. Among infertile males no premutation or mutation carriers cell lines and analysed the functional properties of the SHOX protein were found. The distribution of the number of CTG repeats compared on a molecular level. Results show that the SHOX encoded protein between infertile and fertile males was not statistically significant (p = is located exclusively within the nucleus of a variety of cell lines, 0.825). including U2Os, HEK293, COS7 and NIH3T3 cells. In contrast to CONCLUSION. We conclude that the number of CTG repeats in this cell-type independent nuclear translocation, the transactivating normal range does not contribute to male infertility. Moreover, this potential of the SHOX protein on different luciferase reporter results show that increased risk of DM1 among offspring conceived constructs was observed only in the osteogenic cell line U2Os. Since by ICSI is unlikely. C-terminally truncated forms of SHOX lead to Leri-Weill syndrome and idiopathic short stature, we have compared the activity of P1081. Risk of sex chromosome mosaicism associated wild-type and truncated SHOX proteins. Interestingly, C-terminally truncated SHOX proteins are inactive with regards to target gene with Y chromosome AZFc microdeletions activation. These results for the first time provide an explanation P. C. Patsalis1, C. Sismani1, A. Ioulianos1, C. Eftychi1, C. Krausz2, L. of SHOX related phenotypes on a molecular level and suggest the Quintana-Murci2, K. McElreavey2; existence of qualitative trait loci modulating SHOX activity in a cell- 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, type specific manner. 2Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. Deletions of specific Y chromosome regions cause male infertility. Recent advances in infertility treatment permits deleted Y- P1079. The Y chromosome microdeletions in Czech men chromosomes to be transmitted to male offspring with the assumption with severe reproduction disorders that there will be no clinical consequences other than infertility in adult M. Machatkova, S. Vilimova, I. Smetanova, M. Matejckova, A. life. Recent data suggested that sex chromosome mosaicism could Krebsova, M. Macek, Sr.; arise when AZFc-deleted Y chromosomes are transmitted from one Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the 2nd Medical School generation to another by ICSI. If this hypothesis is correct, it raises of Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech the possibility that some patients with 45,X/46,XY karyotypes, such Republic.Posters - Y chromosome, Infertility 304 305 as patients with Turner-related phenotypes or sexual ambiguities may this preliminary data through a long-PCR methodology, based on in fact harbour Y chromosome microdeletions. To test this hypothesis, primers flanking the 60-bp polymorphic microsatelite associated to we screened a group of patients with a 45,X/46,XY karyotype for Y the binding domain of the Muc-1 glycoprotein. DNA samples were microdeletions using several Y-specific markers. We show that 33% obtained from twenty-one women patients, 10 fertile and 11 infertile of patients presenting with Turner stigmata and/or sexual ambiguities (three or more implantation failures), and were amplified in long-PCR and a 45,X/46,XY karyotype, carried Y chromosome microdeletions conditions using the Platinum Pfx DNA polymerase. Amplification of distal Yq. These results highlight a potential risk for offspring born generated fragments sizes from 1.6 to 2.9 kb. The average size for to fathers carrying Y chromosome microdeletions and treated by the lower allele was 1.68 kb for both groups, and for the upper allele assisted reproductive techniques. The risk is the development of sex was 2.29 and 2.47 kb (P>0.05), respectively for fertile and infertile chromosome aneuploidy during foetal and embryonic development. groups. In conclusion, the 60-bp microsatelite polymorphism of MUC The clinical consequences of this can be severe, including Turner 1 gene was not associated to women implantation failure. syndrome, mixed gonadal dysgenesis, male pseudohermaphroditism and rarely mild mental retardation or autism. Our data may also P1084. Y chromosome microdeletions in infertile azoo- explain in part the observation that in almost three-quarters of all 45,X and oligozoospermic men in Russia patients with Turner syndrome, the X chromosome is maternal in V. Chernih, A. Chuhrova, L. Kurilo, A. Polyakov; origin. Concluding, the transmission of Y chromosome microdeletions Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. could potentially have more severe clinical consequences other than Infertility affects 15% couples and in 50-60% of these cases male infertility, such as the development of sexual ambiguities and/or qualitative and/or quantitative abnormalities of sperm are found. Turner stigmata. About in half of these cases the etiology of male infertility, defined as idiopathic, may be associated with genetic factors. Major known P1082. A national based population screening for AZF genetic cause for male infertility is Y-microdeletions in AZF locus deletions in patients with severe spermatogenic failure (Azoospermia Factor) that contains three non-overlapping Yq11 and normal fertile controls, using a specific study and regions (AZFa, AZFb and AZFc). Several genes, have been identified experimental design within these regions, are considered as candidates for male infertility. C. Sismani1, A. Ioulianos1, N. Fourouclas1, T. Patroclou2, C. Sergiou3, AZF-microdeletions are associated with spermatogenic failure P. C. Patsalis1; ranging from Sertoli Cell Only Syndrome (SCOS) to spermatogenic 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, arrest and severe hypospermatogenesis. 2”Patroclou” Gynegologic & Obstetric Clinic, Limassol, Cyprus, We have studied cohort of infertile men with azoospermia and 3Fertility Center (CFC), Nicosia, Cyprus. severe oligozoospermia. Clinical examination, seminal fluid and Y chromosome microdeletions in the azoospermia factor (AZF) locus cytogenetic analysis was carried out on 89 males. Cytogenetic have been associated with spermatogenic failure. The frequency investigation was performed according standard methods (GTG- of AZF deletions is estimated to be about 7.3% in infertile men, banding). No chromosomal anomalies were found in men. Molecular although, in the literature the frequency varies between 1% and analysis was carried out using leucocyte DNA by multiplex PCR. 55.5%. Therefore, considerable debate remains concerning the Primer set contains 9 Y-specific pairs: SRY; ZFY; sY84, sY86, sY615 frequency, the position, and the phenotypes associated with Y (AZFa); sY127, sY134 (AZFb); sY254, sY255 (AZFc). Eight markers chromosome microdeletions. In order to elucidate the above debate, were selected on “Laboratory guidelines for molecular diagnosis we designed a national based population screening with well-defined of Y-chromosomal microdeletions” (Simoni et al., 2000), and one study and experimental criteria. Eighty Greek-Cypriot patients that additional marker sY615 was used for AZFa subregion. Sequences of met the selection criteria were included in this study as well as 50 all primers are original. Microdeletions have been found in 13 cases. normal controls with proven fertility. All samples were collected from Eleven patients had microdeletions in AZFc (9 with azoospermia and all districts of the island of Cyprus as the population is of the same two - severe oligozoospermia), 2 patients had microdeletions AZFb+c religious, geographic and ethnic origin. All patients and controls had and azoospremia. The frequency of microdeletions in this study is detailed clinical information and at least two semen analysis reports 14.6% that is consistent with published data. based on WHO standards. Samples with abnormal karyotypes, obstructive azoospermia or oligospermia with >2 X 106/ml were P1085. FOXL2 mutations in syndromic and non- excluded from this study. The experimental design required a syndromic female infertility referral team and laboratory to undertake the responsibility, collect G. Pilia1, L. Crisponi1, M. Uda1, F. Chiappe2, M. Deiana1, G. Usala1, all samples, all clinical and laboratory information, isolate DNA and P. Amati3, D. Bonneau3, F. Faravelli4, J. Tolmie5, L. Bisceglia6, M. R. carry out all tests, data analysis and interpretation. This study showed Piemontese6, L. Zelante6, A. Iolascon7, P. Gasparini6, G. Crisponi2, that Y chromosome microdeletions are specific for spermatogenic L. Boccone8, A. Percesepe9, A. Forabosco9, G. Monni8, S. Loche8, A. failure. Under the specific patient selection criteria and experimental Cao1; design the overall frequency is 6.3% or 12.5% among patients with 1CNR, IRTAM, Cagliari, Italy, 2University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, azoospermia and 2.1% in oligospermia (<2 X 106/ml). The variation 3Service de Genetique Medicale, Poitiers, France, 4Ospedale in deletion frequency reported in other studies is probably attributed Galliera, Genova, Italy, 5Yorkhill NHS Trust, Glasgow, United to the patient selection criteria and experimental design. Kingdom, 6IRCCS, Ospedale CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 7University of Bari, Bari, Italy, 8Ospedale Microcitemico, Cagliari, Italy, P1083. Polymorphism of the MUC 1 mucin 60-bp 9University of Modena, Modena, Italy. microsatelite is not associated to women infertility nor to Type I Blepharophimosis/Ptosis/Epicanthus inversus Syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal dominant disorder in which eyelid embryo implantation failure abnormalities are associated with Ovarian Failure leading to Female L. R. Goulart1, G. S. Vieira2, J. Inacio2, I. M. B. Goulart1, L. R. Infertility. Apparently, type II shows only the eyelid defects . We Martelli3, J. G. Franco Jr4; recently cloned a novel gene, FOXL2, belonging to the family of 1Universidade Federal de Uberlandia, Uberlandia-MG, Brazil, the winged helix/forkhead transcription factor, that we found to be 2BioGenetics, Uberlandia-MG, Brazil, 3Universidade de Sao Paulo mutated in both types of BPES. - FMRP-USP, Ribeirão Preto-SP, Brazil, 4Centro de Reprodução We carried out a FOXL2 mutation screening on 45 BPES families. Humana - CRH, Ribeirão Preto-SP, Brazil. On all 13 type I BPES families analyzed we identified nonsense Recent studies have demonstrated that the transmembrane mucin and frameshift mutations. In 7 type II BPES patients we observed glycoprotein, Muc-1, is abundantly expressed at the apical surface apparently milder mutations: a 30 bp in-frame duplication (909_ of luminal epithelia under most conditions and is invariably reduced 939dup) present in 3 independent cases, 3 different missense in receptive uteri. These and other observations have led to the mutations and a 3 basepair deletion. We detected FOXL2 mutations suggestion that mucins serve an antiadhesive role and function to in 7 additional BPES patients whose clinical type could not be maintain a nonreceptive uterine state. A polymorphic variation of determined. These results suggest a genotype-phenotype correlation the MUC 1 gene (Horne et al., 2001 - Lancet, vol. 357, no. 9265) ; FOXL2 loss-of-function mutations are probably incompatible with has been associated to women infertility due to suspected failure any kind of female fertility while milder mutations could allow a child- of embryo implantation, based on the significant greater size of the bearing activity but nonetheless affect ovarian function. For example, lower allele observed in the infertile group. Our aim was to confirm 304 Posters - Y chromosome, Infertility 305 the 909_939dup was present in a girl with overt Ovarian Failure and cytogenetic study.In all cytogenetically normal cases (n=70) whose affected mother also had a history of Premature Ovarian microdeletion analysis was carried out using PCR. For this genomic Failure (POF) . A position effect for the FOXL2 gene or mutations in DNA was extracted using peripheral blood. The STS primers tested another gene could be responsible for those cases in which we found on each subject were sY84, sY86 (AZFa); sY127, sY134 (AZFb); no mutations. In addition, we are concluding the screening of FOXL2 sY254, sY255 (AZFc).Eight of the seventy cases (11.4%) showed for 100 POF patients, and to now we only found one missense deletion of at least one of the STS markers. Four cases had AZFc mutation in a patient in the coding region of the gene. deletion, three cases had AZFa and AZFb deletion and one case showed AZFb deletion alone. The 3 cases with AZFa and AZFb P1086. Microdeletion analysis of the AZF region in Male deletions had Sertoli Cell Only Syndrome (SCO). Two of the three Infertility cases with AZFc deletion had hypospermatogenesis and in the third R. Dada, N. Gupta, K. Kucheria; case there was maturation arrest. In two cases with AZF deletion All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. FNAC was not possible as they were cryptorchid. Thus cases with Microdeletion of the long arm of the Y chromosome are associated AZFa and AZFb deletion have poor prognosis and cases with AZFc with spermatogenic failure and have been used to define three deletion can go in for Assisted Reproductive technology as there regions on Yq (AZFa, AZFb and AZFc) which are critical for testis show spermatogenesis though at a reduced rate. Therefore spermatogenesis and are recurrently deleted in infertile males. in all cases of idiopathic infertility a genetic aetiolgy should be 102 infertile males were included in this study. Semen analysis was established to provide the most adapted therapeutics to the infertile done in each case to determine the spermatogenic status. They couple. were subjected to detailed clinical examination, endocrinological EMPAG Plenary Sessions 306 307 EMPAG Abstracts St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Human Genetics, International Centre for Life, Newcaste-upon-Tyne, United EMPAG Plenary Sessions Kingdom. Aim of this study was to explore the mental health and psycho-social E-PS 1. Psychosocial Impact of Genetic Disease problems associated with an undiagnosed skeletal dysplasia and the impact of a precise molecular diagnosis, which is hypothesised to E-PS01. Living with Marfan syndrome; the European have a significant psychological benefit for both the individuals and experience. their families. Definitive diagnosis removes uncertainty, allows risk assessment and the possibility of testing for other family members. S. Vangoidsenhoven; Previous research has explored the psychological and mental health Medische Genetica, Gent, Belgium. aspects of having a skeletal dysplasia and has highlighted a range Living with Marfan syndrome; the European experience. S. Vangoidsenhoven1, S. De Bie1, R. Hennekam2, B. Loeys1, A. De of difficulties particularly in adolescents. (Apajasalo et al., 1998; Paepe1 Hunter, 1998 and Vallmitjana, 1999). However, these studies relied 1 Ghent University Hospital; Gent, Belgium; 2University of Amsterdam; upon quantitative measures. A qualitative methodological approach is effective in giving a fuller picture of the subjective experiences. Amsterdam, The Netherlands A pilot sample consisting of both adolescents, older adults and anne.depaepe@rug.ac.be parents (n=19) were interviewed using the constant comparative A specialised questionnaire, containing 88 multiple choice questions method with theoretical sampling derived from Grounded Theory on medical and psychosocial aspects, was sent to patients with (Glaser and Strauss, 1967; Strauss and Corbin, 1998) in order Marfan Syndrome (MFS) from 7 European countries. We present to identify key areas of concern. Analysis was performed using data from 857 individuals on the quality of life and the psychosocial Atlas.ti software based on grounded theory principles, effective well being as experienced by persons with MFS. A scoring system for qualitative analysis. Three major categories of themes were was established to assess the objective severity of the condition in elicited. Firstly, the effect of the disorder on the psychological and each individual. The subjective severity that stands for the patients‘ social well-being of the individual when living with a conditon of this own perception of their condition was questioned. We compared the nature. The other two major themes concerned aspects of medical results with an objective coping score based on questions relating care and issues surrounding genetic diagnosis and testing. The data to the psychosocial adjustment. The data show that MFS represents suggests that both psycho-social and practical benefits and problems a significant burden on many aspects of daily life but that most are associated with molecular diagnosis for the patients and their individuals are coping effectively with the disorder. The level of coping families, important for the future direction of healthcare service and the quality of life is determined by the subjective rather than by provision. the objective severity. The subjective attitude towards the condition influences the attitude towards professional activities, relationships and reproductive options. Many individuals have difficulties E-PS04. Living with Achondroplasia in an Average-Sized discussing problems associated with the MFS. It remains important World to stimulate the support of family, friends and patient support groups S. Gollust1, R. Thompson2, B. B. Biesecker1; since social isolation negatively correlates with depression and 1NHGRI/NIH, Bethesda, MD, 2Johns Hopkins University School of anxiety. Professional support must pay attention to the threat of social Public Health, Baltimore, MD. isolation. We conclude that creating a positive frame of reference is Mutations in the gene encoding fibroblast growth factor receptor an important element for their psychosocial well being. 3 cause achondroplasia, the most common form of inherited dwarfism. Although there are 10,000 individuals with achondroplasia E-PS02. Living with FAP in the family in the United States, there has been little study of the quality of M. Schmedders; life of individuals living with the condition. For this study, surveys University of Hamburg FSP BIOGUM, Hamburg, Germany. were collected from 189 individuals affected with achondroplasia Objective: Predictive genetic testing for familial adenomatous (ACH) and 136 relatives of average stature (FDR). FDR and ACH polyposis (FAP) is applied for nearly ten years, but little is known individuals differed significantly in their perception of achondroplasia about its psychosocial effects. The aim of the study presented here as well as in their evaluation of advantages and disadvantages that is to investigate long-term psychological and social consequences accompany the condition. Overall scores for quality of life (QOL) of living with the knowledge of FAP running in the family. The main as well as scores in each of the four subdomains were significantly interest is to analyse the influence of genetic knowledge concerning lower in affected individuals than in the relatives. Lower self- reproductive decisions. esteem scores, affected status, and lower income were the most Method: 16 affected people from all over Germany were asked to tell significant predictors of a reduced quality of life index. A qualitative their life-histories in order to investigate how people suffering from analysis of open responses to questions about the advantages and FAP live with their genetic knowledge. The qualitative evaluation of disadvantages of achondroplasia revealed that individuals were as transcripts of the interviews followed the methodology of narrative likely to cite disadvantages relating to their health and functioning biographical analysis developed by G. Rosenthal (1995). as they were to cite social disadvantages. Affected individuals’ Findings: All people investigated have learned to manage their reduction in quality of life, lower than that which would be expected own disease during their disease trajectories and to get over the by relevant sociodemographic variables, can be interpreted to be a uncertainties concerning their own health. However, the possibility result of negative factors relating to social constraints on living in an to pass on or to have passed on the mutated APC-gen to the average-sized world. Genetics professionals should consider a broad children remains a steady cause of uncertainty which is a major conception of quality of life as reported by individuals themselves to problem living with FAP. Four different types of strategies to cope better understand and inform others about disabilities. with this uncertainty were found which have different consequences concerning reproductive decisions or explaining facts of FAP to the E-PS 2. Predictive Testing for Late Onset Disease children. Due to the biographical approach of the analysis it is shown that the coping strategies mainly depend on individual experiences E-PS05. Impact on perceived control and risk- rather than on rational considerations concerning the genetic disease. reducing behaviour of genetic testing for Familial Conclusion: The individual case history has more influence on Hypercholesterolaemia (FH): a randomised controlled reproductive decisions and health care behaviour than rational trial genetic considerations. This must be considered in counselling T. M. Marteau1,2, V. Senior1,2, S. Humphries3,2; models. 1King’s College, London, United Kingdom, 2on behalf of GRAFT Study Group, King’s College, London, United Kingdom, 3University College, E-PS03. The Psychosocial Aspects of Skeletal Dysplasia London, United Kingdom. and the Impact of Molecular Genetic diagnosis-An Background There are concerns that predictive genetic testing may Exploratory Study reduce perceived control over a disease, thereby reducing motivation S. Alam1, R. Macleod1, D. Donnai1, D. Craufurd1, M. Wright2; to engage in risk-reducing behaviours. 1Academic Unit of Medical Genetics, and Regional Genetic Service, Purpose To test the hypothesis that a diagnosis of familial 306 EMPAG Plenary Sessions 307 hypercholesterolaemia (FH) incorporating genetic testing reduces of frame is taken from Goffman (1974:21) to denote `schemata of perceptions of control over FH and adherence to risk-reducing interpretation’ that enable participants`to locate, perceive, identify, behaviour. and label’ occurrences and events within their everyday life spaces. Method The data includes over 40 detailed transcripts of audio-recorded 340 families (340 FH probands and 129 adult relatives) were pre-test sessions for HD involving 15 families in Wales. Our analysis randomised to: Routine clinical diagnosis; or Routine clinical suggests that the pre-test counselling sessions are predominantly diagnosis plus genetic testing (mutation searching in patients oriented towards a display of clients’ (i) accounts of the trajectories and direct gene testing in relatives). Outcomes were assessed at that underpin their current decisions about having or not having a baseline, one week and six months after diagnostic testing. predictive test, and (ii) reflections on how they are prepared to cope Results with the future implications a positive or negative test result may 81% of probands and 73% of relatives completed the trial. Mutations have upon themselves and their families. The analytic focus will be were found in 29% of the 196 probands undergoing mutation the incidences of misalignments in counsellors’ attempts to facilitate searches and in 46% of the 37 relatives undergoing direct gene clients’ accounts of decision-making and coping - both retrospectively testing. The diagnosis of FH where a mutation was found had no and prospectively - and in clients’ differential orientations to the impact on perceived control or adherence to risk-reducing behaviour temporal dimensions of their experience of living with the genetic at either time point, compared with a non-genetic diagnosis of FH. condition. By contrast, for those in whom a mutation search was unsuccessful, perceived control over FH and heart disease was lower one week E-PS08. Test motivation, predictive test result for after testing, but not at six months. Huntington’s disease and the evolution of psychological Conclusion distress over a five year period. The hypothesis was not supported. Future studies are needed to M. Decruyenaere1, G. Evers-Kiebooms1, T. Cloostermans1, A. determine whether similar results are obtained in general populations Boogaerts1, J. Fryns2; undergoing genetic testing to learn of increased risks for early heart 1Psychosocial Genetics Unit, Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, disease and other conditions. Belgium, 2Clinical Genetics Unit, Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. E-PS06. Parents’ responses to genetic testing in their The aims of the present paper are: (1) a description of general children for long QT syndrome and specific distress in tested persons five years post-test, (2) an K. S. W. H. Hendriks1, F. J. M. Grosfeld1, J. van den Bout2, A. A. M. assessment of the evolution of depression level, anxiety and ego- Wilde3, I. M. van Langen4, J. P. van Tintelen5, H. F. J. ten Kroode1; strength over time, in function of test result and (3) the role of test 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2University motivation in explaining interindividual differences in psychological Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Experimental and Molecular distress over time. Cardiology Group, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Academic Medical Methods: The 5-year assessment is an extensive psychological Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Academic Hospital Groningen, evaluation of tested persons (24 carriers, 33 non-carriers), using Groningen, Netherlands. psychometric tests and qualitative measures. Some of these tests Purpose: To assess the psychological reactions displayed by parents had also been administered at baseline and 1 year post-test. who applied for genetic testing of their children before and after Results: Carriers did not differ from non-carriers with regard to disclosure of genetic results for inherited Long QT Syndrome. general distress. With regard to specific distress, carriers had Methods: Subjects are parents(n = 41) who applied for genetic significantly more avoidance behaviour and had less positive feelings testing of their children less than 16 years old. Before and two weeks about their test result than non-carriers five years post-test. The study after DNA test disclosure these parents completed questionnaires further showed that mean depression level, general and HD-specific that assess levels of anxiety related to the test disclosure (IES), anxiety had significantly decreased at the 5 year assessment, depression (BDI) and general anxiety (STAI). compared with the baseline level. The evolution did not significantly Results: All parents showed high levels of distress at predisclosure differ for carriers and non-carriers. We found clear evidence measurement. After disclosure, parents of carrier-children (n = 24) for the role of the participant’s test motivation in psychological had significantly higher scores on the IES (t = 5.03, P = .000), the BDI distress. Persons who asked the test to get rid of the uncertainty, (t = 2.65, P = .013) and on the STAI-s (t = 2.34, P = .031) compared without specifying implications for substantial life areas, had more with parents without a carrier-child (n = 12). After disclosure, the psychological distress before and after the test, compared to those percentage of parents of child-carriers with high or very high scores who wanted the test to take action in an important life domain. in comparison with the normal population on the distress measures is Moreover, the pattern of distress differed over time, depending on the considerable: 41 % had IES scores indicating a traumatic impact, 29 test motivation. % of the carriers had BDI scores indicating depression and 53 % had Implications of the findings for pre-and post-test counselling will be STAI scores indicating a high level of general anxiety. discussed. Conclusion: High levels of psychological distress in our group may reflect great suffering for having a child with a life-threatening E-PS09. Damned if you do, damned if you don’t: the role inherited arrhythmia. Whether the high levels of distress in these of religious faith in predictive and diagnostic testing for parents can be valued as a sign of maladjustment is dependent on Huntington’s disease the outcome of a follow-up study. S. A. Simpson, L. Emslie, Z. Miedzybrodzka; Grampian University Hospitals Trust, Aberdeen, United Kingdom. E-PS07. Interactional framing of decision-making and Presymptomatic predictive testing for Huntington’s disease (HD) coping trajectories in counselling for predictive testing has been provided for those at risk of this neurodegenerative for Huntington’s Disease disease for more than 15 years at centres throughout the world. S. Sarangi1, K. Bennert1, L. Howell1, A. Clarke2, P. Harper2, J. Gray2; Professionals from the international community, with family members, 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Medical created a code of practice which is adhered to in most centres Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom. world wide. Despite cultural differences, this protocol has been Genetic professionals and clients in Huntington’s clinics may remarkably successful in ensuring support for those who seek to assign different meanings to the extended format of the counselling know whether or not they have the mutation for HD. Guidance for the protocols for predictive testing. While counsellors typically see their test suggests pre-test discussion ought to take place about issues role as following a specific agenda for the evaluation of clients’ involving family relationships, potential insurance problems, and understanding of predictive testing, including possible results and employment difficulties, but religious faith is generally not included their implications for families, clients may regard their experience of as a discussion topic. The role of spirituality in health and well being protocols as of a gatekeeping nature that need to be complied with to has been extensively explored in the medical literature, and in the gain access to testing. field of prediction for cancer risk. Religious faith has been noted to We use discourse analytic methods to examine the interactionally be important in providing support after a predictive test result for HD, complex framing of clients’ decision-making and coping trajectories, but there is no discussion about the role of religion in the decision as prompted by counsellors’ agenda-driven probing. The notion making process. This paper will discuss the literature and give four EMPAG Concurrent Sessions 308 309 case histories where issues surrounding religious faith have caused problems have influenced their psychosocial functioning in serious significant difficulties for the individuals who underwent predictive or ways. In most clinical genetic centres in the Netherlands there are diagnostic testing whether or not favourable or unfavourable results social workers involved in the genetic testing programs who provide were produced. psycho-education and support. Although the role of social workers in the psychosocial counselling for individuals and their families E-PS 3. Different approaches to genetic counselling and is widely accepted, there are only a few practice-based research psychosocial service provision reports. In the Netherlands, the number of social workers in the clinical E-PS10. Provision of Genetic Services in Europe: Do we genetic centres has doubled in the last fifteen years. They offer meet the Community Needs? individual support to counselees and their partners, they participate S. Ayme; in formulating counselling protocols, and they develop models for INSERM SC11, Paris, France. professional help and psycho-education. Genetics and biotechnology provide us with new diagnostic tests Recently it has become evident that a job description was needed (around 600 genetic diseases can be accurately diagnosed) and to define the core competencies of the position for other (health) much needed therapeutic tools (around 100 diseases are now professionals, both in the field of clinical genetics and externally. The treated with a specific drug) , but health technology, practices and areas of results are well defined in the job description so it is now procedures cannot be left to the vagaries of economic forces and clear in which areas specific to genetics a social worker can offer personal interests. There appears to be tendency to adopt the help. new applications of molecular genetics without always providing From a joint inventory of the activities carried out in recent years, we appropriate information and counselling. There are profound present an overview of the type of help most frequently requested economic and technological inequalities between countries and offered. Moreover, this inventory reveals which results from the and population groups within Europe. Efforts must be made to psychological research in genetics have proved to be most useful propose and harmonize safeguards so that such inequalities are in social work practice. It also reveals what issues we would like the not aggravated, that the safety and rights of all individuals and research to focus on in the next ten years. communities are adequately protected. The rapidity and complexity of the progress made in the field E-PS13. A randomized trial of three approaches to of human genetics generates the need to evaluate, apply and genetic counselling for late maternal age. disseminate new techniques by skilled health professionals and an J. E. Allanson, M. Cappelli, T. Chiu, L. Humphreys, A. Hunter, D. informed public. Medical genetic services are rapidly extending but Moher, A. Zimak; there is concern about rising demand, inadequate infrastructures and Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada. the ethical and social implications of the changes.Genetic screening Few outcome studies of genetic counselling for late maternal age at the population level is expending rapidly, before an appropriate have been reported, yet a significant proportion of pregnant women evaluation. Not only should genetic screening do more good than 35 and over are offered prenatal diagnosis; most will have genetic harm at a population level, it would do well to make individual sense counselling prior to testing; these women must make complex to the person being screened. The availability of genetic tests at low decisions; and considerable resources are committed to this service. cost may lead to the systematic offer of screening tests without the In our region, population 1.4 million, virtually all women are seen appropriate medical environment for providing information prior to by a genetic counsellor before their first prenatal test. In 2000, testing as well as comprehensively explaining the results afterwards. 1149 women were counselled. Before 1999, counselling occurred in a one-on-one session. In the late ‘90s we developed a decision E-PS11. The universality of the human issues raised by aid to facilitate communication of facts about prenatal diagnostic genetics tests, focus patient views, and aid choice of testing. In a trial of that T. Clancy1, B. Pooe-Monyemore2, N. Madolo2; decision aid, knowledge significantly increased, decisional conflict 1Regional Genetic Service and Academic Group of Medical Genetics, significantly decreased, anxiety about testing did not change, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Human Genetics, Department of and acceptability was reasonably high. In 2000, we initiated a Health, Pretoria, SOUTH AFRICA. randomized controlled trial to compare one-on-one counselling, The priority that governments can give to genetic services varies group counselling of 4 women/couples, and use of the decision aid. between countries, particularly between those in the developing All three approaches had the same content. We hypothesized that and the developed world. This is determined by factors including counselling in any form would improve knowledge, reduce decisional overall resources available and competing priorities. In August 2001, uncertainty and reduce levels of distress associated with prenatal the Department of Health of the Republic of South Africa (RSA) testing. Secondly, we hypothesized that there would be no statistical announced the launch of the ‘Human Genetics Policy Guidelines for or clinically significant difference between the three groups. Our the Management and Prevention of Genetic Disorders, Birth Defects results demonstrate that each approach has it’s advantages: although and Disabilities’. Alongside this, genetics training courses for nurses people prefer one-on-one counselling, they learn best in a group or and midwives from the nine provinces took place with the support decision aid setting, and the least decisional conflict is found with the of the World Health Organisation. Three of the one-week courses, decision aid. Importantly, we find no clinically significant difference involving colleagues from eight of the provinces, were organised between the three approaches. jointly by the Department of Health (RSA) and the Department of Clinical Genetics, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester (UK). The format EMPAG Concurrent Sessions and content of the training will be outlined. Both the resources available to and the cultural issues facing colleagues in RSA and the E-C 1. Screening Issues UK are different. However, examples will be presented to illustrate that the psychosocial impact of inherited disorders and birth defects E-C01. Attitudes of Dutch general practitioners, are similar in the two countries. This suggests that while different pediatricians and gynecologists towards cystic fibrosis priorities need to be set for genetic services in the developing and carrier screening the developed world, the human issues raised for families and M. J. H. Baars, L. Henneman, M. C. Cornel, L. P. Ten Kate; professionals are universal. VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Objective To investigate attitudes of general practitioners (GPs), E-PS12. Twenty years of social work in clinical genetics pediatricians (PEDs) and gynecologists (GYs) towards cystic fibrosis in the Netherlands: Where do we stand and what do we (CF) carrier screening and to determine factors influencing these need in the future attitudes. H. G. Van Spijker1, T. Brouwer2; Methods A questionnaire developed by Hofman et al (Acad Med 1University Medical Centre, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2University Medical 1993; 68: 625-32) containing questions about knowledge and Centre VU, Amsterdam, Netherlands. attitudes towards genetics (tests) was adapted to the Dutch health From its beginning as a profession, social work has demonstrated a care system. Questionnaires were sent to randomly selected GPs strong commitment to serving individuals and families whose health (n=200), GYs (n=300) and PEDs (n=265). Multiple logistic regression 308 EMPAG Concurrent Sessions 309 identified predictors of positive attitudes towards CF carrier women were given information about this screening-method by screening. their gynaecologist. A quarter of the partners had been informed by Results The response rate of GPs, GYs and PEDs was 64%, 69% their wives or by the gynaecologist. Half of them had received this and 72%, respectively. Of the respondents 63% of GPs, 69% of GYs information only at genetic counselling. After a pathological triple test, and 71% of PEDs agreed that couples should be tested if they ask 86% of the pregnant women and 90% of their partners felt depressed; for it. Of the respondents 32% of GPs, 40% of GYs and 32% of PEDs 2% felt activated. After genetic counselling, there was a significant favored routine screening when a hypothetical error free inexpensive increase to the activated mood (women: 52% were depressed, 34% test would be available. However, after explaining limitations in the felt activated; partners 58% and 40%). The coping strategies showed test sensitivity (95% detection rate for individuals) these percentages the most significant variation in active coping: after risk information, decreased to 16%, 19% and 25%, respectively. Predictors for women 17%, partners 10%, and after prenatal diagnosis, 55% offering routinely CF carrier screening in the latter situation were [OR and 45%. 25% of the pregnant women refused invasive prenatal (95%CI)]: considering the test sensitivity less important (GPs: [4.2 diagnosis after genetic counselling. Conclusion: Genetic counselling (1.4-12.3)]; GYs [6.2(1.9-20.7)]), high perceived risk of having a child plays an important role in the development of positive coping with CF (GYs: [4.0 (1.2-13.9)]), providing genetic counseling (PEDs: strategies. It should provide information and therapeutic support for [4.2 (1.2-15.0)]) and reassurance when both partners test negative pregnant women and for their partners. (PEDs: [4.3 (1.6-11.8)]). Conclusion Although approximately two-thirds of physicians support E-C04. Serum screening uptake and attitudes towards performing CF carrier screening when couples ask for it, more Down’s syndrome reservations are present among these physicians for routinely L. D. Bryant, J. M. Green, J. Hewison; offering CF carrier screening. University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. Prenatal screening for Down‘s syndrome is now offered in some form E-C02. Feasibility and acceptability of two screening to most pregnant women in the UK. However, very little is known strategies for haemochromatosis, report of phase one of about the attitudes that women hold towards Down‘s syndrome and a randomised controlled trial. how such attitudes may influence screening choices. This paper C. Patch1, P. Roderick1, W. Rosenberg2; presents findings from a study based in an antenatal clinic in the 1Health Care Research Unit, University of Southampton, north of England where serum screening was offered to all women Southampton, United Kingdom, 2Division of Inflammation, Infection attending for antenatal care. Over a six-month period, women in the and Repair, University of Southampton, Southampton, United first trimester of pregnancy were asked to complete a questionnaire Kingdom. that incorporated measures of cognitive, emotional and experiential Haemochromatosis, a treatable, adult-onset condition of progressive aspects of attitudes towards Down‘s syndrome. An objective measure iron overload is amenable to screening. Initial enthusiasm for of the participants‘ serum screening uptake was then collected at a screening to increase early diagnosis has been modified since the later date from patient records. The findings suggest that regardless identification of the HFE gene. The risk of disease attributable to of attitude towards Down‘s syndrome most women accept screening the at-risk genotypes, and disease progression in those diagnosed tests. All of the women with the most unfavourable attitudes towards is not established. Screening trials will identify individuals in whom Down‘s syndrome accepted screening as did 67% of those with these questions can be evaluated. Evaluation of these programmes the most favourable attitudes - despite the latter group holding should include evaluation of sensitivity and specificity and all the unfavourable views towards termination for the condition. The components of the programme e.g. uptake, population characteristics findings have implications for the issues of informed choice and the and effectiveness of treatment. perceived ‘routineness‘ of prenatal screening tests. Design: Randomised controlled trial of two screening strategies. a) Biochemical screening for iron overload followed by genetic E-C 2. Cultural and Ethical Issues analysis and clinical assessment b) Genetic screening for the at risk genotype followed by biochemical E-C05. Thalassaemia carrier testing in pregnant Pakistani testing for iron overload and clinical assessment. women: perceptions of ‘information’ and ‘consent’. Sample: General practice population aged 30-70 stratified by age S. Ahmed, J. Green, J. Hewison; and sex University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. Findings: 1438 individuals were invited; initial acceptance was Introduction: The literature on genetic testing suggests that one of the approximately 30%. Uptake was higher in females than males, main objectives of screening programmes is to allow individuals to specifically in older females. Middle-aged men who would be make informed decisions. However, there is no published research on expected to have a higher risk of expressing the at-risk genotypes whether women value informed consent for antenatal thalassaemia were less likely to accept the offer of screening. carrier testing. The allele frequencies for the haemochromatosis associated alleles Aims: To ascertain pregnant Pakistani women’s perceived value of were greater than would be expected from previous population ‘informed consent’ for antenatal thalassaemia carrier testing and their studies. perceived pre-test information needs. Discussion: In this pilot of population based screening in primary Methods: In study 1, 110 Pakistani women tested and not found care, the low uptake of screening and the characteristics of the to be thalassaemia carriers completed a questionnaire, 14 of population that accepted screening have implications for the design whom were also interviewed. In study 2, 36 women identified as of treatment or screening trials for haemochromatosis that merit carriers/possible carriers completed a questionnaire and were further investigation. interviewed. The questionnaires assessed women’s knowledge and understanding of antenatal tests; their attitudes toward antenatal care E-C03. Coping strategies of pregnant women after “triple- and tests for fetal abnormality; their knowledge and understandings diagnostic” and those of their partners of thalassaemia; and their pre-test information preferences. The S. Jahn, F. R. Kreuz; interviews explored these domains in more depth and investigated Technical University, Dresden, Germany. women’s beliefs about ‘informed consent’. Objective: To compare coping strategies of pregnant women after Findings: Women had received little or no pre-test information and the triple-diagnostic and of their partners. To point out the importance said that they would have preferred to be informed that they were of the genetic counselling. Background: The triple-diagnostic has being tested for thalassaemia carrier status, but they did not expect, become a standard prenatal screening-method and involves a or express a desire, to be asked for their ‘informed consent’ for combination of three serum parameters with personal data to define antenatal thalassaemia carrier testing. the individual’s probability for a fetal trisomy 21. This screening often Discussion: While women wanted pre-test information in order to takes place without giving sufficient information. A “bad result’ is be ‘informed’ of antenatal thalassaemia carrier testing, they were mostly equated with a handicapped child. Methods: Our investigation less concerned about being asked for their ‘consent’. This finding was carried out by questionnaires. The answers of 92 women after is discussed in the context of the way in which service delivery is “triple-diagnostic’, genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis and organised. of 52 of their partners were evaluated. Results: Only 2/3 of the EMPAG Concurrent Sessions 310 311 E-C06. Breast cancer: South Asian patient’s experience, uses of the body (or elements issued from the body): these uses are attitudes, beliefs and perception of risk. apprehended here through the meaning given by the DNA donors G. A. Karbani, Chu,C., J. Hewison, K. Atkin to their involvement in research. The first results show different Centre for Research in Primary Care, Leeds, United Kingdom. typologies of the body usage: the body submitted to medical activity, Background: Incidence of breast cancer among South Asian women the body medically auto-supervised and “property” of the individual or living in the UK is increasing. We know little about how these women also the body subjected to collective interests. I will try to show that make sense of the condition or how health care services can best these modalities of use involve different ways of understanding and of support this patient group. using the principle of informed consent. Aim: The study aims to examine health care pathways, attitudes, beliefs and genetic perception of risk factors in South Asian women E-C09. Am I My Brother’s Keeper?: Outlining Rights and with breast cancer compared with ‘white‘ women. Responsibilities in the Context of the Human Genome Method: The study comprised of two groups of women attending Diversity Project breast clinic because of a diagnosis of breast cancer. The study J. K. Brewer1,2; comprised 25 South Asian and 15 ‘white’ women’ diagnosed with 1Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 2De Paul College of Law, breast cancer, matched for diagnosis, age, and socio-economic class. Chicago, IL. This enabled us to explore the role of ethnicity in mediating women‘s There are many obstacles to continued scientific research, the responses to the illness. For further context, our work also included Human Genome Diversity Project (HGDP) specifically. The main the experience of the women’s main family carer (n=29) and a health obstacles appear to be differing philosophies toward human rights professional involved in their care (n=15). and responsibilities. On the one hand, Western researchers impute We collected information using semi-structured qualitative interviews, ownership rights upon human body parts. This view is repugnant which were then subject to detailed content analysis. to the culture and beliefs of many indigenous people. However, Findings: The main themes emerging from the analysis include indigenous peoples and some Western legal scholars maintain that access to service delivery, knowledge of breast cancer, health a duty exists for individuals to further the survival of others through beliefs, coping strategies, cultural beliefs regarding genetic and other scientific research. Still, this duty conflicts with a duty that may exist causes of breast cancer, communication about the condition within to future generations not to tinker with the common heritage. The the family, and the role of health professionals in offering support. issue of human genetic diversity presents an interesting paradox: The presentation will conclude by exploring how culturally sensitive genes are responsible for one’s uniqueness, and simultaneously, provision would improve the care of women with breast cancer. genes are an omnipotent component of every human being. Achieving a balance between preserving the integrity of our genetic E-C07. Genetic Testing for Hearing Impairment- Different heritage and granting ownership rights in furtherance of scientific Motivations for the Same Outcome knowledge is a perplexing challenge. Yet, at least one group of M. Sagi1, O. Dagan2, H. Hochner1, H. Levi3, A. Raas-Rothschild1, T. indigenous peoples has achieved such a balance, and they justified Cohen1; their agreement by articulating a duty to others to help understand 1Department of Human Genetics Hadassah Hebrew University and cure a particular disease. Perhaps if we all recognize that we Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Department of Human Genetics and are our brother’s keeper, we can work together to further the aims Molecular Medicine, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, of science while at the same time maintaining respect for proud Tel-Aviv, Israel, 3Speech and Hearing Center, Hadassah Hebrew cultures. University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel. The recent discoveries of genes involved in hearing impairment E-C 3. Psychological Support, Family Issues and Impact of opens new options for families and individuals with hearing Genetic Disease impairment, but also raises new ethical dilemmas. Our study aimed at evaluating the intensions, as well as the reasons, of Israeli Jewish E-C10. A Pilot Project on Rehabilitation in Huntington’s parents of hearing impaired children to opt for or against genetic Disease: Three Years Experience in Italy. testing and prenatal diagnosis for deafness. Questionnaires were P. Zinzi1, G. Jacopini1, R. De Grandis2, G. Graziani2, S. Maceroni2, P. filled by 139 parents, showing a very high interest (87%) in genetic Zappata2, A. Bentivoglio3, M. Frontali4; testing, and lower interest (49%) in prenatal diagnosis. Althogh 1Institute of Psychology C.N.R., Rome, Italy, 2Home Care “Nova part of the Jewish population in Israel do not comply with genetic Salus”, Trasacco, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology UCSC, Rome, Italy, services, due to religious restrictions, the high interest in testing was 4Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine C.N.R., Rome, found across all religious sectors (secular, traditional, orthodox and Italy. ultra-orthodox); however, some of the reasons for undertaking such Huntington Disease (HD) is a genetic, chronic, neurodegenerative a test were very different between the sectors. We conclude that disorder for which there is no known cure. In the past, rehabilitation in genetic testing would be welcomed by parents from a wide range of HD was justified on humanistic compassionate ground but now it has communities, including those which usually do not apply for genetic a more scientific fundament and theoretical support in recent studies counseling and testing, if it is offered in accordance with their cultural using animal models that show beneficial effects of environmental norms and beliefs. stimulation on disease progression and suggest a possible positive impact of environmental factors on individuals affected by HD. E-C08. Uses of the body and informed consent for A pilot research project on the evaluation of rehabilitation effects in participants in predictive medicine research HD has been started in Italy in 1999. Fifty patients with a clinically P. Ducournau; and genetically confirmed diagnosis of HD have been enrolled in a INSERM U558, Toulouse, France. rehabilitation protocol including neuromotor and cognitive therapy. On the occasion of the creation of a DNA bank for research in Patients’ conditions were assessed at patients’ admission and predictive medicine in the south of France, this sociological study discharge. Further additional data were collected from patient’s deals with an ethical and juridical norm and its application: the and families’ interviews. First results are encouraging because principle of free and informed consent of DNA donors-participants. we can remark notable improvements both on motor control and This consent is often said to favour the expression of the patients’ psychological conditions and we have also found positive effects on “autonomy” towards “medical power”: it would make sure that family relationships and on caregivers well being state. individual freedom in the uses of the body is put in confrontation Analyses of data are currently performed. with the biomedical enterprise. Previous studies have addressed The research was made possible by a grant from C.N.R to M.F. the question of the quality of the consent given by participants. This study rather addresses the way in which they “frame” the consent E-C11. Communication with relatives about predictive (they give a meaning and their position in relation to this meaning). genetic testing for cancer predisposition Not only their position regarding the procedure but also that towards C. Foster1, M. Watson2, C. Moynihan1, A. Ardern-Jones2, R. Eeles2; the concept of consent itself are investigated. The access to this 1The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 2Royal framing is achieved through thorough interviews (planed number = Marsden NHS Trust, London/Sutton, United Kingdom. 50). This speech on consent is then mirrored with the participants’ Individuals who have a genetic test for breast/ovarian cancer 310 EMPAG Concurrent Sessions 311 predisposition are required to pass on information to their relatives. at: providing a description of this virtual community; analysing the The purpose of this study is to explore communication in the family priorities given by the contributors to the different issues; exploring about cancer and predictive genetic testing for breast and ovarian the way they communicate their ideas and emotions about the disease. cancer predisposition amongst women at increased risk of developing breast and/or ovarian cancer due to their family history. 15 women E-C14. Adult Survivors of child sex abuse in the genetic attending the RMH Genetics Clinic were recruited into the study. counselling consultation They were interviewed at least one week prior to receiving their C. A. Falconer; BRCA1/2 test result and again 6 months following the test result. St James University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom. A grounded theory approach was adopted to analyse the interview Given the prevalence of sexual abuse in our society, with a large transcripts. The findings indicated that cancer or deaths had affected proportion of the abuse taking place within families, it is clear that any family relationships, with some relationships being strengthened and health professional will be dealing with clients who are survivors of others becoming distant. Many women had talked to other family childhood sex abuse. members about testing. Women anticipated being selective in which This paper explores how a pre history of childhood sexual abuse may family members they would tell about their test result. Several women impact the genetic counselling consultation. The genetic counselling experienced difficulty in talking to relatives about their test result. situation is possibly the only one in which taking a family tree is such The findings illustrate that the nature of relationships and differing a large part of the consultation. It can expose people to thinking opinions within the family regarding genetic testing are likely to have about their relationships within the family and bring forward painful an impact upon dissemination of information about predictive testing memories. A faulty gene running through the family can highlight the to relatives. legacy of abuse or the ‘inheritance’ of the problems associated or passed on with it. E-C12. Myotonic Dystrophy and the marital relationship Implications for genetic counsellors discussed in this paper are: A. Rotteveel, A. R. Wintzen, A. Tibben; Disclosure of sexual abuse. Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, Leiden, Netherlands. The specific genetic implications of incest. Background: Myotonic Dystrophy (MD) is a multi-system disease with Non disclosure of genetic information to family members because of symptoms including muscle weakness, especially in facial muscles a history of abuse. and distal extremities, cardiac and gastro-intestinal problems. Occasional cases of ‘munchausens syndrome’ particularly where Cerebral symptoms of MD include (daytime) sleepiness, loss of prophylactic surgery may be considered have been reported.Could energy, mental slowness and lack of initiative. Some studies suggest some of these women have been sexually abused? a change of personality. Based on clinical findings 3 phenotypes have One of the predictors of abnormal grief reaction following termination been identified: mild, classical, and congenital. MD is inherited in an of pregnancy is incest and sexual abuse. As genetic counsellors we autosomal dominant manner. Offspring of an affected individual have are often supporting women in this situation. a 50% chance of inheriting the causal mutation. These symptoms not only affect the patients’ life but also that of their E-C 4. Genetic Counselling for Hereditary Cancers spouses. Couples seem to respond to this variety of symptoms in different ways. Some apparently cope with these problems and go E-C15. Women at increased risk for breast cancer (BC) on living their (more or less adjusted) lives. Others express having attending a regular surveillance program. Preliminary trouble in doing so and keep experiencing this trouble for a prolonged results of the baseline measurement. period of time. S. van Dooren1, C. Seynaeve2, H. J. Duivenvoorden1, M. Kriege2, A. Objectives: J. Rijnsburger3, J. G. M. Klijn2, C. C. M. Bartels2, H. J. de Koning3, A. 1. How does MD influence the lives and relationships of patients? Tibben1; 2. Which factors contribute to people’s ability to overcome the 1Department of Medical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Erasmus problems caused by MD? Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Family Cancer Clinic/ Methods: 100 patients of the outpatient clinic and their partners are Daniel den Hoed Clinic, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, interviewed about their relationship and the way they feel it has been Netherlands, 3Department of Public Health, Erasmus Medical Centre, affected by MD. Information on present symptoms of MD, personality, Rotterdam, Netherlands. coping style, family functioning, anxiety and depression is obtained Background: The MRISC study is a surveillance program for through questionnaires. While subjects watch funny pictures, facial women at risk of BC due to a genetic predisposition or family expressiveness is assessed by experienced judges. history. Surveillance consists of bi-annually physical examination Results: Until January, 57 patients (58% males) and their partners and yearly mammography and MRI-scan. The estimated actual risk (40% males) have enrolled. Mean age 46,5 years (sd = 8,8). of developing BC in terms of a cumulative life time risk (CLTR) is trichotomiseda. Category 1 implies a CLTR of 60-85%, 2: 30-50%, E-C13. Putting HD into words: exploring the virtual and 3: 15-30%. narratives of the Italian HD support group online. Objectives: Identify (a) the relation between CLTR, coping strategies G. Jacopini1, P. Zinzi1, A. Cordi2; and psychological distress; (b) the relation between risk of developing 1Institute of Psychology C.N.R., Rome, Italy, 2A.I.C.H.-ROME, Rome, BC as perceived by the participant (adjusted for CLTR), coping Italy. strategies and psychological distress. Three years ago the Italian Association for Huntington’s Disease Methods: Participants completed a questionnaire 2 months prior to (A.I.C.H.-ROME) has developed a web site. It is a non commercial their surveillance appointment, containing: the Hospital Anxiety and service and is the result of patients’and caregivers’ voluntary work. In Depression Scale, the Impact of Event Scale, the Psychological Italy it is the unique “interactive” website for HD. Consequences Questionnaire and the Utrecht Coping List. The Beyond any expectation, this virtual community interested to/involved participants perceived risk was measured in terms of cognition and affect. with HD for many different reasons has been growing very rapidly: Multiple linear regression and polychotomous ordered logistic from 6 contacts a week, when the site was started, up to 1600 regression analysis were used to identify the relationships between contacts in one month (November 2001). actual and perceived risk on the one hand and psychological factors Many messages have arrived: some messages are brief and simply on the other. ask for information, other messages are rather long and are aimed at Results: 241 women answered their baseline questionnaire (mean sharing the intimate, emotional aspects of the individual’s experience age 40 years). 11% belong to category 1, 53% to category 2 and 36% of the disease or at confronting with others about main life decisions to category 3. such as to be tested or not, having or not children, having or not CLTR is positively related to avoidance and negative psychological prenatal diagnosis, informing or not children about the disease in the consequences (p< 0.05). Perceived risk is positively related to a family and so on. depressive coping style (p < 0.02). These exchanges on line offer a unique opportunity of a glimpse Conclusion: Having a higher CLTR means displaying more avoidance to the heart of a support group for a severe, incurable, hereditary and experiencing more negative psychological consequences. disease. A text analysis and a qualitative examination of the Women perceiving their risk of developing BC as high display a messages are currently performed. Our first inquiries are aimed depressive coping style.EMPAG Concurrent Sessions 312 313 E-C16. The meaning of risk: Women’s perceptions of Genetics, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Oxford Regional Genetics, the genetic risk of breast and ovarian cancer following Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Regional Genetics Service and Academic BRCA1/2 mutation searching Group of Medical Genetics, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United N. Hallowell1, C. Foster1, R. Eeles1, A. Ardern Jones2, V. Murday3, R. Kingdom. Houlston1, M. Watson4; The theory of engagement emerged from grounded theory work 1Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom, 2Royal with HNPCC families having predictive genetic testing (McAllister, Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3St George’s Hospital, 1999; 2001), and differs from existing general psychological theories London, United Kingdom, 4The Royal Marsden Hospital, London, because it is grounded in the experiences of high risk families, and makes specific predictions about adjustment to the results United Kingdom. of predictive genetic testing. According to the theory, it is not test The literature suggests that there is a divergence between the ways result per se, but prior engagement status in combination with test in which individuals with a family history of breast/ovarian cancer result that predicts post-test adjustment. Intense engagement prior perceive their risks of developing cancer and the risk estimates to predictive testing is associated with feelings of relief, and often provided by clinicians. However, there has been little research that satisfaction with the discovery of mutation carrier status in HNPCC explores the meaning of risks for individuals who are deemed at families. These mutation carriers may feel that they are better risk because of their family history, and none that has looked at how off than members of the general population because their carrier women who have previously been affected with cancer make sense status is perceived as a gateway to care. These feelings are not of their (potentially) increased risks following DNA-testing. always shared with their less engaged relatives. A proposed model This retrospective study of affected women who had undergone for pre-test counselling for cancer predisposition is presented that BRCA1/2 mutation searching investigated their perceptions of may enable more appropriate targeting of clinical resources, cost- developing cancer. In-depth interviews were undertaken with 30 effective practice, and the likelihood of decreased patient distress and women. These explored their risk perception and the impact of increased patient satisfaction. It may also prevent future difficulties in genetic testing on their risk perception. adjusting to predictive test results. The data suggest that following their initial diagnosisall women were very aware of their recurrence risk. However, most reported that their anxiety about developing cancer had decreased over time. For some E-C19. Impact of predictive genetic testing for hereditary the probability of developing cancer was perceived as reducing over non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) time, whilst others described their risk of cancer as constant but their J. L. Halliday1, B. Meiser2, R. Warren1, V. R. Collins1, C. Gaff3; ability to accommodate risk within their lives changed. Women’s 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Victoria, Australia, 2Prince understanding of their (potential) inherited risk of cancer involved of Wales Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services, reconciling their previous experiences with their expectations of the Victoria, Australia. future. Thus, some women, did not regard genetic risk as a threat, Background whilst others reported an increase in anxiety on learning their risks This longitudinal multi-centre Australian study examined the response of developing a second primary cancer. The implications of these of people at high risk for colorectal cancer to predictive genetic findings for theoretical accounts of risk perception will be discussed. testing for hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). There were four assessment times of participants: prior to, and 2 E-C17. Women from HBOC families during the BRCA weeks, 4 months and 12 months after notification of test result. genetic testing process : lay and providers interactions Results C. M. Julian-Reynier1, C. Cypowyj1, F. Chabal1, F. Eisinger2, H. 104 people have completed the baseline questionnaire, of whom 56 Sobol3; are female and 45 male. Almost all have received genetic test results 1INSERM U379, Marseilles, France, 2INSERM U379 & E9939 & and also completed the second questionnaire, 88 completed the third Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseilles, France, 3INSERM E9939 & and 76 the fourth. Measures of anxiety, depression, and intrusive and avoidant Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseilles, France. thoughts about being at risk for colon cancer (as measured by the The objective of this study was to describe medical and social Impact of Events Scale [IES]) were included in the questionnaires. interactions about BRCA genetic testing and how helpful they were Results show marked differences between carriers and non-carriers perceived by the patients during the cancer genetic testing process.A two weeks post notification, particularly for the IES measure. The prospective cohort study is ongoing including all women who difference between these two groups for IES scores remained attended at one French cancer genetic centre after a first biological statistically significant at 4 and 12 months post testing, having sample was analysed for mutation identification (BRCA1/2). Closed adjusted for age and baseline levels of IES. However, all measures questionnaires were administered before and after the occurrence decreased between time 2 (two weeks after the result was given) and of the 2nd cancer genetic consultation. This consultation aims to 12 months for both groups. confirm the decision to be tested. No biological results were given Most non-carriers appear reassured and did not have colorectal during this consultation.Preliminary results were analysed (N=82 cancer screening in the first year post genetic testing: 12% of non- ; mean age 46, SD=11; 70% affected by cancer). The medical carriers have had a colonoscopy, compared with 58% of carriers. providers consulted about the decision to be tested were: the Cancer Conclusion Geneticist (82%), the Gynaeco-Obstetrician (44%), the General At this stage, there is no evidence that having a predictive test for Practitioner (42%) and the Clinical Psychologist (7%). When they HNPCC is causing psychological distress and compliance with advice occurred, these encounters were considered helpful by 92%, 75%, related to screening is being observed. 67% and 62% for Cancer Geneticist, Clinical Psychologist, Gynaeco- Obstetrician and General Practitioner respectively. In the family, spouses and sisters were consulted in 40%, and mothers in 26%. E-C20. The influence of consultants’ communication and These encounters were considered helpful in 76%, 60%, and 44% for information-giving behaviours on patient outcomes: A sisters, mothers and spouses respectively. All the sources consulted multi centre study of genetic counselling with women were in their overwhelming majority favourable to genetic testing. An from high risk breast cancer families analysis of medical and psychological factors related to information E. A. Lobb1, P. N. Butow1, B. Meiser2, A. Barratt3, C. Gaff4,5, M. A. exchange and information seeking will be investigated further.These Young6, E. Haan7, G. Southers7, M. Gattas8, K. Tucker9; results highlight the need for education in cancer genetics, not only 1Medical Psychology Research Unit, Department of Psychological for primary care providers but also for the social network of those Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2Dept. of concerned by genetic testing. Psychological Medicine, Royal North Shore Hospital, St. Leonards, Australia, 3Dept. of Public Health and Community Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 4Genetic Health Services Victoria, Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, Australia, 5Royal E-C18. Theory of Engagement: A model for predictive test Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia, 6Peter Mac Callum Cancer counselling Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 7South Australian Clinical Genetics M. McAllister1, A. Silver2, G. Evans3; Service, Women’s & Children’s Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia, 1Regional Genetics Service and Academic Group of Medical 8Queensland Clinical Genetics Service, Royal Children’s Hospital, 312 EMPAG Concurrent Sessions 313 Queensland, Australia, 9Hereditary Cancer Clinic, Prince of Wales Hôpital d’Enfants Armand Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 4Service Hospital, Sydney, Australia. d’ORL et de chirurgie cervico-faciale, Hôpital d’Enfants Armand This longitudinal study aimed to document i) the information-giving Trousseau, APHP, Paris., France. and patient-communication styles of clinical geneticists and genetic Deafness is the most frequent sensorial defect. One in a thousand counsellors (consultants) in familial breast cancer clinics, and ii) children present with profound deafness at birth. As this handicap assess the impact of these behaviours on women’s knowledge, affects communication, deafness impedes language acquisition, whether their expectations were met, satisfaction, risk perception and speech development and social integration. The particularity of psychological status. this handicap is the existence of a deaf community with their own 158 women from high-risk breast cancer families completed language and culture. The recent progress in the identification self-report questionnaires at two weeks pre-and four weeks post- of the genes responsible for isolated deafness have open new consultation. The consultations were audiotaped, transcribed technical possibilities and pose significant ethical problems. We send verbatim and coded. questionnaires to hearing parents of deaf children and to deaf adults. Multivariate logistic regressions showed that women who had The aim of these questionnaires is to discover if patients know the prophylactic mastectomy (p=0.00) and oophorectomy (p=0.01) etiology of their deafness, if they want to know it, if they have access discussed had significantly more expectations met and a greater to a genetic counselling consultation and if not why, what are their reduction in breast-cancer-related avoidant thoughts (p=0.07 and thoughts about the possibility to pratice antenatal diagnosis, and p=0.09 respectively). Women who received a summary letter of therapeutic abortion. We analyse more than 200 responses. We try to the consultation and reported reading it, experienced significantly determine if the reponses are influenced by the audiologic status of lower generalised anxiety (p=0.01), lower breast cancer specific the responder, the severity of the defect, its association with an other anxiety (p=0.08) and were significantly more likely to be accurate handicap or others parameters. in reporting their perceived risk (p=0.02). Women whose consultant used more supportive behaviours experienced significantly more E-C23. Relevant issues in genetic counseling for familial breast-cancer-related intrusive thoughts at the four weeks follow-up dementia: a study on attitudes towards testing in at-risk (p<0.001). Women who received more supportive behaviours were relatives. not significantly more anxious before to genetic counselling. S. Amadori1, L. Gigola1, E. Di Maria2, A. Saltini1, R. Pioli1, P. Discussing prophylactic surgery led to better psycho-social outcomes. Mandich2, O. Zanetti1, A. Alberici1, G. Binetti1; Providing women with a letter summarising the consultation reduced 1IRCCS San Giovanni di Dio - Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy, anxiety, increased accuracy of risk perception and was a useful 2University of Genova, Genova, Italy. adjunct to the consultation. Greater use of supportive and counselling Some familial forms of dementia were found to be transmitted behaviours appeared to increase intrusive thoughts, at least in as mendelian traits, such as early onset Alzheimer disease and the short term. Longer follow-up may have shown a reduction in frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism, which were associated emotional response. Identifying methods to assist consultants to with mutations in the PS-1 and MAPT genes, respectively. In effectively address emotional issues may be helpful. these cases, the mutation is characterised by autosomal dominant inheritance, with high penetrance. Thus, a test with high predictive E-C 5. Professionals’ and Family Attitudes towards Genetic value can be offered to the at-risk healthy relatives of patients. Testing The present study is aimed at: i) evaluating the attitudes towards genetic testing in relatives of patients with familial dementia; ii) E-C21. Attitudes of persons at risk for late-onset developing a specific protocol for genetic counselling, including neurodegenerative disorders and for hereditary cancer presymptomatic testing, for families with mendelian forms of diseases towards molecular genetic predictive diagnosis dementia. F. R. Kreuz, M. Aehnelt; Thirty-five relatives of patients with familial dementia were recruited. Technical University, Dresden, Germany. Participants were tested by an extensive psychological assessment Objective: To compare the attitudes of persons at risk (RP) towards including several rating scales; the attitudes towards genetic test genetic predictive diagnosis (PDD). were evaluated by using a specific tool (Roberts, 2000). About Background: Huntington’s disease (HD) and heredoataxias (HA) are 70% of participants expressed probable intentions to seek for the late-onset neurodegenerative disorders with (HD) and without (HA) test. Participants reported test benefits as more important than dementia. Both are incurable. Hereditary cancer diseases (HC) can limitations and risks (p=.0019). Staying on top of future treatment, be prevented by prophylactic methods. DNA analysis is available. as well as planning the future, were considered the most important Methods: Our investigation was carried out by questionnaires. items in favour of the test. Psychological and sociodemographic Answers from 300 RP for HD, 30 for HA and 55 for HC were characteristics do not seem to influence attitudes and intentions evaluated. towards genetic testing. Two families in which a MAPT gene mutation Results: About 55% of RP for HD, 73% for HA and 85% for HC wish segregates with frontotemporal dementia were identified; some to undergo PDD. The main reasons are to obtain certainty about at-risk relatives requested to be enrolled for the genetic testing risk status (HD: 78%), to plan for the future (HA: 68%) and to obtain procedure. On this purpose, a multidisciplinary team is developing a prophylactic therapy (HC: 80%). 33% of the RP for HD, 13% for HA pilot protocol for genetic counselling. The preliminary experience will and only 4% for HC refuse PDD. The main reasons against PDD be reported. are psychological problems (HD: 79%; HA, HC: 50%). 2/3 of the RP for HD, 1/3 for HA and only 1/5 for HC think that there are problems E-C24. Awareness of the contribution of genetic factors in taking PDD generally. Most problems are seen in coping with the to aetiology amongst individuals with bipolar disorder. result of PDD (psychological problems; HD: 77%; HA: 60%; HC: J. H. Tocher1, D. Craufurd2, R. Warner3, A. MacNeill3; 45%), with insurance companies (40%, 20%, 55%) and with social 1Clinical Genetics Service, City Hospital, Nottingham, United surroundings (36%, 20%, 18%). Psychotherapy would be accepted Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, St Mary’s Hospital, by 93% (HD), 83% (HA) and only by 25% of RP for HC. Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Community Health Sheffield, Sheffield, Conclusions: There are different attitudes towards PDD in the three United Kingdom. groups because of the different symptoms and the possibilities of Bipolar disorder is a chronic, mental health condition with a preventing in the case of cancer. Genetic counselling has to consider multifactorial, polygenic aetiology. The illness is characterised by these features. episodes of both mania and major depression, typically occurring in cycles. E-C22. Progress in genetic : the opinion of the deaf The aim of this exploratory study was to assess knowledge of the patient and their families ? possible causes of bipolar disorder and to discover the level of S. Marlin1, D. Deschamp2, C. Rebichon3, F. Denoyelle4, G. Roger4, N. concern amongst participants that other family members may be Loundon4, E. Garabédian3; at risk of developing the illness. 22 adults diagnosed with bipolar 1Unité de Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants Armand Trousseau, AP- disorder were interviewed, using a semi-structured interview HP, Paris, France, 2Département de philosophie, Université Paris I schedule. Data were analysed to see if there was an emerging Sorbonne, France, 3Service d’ORL et de chirurgie cervico-faciale, difference between those with a family history of mental illness and EMPAG Concurrent Sessions 314 315 those individuals who were isolated cases. hospitals (23%). Rates of informed choice to accept were higher The results showed that 15/22 (68%) knew that family history plays at the hospital conducting tests as part of a routine visit than as a a role, with 13 then explicitly stating genetics as a cause. 77% cited separate visit (41% vs 21%). stressful or traumatic life-events as a cause of their illness. More than Conclusion: Screening conducted as part of a routine visit is half the sample overestimated both the population lifetime risk of associated with higher rates of informed choice, than if it is conducted bipolar disorder and the lifetime risk for those with an affected parent. at a test-specific separate visit. An experimental test of this There was no evidence that those with a family history overestimated observation is underway. the risks compared to isolated cases. Those who overestimated population risk were also overestimating family risk for developing E-C27. Pregnancy Outcome After Genetic Counselling bipolar illness. Almost half of the sample (10/22) had experienced For Prenatal Diagnosis Of Chromosomal Anomaly With some degree of worry about other family members becoming manic- Low Risk Of Severe Clinical Significance depressive. M. Petrella1, E. Di Gianantonio1, R. Ponchia2, I. Mammi1, M. These findings suggest that genetic counselling and information may Clementi1, R. Tenconi1; be useful to this population. 1Genetica Clinica Epidemiologica, Padova, Italy, 2Azienda Ospedale, Padova, Italy. E-C25. General Practitioners And Predictive Genetic The aim of the study was to evaluate the psyco-social impact of Testing For Late Onset Diseases: Their Opinions And the identification of a foetal chromosomal anomaly on couples who Their Perceived Role underwent prenatal diagnosis in the years 1996-2000 and were M. Welkenhuysen, G. Evers-Kiebooms; referred for genetic counselling to our service. Psychosocial Genetics Unit, Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Inclusion criteria were the identification of a chromosomal Belgium. anomaly that may have no phenotypic consequences or only mild A sample of 356 GPs received mail questionnaires in combination ones: variant, mosaicism (I-II level), balanced familial inversion with telephone prenotifications and reminders to assess their or translocation, familial or denovo extra structurally abnormal opinions (1) on the sense of predictive testing for breast cancer, chromosomes (ESACs) and sex chromosomes aneuploidies. thyroid cancer, Alzheimer disease and Huntington’s disease, (2) on Exclusion criteria were: presence of a malformation detected by the acceptability of testing a child at the parents’ request and an ultrasound, or autosomal aneuploidy, or unbalanced chromosomal adolescent at his/her own request, (3) on their own role in the context anomaly. of predictive testing. Multiple-choice and open-ended questions were Both parents have been interviewed and asked to fill in a used. Sixty percent returned the mail questionnaire. One third of questionnaire, consisting in two parts (general information, scale for them had at least one patient who had asked for information about a the assesment of anxiety). predictive test and/or who had such a test performed. The following RESULTS pattern in the GPs’ judgments about the sense of predictive testing A total of 36 couples were included in the study and 30 agreed was revealed: the test for thyroid cancer was considered as more to participate: 13 sex-chromosome anomaly, 11 mosaiscisms, sensible than the test for breast cancer, both were more sensible 4 translocations, 1 ESACs, 1 variant. Only 10/30 had a formal than the test for Huntington’s disease and all three were more counselling by the obstetrician before the prenatal diagnosis. sensible than the test for Alzheimer disease. Predictive testing for 2 couples (1 mosaicism II level, 1 45,X/46,XX) underwent an induced Huntington disease for an adolescent at his/her own request was abortion, 16 of the 28 remaining couples who decided to continue judged as more acceptable than for a child at the parents’ request. the pregnancy, did it after the genetic counselling. There was no The GPs’ explanations for their judgements will be presented. Six differences in the level of anxiety between the 12 couples who have percent were convinced that GPs have no role at all to play in the decided to continue the pregnancy before the genetic counselling and context of predictive testing for late onset diseases. Regarding the the others 16. type of task, most GPs focussed on gate-keeping aspects, going from CONCLUSION the provision of information, over making referrals, to being more Couples undergoing prenatal karyotiping should be counselled before directive. The research was funded by the Flemish Interuniversity performing the tests. Institute of Biotechnology (VIB). The genetic counselling has an important role in informing parents and in making the decision to continue the pregnancy. E-C 6. Prenatal Testing: Decision Making and Outcomes E-C28. Defining a psychological intervention program E-C26. Informed choice to undergo prenatal screening: a for women undergoing interruption of pregnancy after comparison of two hospitals conducting testing either as prenatal diagnosis. part of a routine visit or requiring a separate visit J. Rocha1,2, C. Paúl1,3, A. Leonardo4, J. Pitrez5, J. Sequeiros1,3, P. E. Dormandy, S. Michie, T. M. Marteau; Tavares2; King’s College, London, United Kingdom. 1UnIGENe-IBMC, Univ. Porto, Portugal, 2C.Gen.Clín., Porto, Portugal, Background: 3ICBAS - Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4H.Sta.Maria, Lisbon, Portugal, The wide variation in uptake of antenatal Down syndrome screening 5Hosp.Sra.Oliveira, Guimarães, Portugal. is associated with the method of conducting screening. Uptake is Interruption of a pregnancy (TOP) after prenatal diagnosis is a lower when screening is conducted at a test-specific separate visit challenging issue on genetic counselling. The need of psychological compared with a routine visit. It is not known if informed choice intervention to facilitate the adjustment process is well described also varies with the method of conducting screening. Women may in literature; however, few specific empirical data on the decision find it easier to decline screening if it is conducted at a test-specific process and coping with loss of a wanted pregnancy are available. separate visit. Conversely women may find it easier to accept Our work focuses in those issues using two different theoretical screening if it is conducted as part of a routine visit. approaches: the Ottawa decision support framework and coping with Aim: To compare rates of informed choice for Down syndrome critical life-events, including cognitive-narrative perspectives on loss. screening where it is conducted at a test-specific separate visit or as Our main objectives are: a) to define the weight of difficult adjustment part of a routine visit. factors: clinical and social data, coping responses, decision- Participants: 1499 pregnant women offered Down syndrome making determinants and woman’s metaphors for the event; b) to screening. check which coping strategies are effective preventing anxiety and Setting: Two hospitals in the UK offering the same Down syndrome depression; and c) to define a program of psychological intervention. screening test. Our protocol includes 4 sessions, with evaluation at 15 days and Outcome measure: the multi-dimensional measure of informed 6 months after TOP. At the first post-TOP evaluation, a structured choice, comprising three core constructs: knowledge about the interview is used, covering social-demographic data, decision screening test, attitudes towards undergoing the screening test and determinants (perception of the decision, perception of significant screening uptake. others, resources available for the decision-making process) and Results. specific loss issues (social support, knowledge about the process, Rates of informed choice to decline screening were the same at both grief thoughts and metaphor for the episode), Moos Coping 314 EMPAG Posters 315 Responses Inventory, Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), Zung Anxiety EMPAG Poster Session Scale (SAS) and Generic Decisional Conflict Scale. At the 6th month evaluation, a structured interview, with BDI and SAS, is used. E-P01. Psychological adjustment of PKU children and the We discuss the guidelines for the assessment and intervention on family this critical life-event, focusing data on the importance of decision R. Jusiene1,2, L. Cimbalistiene3, R. Bieliauskaite1; support, the coping process, emotional and cognitive intentional 1Department of Clinical and Social Psychology, Vilnius University, attribution of the experience and its metaphor. Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius University Hospital, Human Genetics Centre, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Human Genetics Centre, Vilnius E-C29. Feticide and late termination of pregnancy: impact University, Vilnius, Lithuania. on parents and health professionals Introduction: Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inherited genetic metabolic H. E. Statham1, W. Solomou1, J. M. Green2; disorder in which the enzyme required to digest phenylanine (Phe) is 1Centre for Family Research, University of Cambridge, United missing. If untreated, individuals with PKU develop high levels of Phe Kingdom, 2Mother and Infant Researach Unit, University of Leeds, in their blood which can affect brain development and function. That’s United Kingdom. why low protein diet must be introduced from the birth. Nevertheless, In some countries, legislation permits termination of pregnancy several studies show higher incidence of behavioral problems, after the diagnosis of fetal abnormality at gestations beyond fetal especially internalizing, in early-treated PKU children and suggest viability. Prior to such a late termination, it is necessary to ensure psychological perspective explaining them. Parental maladjustment that the baby is dead prior to the induction of labour. In the United to child’s chronic illness and everyday stress managment related to Kingdom this procedure, feticide, is usually carried out in specialist the burden of special diet can be reasons for psychological problems fetal medicine units. There are no published data concerning how of PKU children. parents react to this procedure nor how it impacts on those health Aim: To evaluate the psychological adjustment of PKU children professionals carrying it out. (as compared to healthy controls) and analyze it in the context of This paper will use questionnaire and interview data collected from psychological impact of PKU on the family. twenty-eight women and their partners, whose pregnancies were Methods: Parents of 37 early-treated PKU children (age 4-14 years terminated with the use of feticide after the late diagnosis of a fetal old) and of 37 matched controls were asked to fill the Child Behavior abnormality. We will describe the impact of this procedure for both Checklist (CBCL, Achenbach, 1991) and questionnaire on stress men and women, compared with parents undergoing termination for coping strategies (Elklit, 1996). Parents of PKU children answered abnormality at earlier gestations without the use of feticide. Attitudes the questionnaire on reactions to child’s disease and it’s impact on to and experiences of the procedure varied among parents. Overall, the family. no relationship was found between undergoing feticide or not and Results: PKU children have significantly more behavioral maternal emotional well being although a year after a termination, problems than healthy controls. They are more withdrawn, there was evidence of higher paternal grief in those men whose anxious/depressive, have more social and attention problems. The partner had undergone a feticide. higher rates of internalizing and overall problems are related to We will also describe the findings from interviews with health parental maladjustment (feelings of guilty and anger) together with professionals (both doctors and midwives) in fetal medicine units, maladaptive (emotion-oriented) stress coping strategies. Two latter which explored: their attitudes to the legal framework for abortion factors further indulging the child, that also predicts the psychological in the UK; the policies and practices that have evolved within the problems of PKU children. legal framework and Royal College guidelines; and the impact of this procedure on them as practitioners. E-P02. Are experiences with HD related to the attachment representation in adults at 50% risk for HD? An empirical E-C30. Profiles and motives of couples choosing PGD exploration R. Lulofs1, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders1, N. D. Muntjewerf1, J. A. Land2; M. Duisterhof1, R. W. Trijsburg1, H. J. Duivenvoorden1, A. Tibben2; 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, 1Department of Medical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Dept. of Gynaecology, Academic Hospital Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Departments of Clinical Genetics and Neurology, Maastricht, Netherlands. Leiden, Netherlands. Introduction. Introduction: Huntington‘s disease (HD) is a family disease. We The Academic Hospital in Maastricht is the only centre in the introduced the attachment theory as framework to study the effect Netherlands that provides Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD). of childhood experiences with HD on adult functioning. According to Between 80-100 couples are referred each year. This gave us the the attachment theory a child forms on the base of daily interactions opportunity to investigate the characteristics and motives of the with his parents a mental representation of the relationship with couples seeking PGD counseling. his parents. A child is securely attached when he approaches his The main question was: parents, especially when being frightened, tired or ill. He can also Which couples opt for PGD and which factors might influence the be attached to his parents in a dismissing (insecure-avoidant) or course of treatment? preoccupied (insecure-resistant) way. Once formed attachment Method. representations are relatively resistant to change. The Adult As part of the intake a Clinical Geneticist provides information about Attachment Interview (AAI)1 allows assessment at adult age of PGD. After that a Psychologist interviews the couple. A descriptive attachment representation, unresolved trauma and loss. We studied analysis of the first 50 interviews has been performed. the attachment representation in adults at 50% risk for HD and Results. explored its relation to HD experiences and family characteristics. The presentation mainly deals with the first part of the question i.e. Method: 30 adults at 50% risk, having had a parent with HD which couples opt for PGD. Roughly 40% of the genetic disorders in childhood, were administered the AAI. They completed a that lead to the wish for PGD are autosomal dominant late onset questionnaire concerning family characteristics and HD experiences. disorders, another 45% are X-linked or autosomal recessive The differential qualities of the attachment categories were explored disorders and 15% of the cases have frequent early abortions due by multivariate modeling of HD experiences and family characteristics to translocations. Couples generally underestimate the impact of the (i.e. optimal scaling techniques). disorder on quality of life. Women and men mention similar motives Results: 11 subjects were securely attached, whereas 14 were for parenthood. Couples feel medium to high time pressure in 60% preoccupied attached and 5 dismissing attached; 16 out of them of the cases. Alternative options to get a healthy child are considered were unresolved regarding trauma and/or loss. Compared to non- in 50% of the cases but 70% express a strong preference for PGD. clinical samples2, fearful preoccupation and unresolved trauma were Sufficient social support is reported by 80% of the couples and only overrepresented. The relation between attachment representation 10% does not want to discuss their problems with others. After the and HD are currently being analysed. It will be discussed how the initial interview, 60% wants to continue, 10% declines to go on and attachment representation is related to HD experiences and family 30% wants to reconsider their options. characteristics.EMPAG Posters 316 317 E-P03. The situation and attitudes of patients suffering partners. The interviews explored how participants found out about from a hereditary disease and those of their partners the disease; whether subsequent relatives had or had not been told; B. Hoelzel, F. R. Kreuz; the factors which influenced telling or not telling; who should tell; and Technical University, Dresden, Germany. views of the genetic counselling process. DNA analyses can help to differentiate diseases and to make a Results: We explored how and when participants found out about diagnosis certain. However, the psycho-social problems may increase Huntington’s disease and the effect this had on subsequent family with new diagnostics. One aim of our study was to investigate the relationships and decisions to tell other relatives such as children. attitudes of patients suffering from a hereditary disease and those of Respondents’ views about whose responsibility it is to pass on this their partners. We wanted to investigate whether there are special type of information were also examined. features in coping with a heredity disease. Method: The study was Conclusions: The impact of Huntington’s disease on family dynamics carried out by questionnaires. Results: 68% of the patients and 27% may result in family secrets and/or living at risk. The level of of the partners had to restrict their professional life. About 20% in disclosure to relatives can at times be limited but also depends on both groups had conflicts with family members. 52% of the patients the psycho-social, cultural and familial context. Ultimately, we hope considered that the difficulties of their situation had strengthened that this study will contribute towards a wider understanding into the partnership, whereas about 25% reported conflicts with their the dynamics within families after someone in that family attends for partner and, in 7%, the partnership was dissolved. For more than genetic counselling. 70% of the patients, their partner is the most important person to help them to cope with the disease. 65% of the patients and 71% of E-P06. Adults with Marfan Syndrome: Sexual Functioning the partners wished to undergo prenatal DNA diagnosis. More than and Reproduction 50% of both groups thought that the termination of pregnancy after a K. F. Peters1, M. Hanslo1, f. Kong2, B. B. Biesecker3; positive prenatal diagnosis is justified. Almost all patients confirmed 1Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA, 2Westat Research that the doctor is important not only for giving information, but also Institute, Rockville, MD, 3NHGRI/NIH, Bethesda, MD. for discussions regarding coping with the disease. Conclusion: As individuals with Marfan syndrome are increasingly diagnosed Good family and social integration and close-meshed consultations prior to childbearing, there is opportunity to study factors related by specialists form the basis for coping with a hereditary disease. to the diagnosis that influence their reproductive planning. Data Genetic counselling can provide the frame for genetic analysis. The will be presented from an exploratory study of 174 adults with partner has to be integrated into the counselling process and should Marfan syndrome regarding their reproductive plans. A majority be paid the same amount of attention. of survey respondents were Caucasian and well educated. Fifty eight percent were female and 64% were members of the National E-P04. Cri du chat syndrome: qualitative analysis of Marfan Foundation. Sixty percent of the cohort reported difficulties behavioural phenotype with sex drive. Age (50+ yrs), striae, back pain, and low quality of R. Posmyk1, S. Stengel-Rutkowski2, L. Anderlik3, A. T. Midro1; life were each independently correlated with a lack of sex drive. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University Bialystok, Forty percent of the respondents had children, with 33% having Bialystok, Poland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of one or more children affected with Marfan syndrome. Approximately Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Montessori Therapist, 2nd Clinic of 62% of the total cohort agreed that having Marfan syndrome has Paediatrics, Munich, Germany. significantly affected their decisions about having children. Age at Haploinsufficiency of 5p15.2-15.3 results in Cri du chat syndrome diagnosis, mitral valve prolapse, and the view that Marfan syndrome (CDC, OMIM 123450), which is a well-recognizable genetic has adverse consequences on one’s life were each independently condition with characteristic facial dysmorphism, organs anomalies, correlated with the perception that being affected had influenced their psychomotor and mental retardation. In contrast to routinely reproductive plans. Of the total cohort, 69% reported that they were published convictions of severe mental and behavioural incapacity interested in prenatal testing for Marfan syndrome. Clinical features of children with CDC, more specific data on their abilities and and psychosocial issues both contribute negatively to affected adults’ educational needs are not available. The main aim of our work was reproductive decision-making and sexual well-being. Genetics a detailed qualitative study of the behavioural profile of CDC, starting professionals are ideally positioned to address concerns surrounding with a 6-year-old boy with characteristic clinical features confirmed reproduction with Marfan syndrome patients and to refer those with by cytogenetic findings. Our method is based on the analysis of significant sexual or reproductive concerns for further evaluation and single picture observations taken from video documentation during management. child directed therapeutic playwork in a Montessori structured environment. The synthesis of our observations revealed a wide E-P07. Caring For Fronto-temporal Dementia Patients: range of abilities: the psychomotor skills include a very good manual Influences Of Premorbid Relationship On Current abilities, a good non-verbal communication and partially expressed Caregiver Burden verbal communication, the social abilities include a good eye contact J. C. Mourik1, S. M. Rosso2, J. C. Van Swieten2, H. J. and participation in playwork and the emotional abilities concern the Duivenvoorden3, M. F. Niermeijer4, A. Tibben5; child’s manifestation of happiness, proudness of managing with his 1Dept. of Medical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Erasmus Medical work by himself, anger, boredom and others. We believe that a more Centre (Erasmus MC), Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Dept. of Neurology, detailed knowledge on the developmental and behavioural phenotype Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Dept. of Medical Psychology of CDC should take an important part of genetic counseling. and Psychotherapy, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Dept. of E-P05. Discovering and disclosing the family disease: Clinical Genetics and Neurology, Leiden University Medical Centre, stories from Huntington’s disease consultands, and their Leiden, Netherlands. partners. Introduction: Fronto-temporal dementia (FTD) is a neurodegenerative K. Forrest, S. A. Simpson, E. van Teijlingen, B. Wilson, N. Haites, L. disorder characterised by personality changes, alterations in social McKee, E. Matthews; conduct, aphasia, and a decline in frontal cognitive functions. Its University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom. onset is mostly during the presenium. In 20 percent of the patients Background: Research suggests that some Huntington’s disease a familial form with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance is consultands grow up knowing about the disease, whilst others do seen. not. Indeed, some only find out after the death of a parent or sibling, Research has shown that caring for a demented patient with or after a relative has been diagnosed. This issue is important for whom the premorbid relationship was warm and positive is less several reasons: individuals might be disadvantaged emotionally, stressful than if the relationship was problematic. Little is known socially, financially or medically by having genetic information about associations between quality of the premorbid relationship withheld or disclosed, and conflicts may arise within families if some and subjective burden of the primary informal caregiver of the FTD cannot accept a parent’s or sibling’s right to privacy or right not to patient. know. Objective: To get insight into the caregiver burden of primary informal Methods: In-depth interviews were undertaken with people who have caregivers of FTD patients in association with the quality of the received genetic counselling for Huntington’s disease, and their premorbid relationship.316 EMPAG Posters 317 Participants: Informal caregivers (65 in total) who were registered at E-P10. Congenital Malformations and Genetic Disorders the outpatient clinic of the department of Neurology at the Erasmus as A Source of Investigation of the Psychosocial MC. Two groups were distinguished a) caregivers of patients that live Repercussions in Pregnant Women in a State Hospital at home, and b) caregivers of patients that are hospitalised. Prenatal Clinical Care from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Assessment of variables: Subjective burden is operationalised and A. S. N. Marinho, O. A. Coser Filho, J. C. Llerena Jr.; assessed by: Fernandes Figueira Institute of Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de · Emotional burden of the caregiver as measured by a section of the Janeiro, Brazil. Neuropsychiatric Inventory on neuropsychiatric functioning of the We conducted an investigation of the psychosocial repercussions patient. in high genetic risk pregnant women based upon a diagnosis of Quality of the premorbid relationship is measured by: congenital malformations and/or genetic disorder at a Medical · Self-report questionnaire on 1) closeness, 2) communication, 3) Genetics reference centre in the State of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, similarity in views about life, and 4) degree of getting along. during 2000. The aim of the investigation was to share the experience Results: The quality of the premorbid relation will be related to with 141 women, as far as comprehending the process of decision subjective burden as outcome measure. The statistical analysis to be making and the necessary change of attitude needed by the families applied is multiple linear regression. upon a clinical and/or laboratory diagnosis of congenital malformation or genetic disorder. The method used, included medical document E-P08. Psychosocial aspects of dwarf child on school research as to map social, demographic and cultural characteristics, age ethnographic protocol (Geertz, 2000), interviews with the families, C. Jurca, M. Bembea, V. Schiopu, D. Bara, O. Vancsik, C. Skrypnyk, and the Life History Method (Becker, 2000), as to investigate the M. Bembea; impact of the diagnosis. The population investigated were referred Clinical Children Hospital, Oradea, Romania. from different geographic regions of the State of Rio de Janeiro Introduction: The Dwarfism is a relatively frequent feature in the (14000000); most couples had a low schooling education; only 12% genetics pathology. In our study, from 2995 cases with genetics had received a genetic counselling previously the current pregnancy; diseases, 97 (3,2%) presents Dwarfism. In all the cases, this is the mean maternal age was 31 years old; a very low uptake of a specific feature of the disease or syndrome. Objective: The invasive exams (amniocentesis, specially) was observed due to identification of the main psychosocial problems of the dwarf different reasons such as emotional, moral religious or ethical (in children during school age. Material and Method: 32 children on Brazil therapeutic abortion isn’t permitted by law). The maternal age school age with different etiologies of dwarfism (achondroplasia, risk factor was the most important one (80%). The information is the hypochondrodisplasia and others osteochondrodysplasias, central aspect in the process of making decisions. It’s necessary to mucopolysaccharidoses, osteogenesis imperfecta, growth hormone create favorable psychological conditions to the understanding of the deficiency, Turner syndrome etc.) underwent psychological tests information, guaranteeing the patient’s presence until the end of the and sociological investigations. In every case we followed: scholar process and hers return to the genetic counseling. performances, community accommodation, effort adaptation, child’s behavior in school, family and society. Particularities regarding E-P11. What is missing from prenatal genetic age, sex, family, diagnostic, treatment, are identified in this study. counselling? The special needs of current care inside the family, medical care, J. Hodgson1,2,3, M. Sahhar1,4; psychological and pedagogic support, are evaluated. Results: All 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Childrens Hospital, the school-age children with dwarfism have psychosocial problems. Melbourne, Victoria, 3052, Australia, 2The Co-Operative Research From these, the most frequent are: the problems of family adaptation, Centre for Discovery of Genes for Common Human Diseases (Gene school adaptation and professional orientation. In some cases, nor CRC), Richmond, Melbourne, Victoria 3121, Australia, 3Melbourne the family, neither the school or the society doesn’t find the best University, Parkville, Melbourne, Victoria, 3052, Australia, 4Genetic methods for adaptation to the child’s sufferance. Health Services Victoria, Royal Childrens Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, 3052, Australia. E-P09. Behavioural phenotype in two cases of Wolf- Genetic counselling research has been criticised for focusing on Hirschhorn syndrome outcomes rather than process (Pilnick & Dingwall 2001). There have P. S. Iwanowski1, S. Stengel-Rutkowski2, L. Anderlik3, J. Pilch4, A. T. been less than 25 published process studies since 1977 with few in Midro1; the area of prenatal diagnosis. Other literature concerning prenatal 1Medical Academy Bialystok, Department of Clinical Genetics, genetic counselling process describes retrospective, subjective Bialystok, Poland, 2University of Munich, Department of Human impressions of session content and decision-making processes. The Genetics, Munich, Germany, 3Montessori therapist, Munich, Germany, process of prenatal genetic counselling remains largely unexplored. 4Silesian Medical University, 2nd Clinics of Paediatrics, Katowice, Following prenatal diagnosis parents have a choice to accept or Poland. reject the pregnancy. Conditions detected range from lethal to mildly Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS), a rare condition with characteristic disfiguring. facial traits, organ malformations, and functional impairment Content of genetic counselling sessions appears to be largely associated with partial short arm monosomy of chromosome 4, information giving (Michie, Marteau & Bobrow 1997) and exploration used to be invariably linked with profound psychomotor and mental of other issues may be ignored. The continuing adherence to non retardation and lack of social or emotional communication. Recent -directive counselling may minimise counsellor involvement with data on better both somatic (eg. walking, general survival) and decision-making (Terrell White 1999) and possibly constrain moral behavioural (eg. communication, social functioning) development in discussion for those who desire it. Research is needed to determine WHS give rationale to more detailed studies of the WHS phenotype. whether clients wish to have a level of moral discourse available to We undertook a detailed qualitative study of the behaviour profile of them. two children with WHS based on subsequent image analysis elicited As the scope of genetic screening and diagnosis increases and from a video sequence recorded of a therapist-guided playwork, presents new and increasingly complex dilemmas, inclusion of a which was featured in the environment structured according to the client-led moral discourse may be seen as a justifiable goal of future principles of Maria Montessori. The focus was set on children abilities genetic counselling practice. and not defects. Based on the results obtained, we attempted to elicit the needs of studied children in order to favour preventing of E-P12. Dinamic counselling in Haemophilia secondary mental impairment in children with WHS and stimulating D. A. Zarri, D. Caprino, P. G. Mori; their development by their families. Our results support the previous G. Gaslini Children’s Hospital, Genova, Italy. communications on better abilities profile of children with WHS It is now possible to identify carrier status and to perform prenatal (psychomotor, emotional, communicative, and social ones) than diagnosis of haemophilia. Therefore, the parents can choose commonly attributed to this syndrome. We think that the growing data whether to have haemophilic children or not, and this choice will on the behavioural phenotype in genetic conditions, including WHS, condition the rest of their lives. Thus counselling is an important will contribute to better and more complete genetic counseling. aspect and it should not be a once in a lifetime event: the decision- making process is something that should be on going. Counselling EMPAG Posters 318 319 should provides families the option of changing their mind. Rational (<50 years) are more worried about developing cancer than older aspects and doubts they might have, even month or years after the women. Few women provide accurate figures for the population risk first consultation, must be considered. Nowadays it is possible to of breast (37%) or ovarian (6%) cancer but most think that they are get information easily from several sources even though it could be at higher risk of developing breast (88%) and ovarian (69%) cancer inaccurate and contradictory, counselling allows people to discuss than the average woman. Cancer related worry is not associated with and to exchange views concerning medical progress. perceived risk or uptake of risk management options except breast Drawing up a counselling outline decreases the disagreements self-examination. The findings indicate that younger women may be regarding the medical and psychological aspects. If all the particularly vulnerable at the time of the offer of a predictive genetic centres provided the same information, the perception, about the test. discrepancies among the various specialist would decrease. Counselling should be geared to the subject we are talking to, and E-P15. Breaking the rule of nondirectiveness: the should take into account social and cultural levels, age and reasons psychological impact of early identification of breast for counselling. The counsellor must be neutral and all the possible cancer patients at risk for hereditary breast cancer strategies must be considered. K. J. Schlich-Bakker1, H. F. J. ten Kroode1, F. J. M. Grosfeld1, C. C. The basis for a long lasting therapeutic alliance can be achieved Wárlám-Rodenhuis1, M. G. E. M. Ausems1, J. van Echtelt1, M. van der through counselling; the main advantages can be had by the patients Heiden-van der Loo2, J. van den Bout3; and their families as by the staff. The type of dynamic counselling we 1University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Comprehensive are suggesting needs to be up-to-date. Everyone working in genetic Cancer Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Dep. Clin. Psychology, counselling must be involved, from laboratory staff to the consulting University, Utrecht, Netherlands. physician. Past five years are characterized by a steady growing interest in genetic counseling for hereditary beast cancer. Applicants for E-P13. Attitude of Italian Haemophilia Carriers towards genetic counseling have mostly concerned healthy persons at reproductive choices high risk for developing breast cancer; they were well motivated A. I.C.E. Italian co-operative group1, D. Caprino2; and highly educated. By identifying cancer patients with a BRCA 1Associazione Italiana Centri Emofilia, Italia, Italy, 2Gaslini Children’s gene mutation and subsequently taking preventive measures and Hospital, Genova, Italy. diagnostic procedures, life expectancy of patients and relatives may Haemophilia A and B are X-linked bleeding disorders due to improve. Besides healthy at risk persons, breast cancer patients coagulation Factor VIII or Factor IX deficiency. will apply, even during course of their treatment. Currently breast Severe haemophilia is characterised by life-threatening bleeding, cancer patients are stimulated to apply for genetic counseling in chronic arthropathy and recently HIV and hepatitis virus infection. a fairly directive manner at the Department of Radiotherapy of the Progress in therapy and prophylaxis has improved the quality and University Medical Center Utrecht in the Netherlands. The protocol expectancy of life of the haemophiliacs. used consists of the following consecutive stages: 1) screening on Many women at risk request genetic counselling and prenatal eight factors predisposing hereditary breast cancer, 2) composition diagnosis. To investigate carriers’ knowledge about treatment and of a pedigree, 3) genetic counseling and 4) DNA analysis. Aim of prenatal diagnosis we designed a multichoice questionnaire. this study is to gain insight into psychosocial consequences of this So far, 189 women, most of them aged between 20 and 45 years, directive approach and provide guidelines for a directive approach in from all over Italy have answered. genetic counseling. Effects will be investigated using questionnaires Regarding the genetic aspect, in familiar cases, 22% claim they found focussing on psychological wellbeing as well as knowledge and out about the risk of having an affected child only after a haemophilic attitude towards genetic counseling. Subsequently a semi-structured son was born and 30% did not answer the question. interview will be administered. 285 pregnancies are reported for the 173 women, and 33 PD were Genetic risk assessment while starting radiotherapy treatment may performed. One of the 3 prenatally diagnosed affected males was prove a psychological burden. However, we expect patients who are aborted. informed of an unlikely genetic cause will also be relieved. Based Many couples choose not to have other children after the birth of a on previous studies indicating decreased psychological wellbeing of haemophilic, mainly due to their carrier status. patients declining genetic risk assessment we expect that patients The availability of new and safer concentrates has improved the way who withdraw from the protocol will report less psychological people feel about of the disease and therapy. wellbeing than others. In 20 years experience at the Gaslini Institute, 117 PD were performed and 87% of the affected males were aborted. We suppose E-P16. Predictive testing for hereditary breast and that the couples requesting PD had already decided to abort the ovarian cancer (HBOC): Psychological impact and affected males. Many carriers avoid pregnancy since having to make health related behaviour in the year following the a decision on abortion is unbearable for them. communication of the predictive test result. E. Claes1, G. Evers-Kiebooms1, M. Decruyenaere1, L. Denayer1, A. E-P14. Predictive testing for BRCA1/2: attributes, risk Boogaerts1, E. Legius2; perception and management in a UK multi-centre clinical 1Psychosocial Genetics Unit, Leuven, Belgium, 2Clinical Genetics cohort Unit, Leuven, Belgium. C. Foster1, D. G. R. Evans2, R. Eeles3, D. Eccles4, S. Ashley3, L. Since the end of 1997, predictive genetic testing for HBOC has Brooks2, R. Davidson5, J. Mackay6, P. J. Morrison7, M. Watson3; been available as a clinical service in Leuven. Test applicants are 1The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 2St offered pre- and post-test psychological counselling in the context of Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Royal Marsden NHS a multidisciplinary approach. Longitudinal psychological research, Trust, London/Sutton, United Kingdom, 4Princess Ann Hospital, embedded in the clinical service, is aimed at establishing a baseline Southampton, United Kingdom, 5Yorkhill NHS Trust, Glasgow, United evaluation of the testees and at assessing the psychological impact Kingdom, 6Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 7Belfast of predictive genetic testing. In the present paper, follow-up data City Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom. for the first year after predictive testing are discussed for 38 tested The aim of this multi-centre UK study is to examine the attributes of women (21 carriers and 17 non-carriers). a cohort offered predictive genetic testing for breast/ovarian cancer The mean general distress levels of carriers and non-carriers were predisposition. Participants are adults unaffected with cancer from not significantly different during the pre-test period nor one year after families with a known BRCA1/2 mutation. This is the first large predictive testing. Moreover, distress levels were not higher (some multi-centre study of this population in the UK. The study evaluates even lower) than in the general population. Except for the STAI-State mental health, perceived risk of developing cancer, preferred risk score that decreased over time, no significant differences were found management options, and motivation for genetic testing. Participants between pre- and post-test measures. were assessed when coming forward for genetic counselling prior Most of the carriers who opted for regular medical examinations to proceeding to genetic testing. 312 individuals, 76% of whom are followed the screening recommendations. About 10% of the carriers female, from 9 UK centres participated in the study. There are no had a prophylactic mastectomy within the year after the test result. gender differences in rates of psychiatric morbidity. Younger women More than two thirds of the remaining group of carriers stated that 318 EMPAG Posters 319 they would not have a prophylactic mastectomy in the future. Of appear to work well. However, genetic testing can also be used to the carriers above 35 years, 37% already had an oophorectomy confirm or exclude HD from the differential diagnosis in apparently before applying for predictive testing whereas 44% had prophylactic affected individuals. There are no guidelines for ‘diagnostic’ testing, oophorectomy after genetic testing. but anecdotal reports suggest considerably more problems than with presymptomatic testing. Some UK laboratories require signed E-P17. Acceptance of testing for genetic predisposition consent for diagnostic testing, but practice varies considerably to breast cancer: Part 2 - The attitude of society between centres. A. V. Shopova1, S. A. Shopova2, M. G. Pesheva3, E. G. Simeonov4; 258 requests for HD diagnostic testing were received by the 1Biological Faculty - Sofia University “St.Kliment Ohridsky”, Sofia, molecular genetic laboratory in Manchester between 1993 and Bulgaria, 2Section of Clinical Genetics - Medical University, Sofia, 2000. The number increased steadily from 18 in 1993 to 48 in Bulgaria, 3Dept.of Genetics, Biological Faculty - Sofia University 1999. Referrals originated from 33 clinicians in 8 specialties. The “St.Kliment Ohridsky”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Section of Clinical genetics percentage of positive test results varied between clinicians from - Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. 38% to 100%. Logistic regression analysis indicated a significant Background: This study represents the second conclusive part of a difference between referring clinicians (p=0.0006) but no significant research project. effect due to specialty. Requests from clinical geneticists declined Objectives: To assess the attitude of the society towards the testing from 90% in 1993 to 40% in 1999, while the proportion of positive of healthy people for genes predisposition to cancer and summarize results decreased from 88% to 62%. Clinical information was the results of the two parts of the project. provided on 60% of request cards, and family history on 45%. Setting: The study was carried out with the participation of 15 Referring doctors with a low rate of positive results presumably use students - molecular biology, 15 women at risk and 30 healthy the test to eliminate HD in cases with relevant symptoms but no women tested by means of a personal interview and a psychological family history. The use of consent forms in such cases may arguably questionnaire. raise patients’ anxieties unnecessarily, but conversely may help to Participants: Total 109 women (aged 21 - 73): 49 medical reduce the risk of performing ‘diagnostic’ tests on presymptomatic professionals and 60 others. at-risk individuals who have not been referred for genetic counselling. Results: 27 (25% of participants) refused to collaborate; 23 (28% The implications for future policy will be discussed. of the collaborating ones) reported personal experience or positive family history of breast cancer. 67% of the students were familiar with E-P20. Psychological impact of pre-symptomatic genetic BRCA 1 and 2. 75% of the participants would accept pre-symptomatic testing for Machado-Joseph disease: preliminary results. breast cancer testing, if required. S. Ledo, M. Fleming, J. C. Rocha, J. Sequeiros; Conclusions: There is no strong correlation between age and IBMC - UP, Porto, Portugal. attitude as well as between personal tragic experience and attitude. The aim of the present study was to measure the impact of pre- However, there is a strong positive correlation between educational symptomatic genetic testing for Machado-Joseph disease, at the level and level of knowledge about cancer. Thus the need of more beginning and end of our program of genetic counselling and psycho- information is clearly indicated. social evaluation and follow-up. We studied the first 19 individuals at-risk (1 male, 18 females; mean E-P18. BRCA1/2 Testing in Hereditary Breast and Ovarian age: 41.7 years), to have completed our protocol. The scores of Cancer Families: Impact on Relationships depression and anxiety, reached through the application of two scales B. B. Biesecker1, A. McInerney-Leo1, R. E. Thompson2, D. Hadley1, (Clinical Evaluation Inventory of Depression, Vaz Serra & Abreu, R. Kase3, T. Giambarresi3, C. Lerman4, J. Struewing5; 1973 and Zung‘s Anxiety Scale, Vaz Serra et al., 1982), were chosen 1NHGRI/NIH, Bethesda, MD, 2Johns Hopkins University Biostatistical as indicators of the emotional state to of each subject and taken three Center, Baltimore, MD, 3Westat Research Inc, Rockville, MD, moments: before pre-symptomatic testing, and at three weeks and at 4University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 5NCI/NIH, Bethesda, nine months after disclosure of the results of the test. MD. Our preliminary data shown that, (1) the scores of depression and Members of Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) families anxiety did not achieve pathological levels at any moment, for often express concern within genetic counseling about the impact the vast majority of subjects; and that (2) awareness of the test of BRCA1/2 testing on relatives. Yet, the impact of the decision to results does not cause a negative psychological impact - mean undergo cancer susceptibility testing and/or the results themselves scores of depression and anxiety by the third moment were always on family relationships is not known. Within a randomized trial of lower than those at the first moment of evaluation. This pointed to cancer genetic counseling method, 212 members of thirteen HBOC psychologically healthy adaptation to the new genetic status (carrier families were offered BRCA1/2 testing for a known family mutation. or non-carrier), for all subjects studied, even in those cases where Data on family functioning was collected at baseline and again at anxiety and/or depression raised immediately after testing (three 6-9 months following the receipt of test results, or at the equivalent weeks). Despite this small sample, the results are in concordance time for those participants who chose not to undergo testing. 181 with previous studies and helped us to delineate future research. participants elected to undergo genetic testing (85%) and 47 (26%) were identified as mutation carriers. The Family Relationship index E-P21. The revelation of the Huntington’s disease was used to measure changes in perceived cohesion, conflict and asymptomatic diagnosis : psychosocial aspects expressiveness from baseline to follow-up. Change was analyzed M. Batt1, M. Germain2, G. Barroche3, A. Trognon4, P. Jonveaux2; for each measure between testers and non-testers and between 1C.H.R.U.N. Laboratoire de Génétique. Université Nancy2. GRC, those who tested positive and negative. Overall, there were positive Nancy, France, 2C.H.R.U.N. Laboratoire de Génétique, Nancy, changes in expressiveness and cohesion and negative changes France, 3C.H.R.U.N. Sce Neurologie, Nancy, France, 4Université in conflict. Individuals who opted for testing had lower feelings of Nancy 2. GRC, Nancy, France. cohesiveness and expressiveness than those who declined testing (p The main purpose of this research is to study how to minimize = 0.054 and p = 0.09 respectively). Expressiveness was significantly the psychological dangers of an asymptomatic genetic diagnosis lower in those who tested positive rather than negative (p = 0.005). of Huntington’s disease. Therefore, we record and study the Results suggest that choosing to undergo BRCA1/2 testing and living conversations that took place in the predictive consultations. We with positive results may cause less disruption in families in which study it with a theory which updates the social and cognitive aspects there are not strong feelings of cohesiveness or expressiveness. of the verbal interactions : the Interlocutory Logic. This analysis allows us to show where the complexity of these interactions lie E-P19. Referral patterns for diagnostic genetic testing in and to pinpoint very subtle conversational mechanisms which Huntington’s disease. are implicated. More precisely, we show how the interlocutors-in- K. Jackson1, A. Dodge2, E. Howard2, D. Craufurd2; interaction (practitioners as well as the asymptomatic individuals at 1Blackpool Victoria Hospital, Blackpool, United Kingdom, 2Academic risk) refer to the demand of knowledge during the successive dialogs Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetic Service, Manchester, that are initiated by it. United Kingdom. Ethical guidelines for HD predictive testing are widely observed and EMPAG Posters 320 321 E-P22. Predictive medicine: gynaecologists’ opinion individuals who were lost to follow-up, as it is difficult to get access to survey this group. Therefore, the adverse effects in carriers and non-carriers M. O. Mkheidze; may be underestimated. Medical Academy for postgraduate training, Sankt-Petersburg, Subjects and methods Russian Federation. In the long-term follow-up of predictive testing for HD 180 test To author’s opinion there is the deepest gulf between the highest applicants completed questionnaires which assessed future level of the modern molecular medicine and its understanding of the expectancies (Beck Hopelessness Scale), intrusion of adverse ideas physicians and persons. The aim of this investigation consists of the and denial-avoidance reactions (Impact of Event Scale) and general study of gynaecologists’ views on some problems of the predictive well being (General Health Questionnaire). medicine. Materials and method. At the beginning of six-hour lecture, Results 50 of obstetricians and gynecologists (41 women, 9 men aged from After receiving the DNA test result, 39 persons (22%; 18 increased 24 to 53 years) got a self-completing questionnaire with 6 questions. risk, 21 decreased risk) did not return for follow-up and additional Results. 1st position: Genomic dactyloscopy is a modern method for counselling (dropouts). After 7-10 years, about 69% is lost to follow- the investigation of dermatoglyphic patterns (Yes-90%). 2nd position: up. There were no differences between non-carriers who did return I’d like to be examined by technique of genomic dactyloscopy (Yes- (participants), and dropout non-carriers. Dropout carriers had 52%). 3rd position: I am informed about predictive medicine (Yes reported at pre-test significantly more hopelessness (F(1,76)=6.5; - 10%). 4th position: I’d like to have the information on my gene p=.013), more intrusive thoughts about HD (F(1,76)=13.4; p=.000), mutations predisposing to some common diseases (Yes -34%). 5th more avoidance behaviour (F(1, 76)=10.1; p = .002) and a worse sense position: Do you want to have your genetic certificate? (Yes - 28%, of well-being (F(1,76)=7.0; p=.010), than participating carriers. all of them are the younger generation of doctors). 6th position: What Conclusions do you think about ethical, legal and social aspects of predictive People who are vulnerable to psychological distress may have medicine? (Absence of problem -2%, confidentality-92%, privacy reacted with extreme denial of an unfavourable test outcome and - 96%, dread of cloning - 5%, questions of financing - 80%) These avoidance of the messengers of the bad news (geneticists) and their findings like our previous reports corroborate the low level of genetic associates (psychologists-researchers). Oral information by relatives knowledge of our doctors and citizens. It is very important to create supports these speculations. Studies reporting few harmful effects special programme to educate our population on medical genetics by identified carriers may have underestimated the real impact of the and predictive medicine. test results. E-P25. Social and Ethnic Differences in Attitudes and E-P23. Life events and psychological risk in individuals Consent to Prenatal Testing entering the protocol of pre-symptomatic testing for FAP- TTRMet30. J. Hirst1, S. Ahmed1, C. Hucknall1, J. M. Green1, H. S. Cuckle1, J. Thornton1, R. F. Mueller2, J. Hewison1; S. Albuquerque1, J. Sequeiros1,2, C. Paúl1,2; 1University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2St James’ University 1UnIGENe-IBMC, Univ. Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS - Univ. Porto, Porto, Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom. Portugal. Introduction: Life events may have an important impact on psychological risk of This paper will present details of an ongoing ESRC/MRC funded persons who are at genetic risk for a deleterious inherited disease. study comparing the attitudes of different social and ethnic groups We made a qualitative analyses of psychological interviews of 23 to prenatal testing. The findings from the pilot study will also be individuals at-risk for familial amyloid polineuropathy (FAP), type presented. I or TTRMet30, the first to enter our protocol of pre-symptomatic Background: testing for this disease. Thus, we chose 4 categories of history of Advances in DNA technology mean that a wider range of prenatal life events that might influence the present psychological conditions tests will soon become available. Obtaining separate informed of individuals at-risk: (1) separation (emotional separation from consent for each condition is likely to cause confusion and provoke significant others); (2) change (change of environment - school, considerable anxiety amongst parents. A classification system is home, other - e.g., due to the death of an affected parent); (3) therefore required and needs to be built upon parents’ attitudes contact (contact with patients and knowledge derived about the to testing and their perceptions of the similarities and differences disease); (4) care-giving (taking care of an affected relative). between conditions. We hypothesised that those events of personal history may turn Research Design: them more fragile, increasing their psychological risk during The attitudes of several hundred postnatal Pakistani and indigenous the pre-symptomatic testing process, as measured by the ‘white’ women towards prenatal testing, for a range of conditions, “Psychopathological Symptoms Inventory” (BSI) (Derogatis, 1982). are being compared using quantitative and qualitative data. The The ‘psychosis index’ varies significantly (F(1,22)=4,169, p<0,05) with effect on attitudes of educational level is also being assessed. The the experience of separation (1); the ‘phobia/anxiety index’ varies acceptability of the classification system will be assessed amongst significantly (F(1,22)=7,998, p<0,01) with the experience of change maternity service users, providers and voluntary organisations. (2); the ‘positive symptom index’ (F(1,22)=6.297, p<0.02) and the The pilot study assessed women’s ability to manage descriptions ‘somatisation index’ (F(1,22)=6.924, p<0.02) both vary significantly of 30 conditions ranging in severity and age of onset. Twenty-one with the experience of care-giving of that person (4). Contact did not women completed the questionnaire and considered whether they influence any indices studied. In conclusion, some life-history events would a) want a prenatal test for the condition and b) consider a seem to influence negatively the present psychological condition of termination of pregnancy if the test was positive. The results from individuals at-risk and may be an indication for being more cautious these 21 participants will be presented. in the procedures of the pre-symptomatic testing protocol, namely in delivering test results to those individuals. E-P26. Pakistani families’ reactions and attitudes towards ambiguous genitalia E-P24. Adverse effects of predictive testing for M. Ahmed1, C. E. Chu1, C. G. Woods1, G. E. Butler2; Huntington disease underestimated 1St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2The R. Timman1,2, R. Roos1, A. Maat-Kievit3, A. Tibben1; General Infirmary at Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. 1Leiden University Medical Centre, Dept. of Neurology, Leiden, The birth of a baby with ambiguous genitalia is considered both Netherlands, 2Erasmus University Rotterdam, Dept. of Medical a medical and a psychosocial ‘emergency’. Sex assignment in a Psychology & Psychotherapy, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Erasmus newborn with ambiguous genitalia requires multidisciplinary team University Rotterdam, Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, effort. Reactions and attitudes to gender ambiguity may vary from Netherlands. culture to culture. The lack of understanding about parents’ attitudes Objective and cultural differences may lead to misconceptions, affecting the In general, studies on psychological consequences of predictive desired outcome of such cases. Between 1997 to 2001, 44 cases of testing for Huntington disease (HD) revealed few harmful genital abnormality were referred to the Yorkshire Regional Genetics consequences for identified gene-carriers and little relief in non- Service for chromosome analysis. Twenty of these cases were of carriers. Little attention has been paid to the characteristics of 320 EMPAG Posters 321 Pakistani origin. This paper highlights the reactions and attitudes E-P29. Management of women with a family history of of two Pakistani families, which was observed during genetic breast cancer in the UK North West Region: training for counselling. In the Pakistani culture intersexuals are categorised as implementing a vision of the future ‘Hijras’ - a third sex or a third gender. They are not socially accepted M. McAllister1, K. O’Malley2, P. Hopwood3, B. Kerr1, A. Howell4, T. in the wider Pakistani society. These individuals lead their life as Clancy1, K. Farthing1, R. Belk5, G. Evans1; outcasts, in their own socially isolated community. This paper will 1Regional Genetics Service and Academic Group of Medical show how intersexuals are conceptualised in the Pakistani culture. Genetics, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Regional Genetics Service This paper will also highlight an ethical dilemma arising from a and Academic Group of Medical Genetics, St Mary’s Hospital, request of termination of pregnancy from one family with genital Manchester, United Kingdom, 3CRC Psychological Medicine Group, ambiguity. The implications for genetic counselling arising from these Christie Hospital, United Kingdom, 4Dept. of Medical Oncology, cultural differences in attitudes towards ambiguous genitalia will be Christie Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Cancer Genetics discussed. Clinic, Christie Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. Specialist genetics centres in the North West region of the UK, as E-P27. Genetic counselling in oncology: the role of the elsewhere, have experienced an exponential growth in demand for social worker genetic counselling services for women with a family history of breast T. Brouwer1, E. Kaats2; cancer. We report a strategy to devolve moderate risk breast cancer 1VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2The genetic counselling to the cancer unit level through an integrated Netherlands Cancer Institute / Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, education programme for specialist nurses. The training programme Amsterdam, Netherlands. and follow-up support for the clinics are described, and evaluation of In this presentation we share our experience in the decision-making both the training programme and the pilot breast unit Family History process of counsellees who present themselves with hereditary Clinics shows that outcome criteria have been met in all cases. The breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC). Individuals at high risk for HBOC training includes didactic teaching, role play and clinical experience. are faced with a number of complex decisions concerning taking To date, 21 nurses have been fully trained, and 5 breast units are (pre)symptomatic gene mutation testing. Visits to the social worker now running regular dedicated breast cancer Family History Clinics. A provide assistance during this process. Patient Satisfaction Survey indicates that women with breast cancer Studies show that issues to be addressed during these visits, family histories are satisfied with the service provided. A limited include perception of cancer risk, consequences of DNA testing and trainee evaluation has enabled some improvements to be made to compliance with screening. However, these studies do not indicate the course, and to the follow-up support provided to nurses running which tools for psychosocial support may be used. Therefore, their own Family History Clinics. we have developed an approach which includes assessment of psychosocial concerns, the individual’s phase of life, relationships E-P30. Facilitated peer group supervision for genetic with family members, social networks and present coping strategies. counsellors: one year’s experience. Psycho-educational interventions and methods for empowerment are D. Scotcher1, G. Hall1, D. Jerman2; used and focus on highlighting various perspectives of the problem. 1Regional Genetic Service and Academic Group of Medical Genetics, This approach aims to prevent negative effects to psychosocial well Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Independent Consultant Supervisor being. and Counsellor, Manchester, United Kingdom. Since 2000, 512 counsellees have been seen. Most of them are There is an increasing awareness of the potential value of emotionally healthy individuals, suddenly faced with the burden of supervision for genetic counsellors (Kessler, 2000). Kennedy (2000) a genetic predisposition and/or a possible treatment for cancer. The has outlined the merits of different models of supervision: individual, family situation may also be burdensome due to existing cancer or in a peer group, or in a facilitator-led peer group. At the present time a recent cancer related death in relatives. Combining the issues it is not routine practice in the UK for genetic counsellors to receive extracted from the literature with our approach of addressing psycho- funded supervision during working hours. As experienced genetic social concerns has resulted quite consistently in a well-balanced counsellors we set up a facilitated supervision group to provide decision to take a screening test or to postpone the test, being challenge, new dynamics and structure in supervision. This voluntary emotionally prepared to accept the consequences in both cases. supervision group of between 6 and 10 genetic counsellors has met We suggest that our approach to decision making may prevent monthly for 1 1⁄2 hours over the last year in a neutral environment, psychosocial problems in counsellees. facilitated by a humanistic counselling supervisor with an interest in group supervision and no prior experience of genetic counselling. E-P28. Health in intellectual disabilities people of more In this paper, we will describe the process of setting up the group, than 40 years old. who to include, group size, choosing a supervisor, setting a contract, C. Mircher, A. Ravel, M. Conte, H. Blehaut, M. Rethore; defining boundaries and aims and anxieties of the group. We will Centre Médical Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France. report on the themes that have emerged and evolved over time Life expectancy in intellectual disability people is increasing as in reflecting the experiences of the group and its growing maturity, from normal population. In Down syndrome, it was 9 years old in 1930, both the supervisees’ and supervisor’s perspectives. and now more than 60. This increasing life expectancy is in relation to a better medical care E-P31. Email as a communication tool for patients with during infancy, but ageing results in others diseases and in important genetic diseases: the Orphanet experience social problems. We compared health status of three groups of A. Andermann, S. Rastoul, S. Ayme; patients with intellectual disability older than 40: group A: Down INSERM SC11, Paris, France. syndrome (n=112), group B: others chromosomal abnormality (n=7), Web sites and email are nowadays important resources that provide group C: unexplained intellectual disability (n=25). Social data were access to medical information on genetic diseases and advice that compared. These data are retrospective from their medical records. patients and health care professionals may otherwise never receive. Results: As expected, medical and psychiatric complications were Our experience in this area is based on Orphanet, a European more frequent in group A; the observed diseases were in descending internet-based information database on rare diseases which has order: hypothyroidism, cataract, depression, and epilepsy. Some a growing readership now averaging over 75 000 individuals each diseases were seen only in this group (autoimmunity, keratoconus). month, half of them being patients or their relatives. Orphanet Thromboembolic diseases were more frequent than expected (5%). receives an average of 65 unsolicited emails each month with From social data analysis, most of those patients were living in their requests for medical information and advice. We categorised the e- own family, and institutionalisations often happen in an emergency mails according to whether responding according to a predetermined context. To adapt one’s care to one’s personal needs, we created strategy would pose any ethical, professional or legal problems and a special document, “the life notebook” to summarise important which type of response would be most appropriate. All unsolicited information (medical, social, personal...); we present it. e-mails received between January 1, 2001 and June 30, 2001 were included in the audit. Using a general strategy would pose a problem in only 3% of cases and 9% fall into a “grey zone”. With regards to the strategy, the majority of the e-mails could be answered using a EMPAG Posters 322 323 general response (84%), 7% would warrant an explicit suggestion to their potential for creating discriminatory attitudes. see a physician, 7% would require some degree of medical expertise to respond, and 2% remain in the “grey zone” with regards to how to E-P34. The Manchester MSc genetic counselling respond. Producing a strategy for responding to unsolicited emails programme: ten year’s experience has allowed Orphanet to continue to orient and educate database L. Kerzin-Storrar, D. Craufurd, T. Clancy, D. Donnai, R. MacLeod, A. users while reducing the number of difficult dilemmas, reducing Read, D. Scotcher; the workload involved, and most importantly, protecting patients by Regional Genetic Service and Academic Group in Medical Genetics, advising that they seek proper medical care in person from qualified St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. professionals. We report our experience of running the first Masters level genetic counselling course in Europe. The programme provides vocational E-P32. Development of the profession of genetic training for genetic counsellors and has contributed to psychosocial counselling in Europe genetic research. The students and staff have helped to inform the H. Skirton1,2, C. Patch3, C. Barnes4; evolving genetic counselling profession in Europe, including advice 1University of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom, to new training programmes and defining requirements for genetic 2Taunton and Somerset NHS Trust, Taunton, United Kingdom, counsellor training and registration. The two year course initially had 3University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 4Guy’s an annual intake of 4-6 students, but has now expanded to take 8-10 and St Thomas’s NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom. new students each year. 62 students have enrolled on the course Genetic services are established throughout Europe, although (including 14 current students); while most students have a relevant levels of service vary and some have minimal input from non- first degree, they also have varied backgrounds, including nursing medical professionals (genetic nurses or counsellors). Skilled health (18 of 62), community based health or social care experience, and professionals are increasingly needed to interpret the benefits or education. 47 students have completed the course to date. Of these, otherwise of genetic advances for the health of individuals. Non- 37 are currently working as genetic counsellors (30 in the UK, 1 medical genetic counsellors can provide services and so enhance in Ireland, 6 outside Europe), 5 are working in genetic counselling access and equity for the population. To ensure safety, standards of research, 2 are completing further academic qualifications, and professional practice must be established. In the United Kingdom 3 are not currently employed in genetics. Although the science of (UK) and The Netherlands, formal processes have been established human and clinical genetics is an important aspect of the training, a to ensure genetic counsellors can deal with the complex scientific, psychosocial approach to genetic counselling practice and research ethical, social and psychological issues involved in genetic is promoted. This is reflected in the choice of research project with counselling. the majority choosing qualitative studies of patients/families’ views In the UK, a profile of genetic counsellors in current practice has and experiences. Collectively the students’ projects have produced provided a baseline for assessment of the new registration process. a significant contribution to the body of genetic counselling research, Of 150 counsellors who provided data on their current post, through publication and presentation at scientific meetings including professional background, educational preparation and ongoing past EMPAG meetings. training needs, 83% are educated to degree level, and 77% are registered nurses or midwives. Fifty-three percent have a generic E-P35. Setting up a genetic counselling service for the post in a genetic centre, while 24% work in disease-specific posts. Irish traveller population Of concern is the finding that 32% consider they have current unmet J. Turner, A. Green; educational needs. Sixty-nine percent intend to register formally as National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick genetic counsellors. Children, Dublin, Ireland. The experiences of individual countries should contribute to building a The Irish traveller population are a distinct ethnic minority group platform for the development of the genetic counselling profession in with origins going back to the 12th century. They are a small minority Europe. Although health systems, education and cultural differences group, making up 0.5% of the Irish population ( approximately 25,000 make a formalised Europe-wide registration system impractical, it people), however, as they have a history of intermarriage, there are may be possible to develop European guidelines for good practice at least 30 autosomal recessive conditions seen more prevalently that are adaptable to the needs of each country. in the Irish traveller population than the general population . As with other ethnic minorities, genetic health professionals must be sensitive E-P33. Unintended Messages: the ethics of teaching to the social and cultural values of a particular ethnic group before genetic dilemmas genetic counselling to ensure the accessibility and suitability of their H. C. Gooding1, B. Wilfond1, K. Boehm-Frassrand2, B. B. Biesecker1; service. With this in mind, a working group was set up to evaluate 1NHGRI/NIH, Bethesda, MD, 2NIDCR/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United the need for such a service, the accessibility of the current service States. and factors which may influence uptake of such a service. We, The teaching of bioethics often uses challenging cases. However, together with representatives of the Irish traveller organisation, other these cases may cause harmful messages to be received by specific medical professionals and the clergy, have created a development communities. We present as an example the “Case of Dwarfism,” plan to address problems with the need, accessability and suitability developed shortly after the discovery of the common mutation for of our genetic counselling service. Problems highlighted included achondroplasia in 1994. This case describes a couple, both affected maintaining cultural norms, preliteracy, nomadic lifestyle, distrust of with achondroplasia and expecting a child, who plan to terminate authority and preserving individual autonomy against a background of the pregnancy if prenatal diagnosis reveals the fetus is of average strong family unity and strong Roman Catholic beliefs. stature. It is often employed as a teaching case for US health professionals, designed to stimulate debate over their role as the E-P36. Genetic Education and Counseling in Mental gatekeepers of access to genetic testing. It also compels audiences Retardation at Primary Health Care Level - Preventive to examine their views on reproductive freedoms and the limits Strategy in India. of parental autonomy. While this case may challenge stereotypes N. T. Shetty, U. P. Dave; about the appropriate uses of prenatal diagnosis, it potentially Centre for Research in Mental Retardation (CREMERE), Mumbai, fosters a more subtle stereotype about the community it intends to India. serve. It presents people with achondroplasia as motivated to make Rapid advances in medical genetics and DNA technology in reproductive decisions based merely on perceptions of their physical developed countries have emerged with better understanding of the features. Yet, a recent study of people affected with achondroplasia causes and therapy of several genetic disorders. Yet in India, genetic revealed that the majority considered knowing the prenatal diagnosis diagnostics is misperceived as expensive, and concerned with rare of average stature unimportant and that only 2% would consider disorders, partly due to the limited resources and technically skilled termination based on this finding. Using this case to challenge the personnel. view of what makes for a “healthy baby” may actually deny that those CREMERE - a tertiary Genetic Centre therefore organized genetic with achondroplasia simply share the common parental desire for education to community heath volunteers (CHVs) (N>400), working healthy children. While such cases remain important teaching tools in at primary health centres located in slum, semi-urban and rural genetics, we should be aware of our own inadvertent messages and areas. The training covered detection of mental retardation, causes 322 EMPAG Posters 323 (environmental and/or genetic), genetic tests, recurrence risk and Family members who carry the premutation or full mutation for pregnancy monitoring with reproductive options. fragile X have been clinically described to manifest a number It was surveyed that parents were largely unaware about nature of psychological symptoms. These observations are supported of the genetic disorders, hereditary factors and existing genetic with statistically and clinically significant results. Data from two diagnostic services. The trained CHVs successfully detected the MR ratings, a self-report and a spouse report were acquired from two cases with genetic factors and told the parents about the training instruments, a checklist and a clinical interview. Significant elevations and rehabilitation aspects. Monitoring in future pregnancy using triple (p<.05) were found in various subject groups for phobic-anxiety, marker screening and fetal ultrasound were explained. The concept anxiety, psychoticism, depression, social isolation, introversion and of prenatal diagnosis, yet not evolved, could be integrated at the obsessive-compulsive symptoms community level. Psychological factors as a function of age were also statistically We encountered various barriers like religious and social analyzed. For the premutation male group, symptoms of anxiety, misconcepts, family traditions and cultural beliefs. Lack of genetic phobic-anxiety, depression, general distress, and obsessive- team approach, sophisticated laboratory infrastructure, technically compulsive symptoms increase significantly (p<.05) with age. Age- skilled genetic personnel and unawareness of existing genetic related changes in symptoms were not found in other subject groups. services was perceived as the main constraints. Neuropsychological results will be presented on a group (N=8) of Genetic counseling done in a few cases depicting the different socio- older premutation males, aged 62-79. These men have significant economic, emotional and medical problems, and measures adopted executive functioning impairment. Some have neurological difficulties to overcome these will be discussed. Integration of genetic services that include intention tremor. A younger group (N=18) of premutation for prevention of genetic disorders associated with mental retardation males, aged 28 to 63, will also be presented. A subset (N=6) of these was feasible through this community education attempt. younger men also have significant executive functioning deficits. They do not have other neurological difficulties such as an intention E-P37. Joint research on the problem of colourblindness. tremor. A study in Calabria and Basilicata (Continental Southern Italy) E-P39. Analysis of ADHD Subtypes in Fragile X Syndrome A. Tagarelli1, A. Piro1, G. Conforti2, P. Grassivaro Gallo3, P. B. R. O’Connor1, K. Riley2, J. Epstein1, R. Wilson1, K. McKelvie1, A. Lantieri4, M. Panza3, D. Risso5, G. Tagarelli1; Reynolds1, R. Hagerman3, R. Levine3; 1Istituto di Medicina Sperimentale e Biotecnologie-CNR, Mangone 1Children’s Hospital, Denver, CO, United States, 2University of (Cosenza), Italy, 2Ministero Pubblica Istruzione, Cosenza, Italy, Denver, Denver, CO, United States, 3M.I.N.D. Institute, University of 3Dipartimento Psicologia Generale , Univerità degli Studi di Padova, California, Davis, CA, United States. Padova, Italy, 4Dipartimento Scienze della Salute, Istituto Statistica Research in the area of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Medica e Biometria, Università degli Studi di Genova, Genova, Italy, ( ADHD ) has emphasized three distinct subtypes including the 5Dipartimento Psicologia Generale , Univerità degli Studi di Padova, Inattentive Type, the Hyperactive/Impulsive Type and the Combined Genova, Italy. Type. Within the Fragile X (FXS) research, the majority of boys A study of colour-blindness carried out in Calabria and Basilicata with the full mutation exhibit significant attentional problems with (Continental Southern Italy) was based on three disciplines: biology, hyperactivity, while females are more frequently described as having psychology, and pedagogy. In all, 63,933 students (age range 11-14 attentional problems without hyperactivity. The profiles of males years) of both sexes underwent the Ishihara test in order to identify and females with the premutation and mosaic status have not been this visual anomaly. Both Calabria and basilicata showed mean documented. frequency of 4.8%, which was evaluated on 32,322 males. Calabria 118 individuals affected by FXS were assessed for ADHD using the demonstrated a North-South decreasing trend of frequencies, SNAP-IV symptom checklists obtained through spouse report or according with the geography of the three ancient provinces: parent report. Data was divided into comparison groups with regard Cosenza (CS), 5.6%; Catanzaro (CZ), 4.6%; and Reggio Calabria to gender and DNA status. Analyses were conducted to document (RC), 3.9%. The frequencies were significantly different among and describe the subtypes as they relate to gender and DNA and to the three provinces: CS vs. CZ, p<0.001; CZ vs. RC, p<0.025; CS determine individual patterns of ADHD subtypes. vs. RC, p<0.0005. The answers to a psychological questionnaire Limited numbers of premutation females and males, and mosaic (18 questions) from 831 colour-blind students were significantly males met clinical criteria for ADHD. Premutation female inattentive different from those of the 34,309 orthocromatics chosen according scores were significantly greater than hyperactive/impulsive scores. to statistical criteria. Statistical quantitative analyses were made by [n=37; (p=.009)], while premutation males inattentive scores were Kruskal-Wallis test, Friedman test, and Sign test; qualitative statistical not significantly different than hyperactive/impulsive scores [n=15; analyses were made by chi square test, and that of McNemar. (p=.11)]. Mosaic males did not demonstrate a significant difference A pedagogical questionnaire (13 questions) of 3,082 teachers of between subtypes. [n=13; (p=.08)]. A high percentage of females and different disciplines confirmed their knowledge of colour-blindness as males with the full mutation met clinical criteria for ADHD. Females an anomaly (39%), with 58% confirming their knowledge came only and males with the full mutation demonstrated higher inattentive through hearsay, while the rest admitted to not know anything about scores than hyperactive/impulsive scores: females [n=20; (p=.0004)]; colour-blindness males [n=27;(p=.0001)]. Research financied by Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio di Calabria e Lucania (Cosenza) E-P40. Emotional well-being after a termination for abnormality: the impact of obstetric and social factors E-P38. Psychological and Neuropsychological Findings H. E. Statham1, W. Solomou1, J. Green2; in Adults with the Premutation and Full Mutation for 1Centre for Family Research, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Mother and Infant Research Unit, University of Leeds, Fragile X Syndrome United Kingdom. R. Wilson1, J. H. Epstein1, K. McKelvie1, J. Grisgby2, H. Nagamoto3, This paper will use data collected from 148 women during interviews S. Harris4, A. Reynolds1, R. Hagerman4; and through postal questionnaires in the year after they made the 1The Child Development Unit, Children’s Hospital, Denver, CO, 2Dept. decision to terminate a pregnancy after the diagnosis of a fetal of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, abnormality. Most of these parents were at no particular risk when CO, 3Dept of Psychiatry, University of Colorado Health Sciences they became pregnant and malformations were discovered as a Center, Denver, CO, 4MIND Institute, University of Davis Medical result of routine antenatal care. The relationship between scores on Center, Sacramento, CA. measures of grief and depression and obstetric, social and personal Emotional and neuropsychological test results will be presented from characteristics has been investigated using multivariate methods. a three-year genotype-phenotype study of families with a member The grief response of mothers is variable but overall, emotional diagnosed with Fragile X Syndrome. Variables were collected well being improved over time. The principal obstetric variables, from American (N=172) and Australian (N=109) adult subjects. gestational age, method of termination and severity of malformation Subjects were administered a battery of cognitive, emotional, and were not related to emotional well being at any time in the year neuropsychological measures. Family members found to have neither following the termination. We have found no relationship between the premutation or full mutation for Fragile X served as controls.EMPAG Posters 324 325 aspects of care during and after a termination and women‘s positive correlations between the measurements (a-c) except for the subsequent feelings. Aspects of how the diagnosis was made, comparison scale (d). Respondents reported a moderate level of specifically satisfaction with getting the diagnosis and ease or certainty for each response mode. They felt more certain in using the difficulty of getting a diagnosis were independently related to comparison scale compared to the other measurements. mothers‘ feelings after a termination. The emotional support that women perceived they were getting from their partner was strongly E-P43. Understanding inheritance: kinship connections related to mood both in the short and long term after a termination. A and genetics year after a termination, there was a significant relationship between A. M. Wilson, M. P. M. Richards; subsequent pregnancies and women‘s feelings. Centre for Family Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom. The implications of these findings for the care and support of women Discussions of lay and professional scientific knowledge suggest undergoing a termination for abnormality will be discussed in this a wide range of possible interactions between people’s existing paper. understanding of particular situations and those they may draw on from scientific work (Wynne, 1991). Lay ideas about inheritance E-P41. Attitudes towards genetic testing in a may be developed early in childhood in the context of the family representative German sample. The influence of and grounded in concepts of kinship, reinforced by everyday social sociodemographic characteristics activities and relationships. Such ideas might be particularly resistant H. Berth, A. Dinkel, F. Balck; to change and may conflict with Mendelian explanations, making the Universitätsklinikum Dresden, Medizinische Psychologie, Dresden, uptake of these scientific accounts of inheritance difficult (Richards Germany. 1996, 1998, Richards and Ponder 1996). This hypothesis has Background: Pre- and postnatal genetic testing have become a implications for genetic counselling, the teaching of genetics and widely used means for the assessment of individual risk for hereditary public knowledge in general. diseases. In Germany, virtually no empirical data concerning attitudes The hypothesis is being investigated in a qualitative study of towards gene tests have been available, so far. young peoples’ connections between concepts of inheritance, Purpose: In order to explore the attitudes of the German public, we genetics, family and kinship. Interviews use open questions, which conducted a survey regarding general attitudes towards genetic encourage participants to explore, in their own words, the concepts testing in a sample representative for the German population (N = of inheritance, genetics and kinship; some specific questions focus 2.076). on participants’ familiarity with genetic terms; a series of vignettes Methods: We used a subset of 13 statements out of a larger examines issues of duty and obligations between family members. questionnaire set used in a Finnish survey. The items related to Forty young people and parents of young children have been approval, disapproval, and concern for genetic testing. interviewed to date. Results: The results reveal that there is wide acceptance of The main research questions are: genetic testing in the German population, about two-thirds hold a a)What are the participants’ concepts of inheritance and of the positive view. Yet, possible disadvantages are also recognised. A processes by which inherited characteristics are transmitted by factor analytic analysis of the items yielded three distinct factors parents to their children? (approval, disapproval, concern for genetic testing). The MANOVA b)What are the participants’ concepts of kinship and how are these model revealed differences concerning attitudes towards genetic related to concepts of inheritance? testing between various sociodemographic groups. The clearest This poster will illustrate the findings from interviews so far differences emerged for religious affiliation. Members of a religious completed. group consistently indicated a less favourable view of gene tests. Furthermore, subjects who had attained a higher educational level E-P44. Psychological well-being in individuals requesting showed ambivalent attitudes, i.e. they scored higher on both approval pre-symptomatic testing for late-onset neurological and disapproval. diseases and controls Discussion: In general, there is widespread support for genetic testing Â. M. T. Leite, C. Paúl, J. Sequeiros; in the German population, but the approval of gene tests is not as Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal. high as in Finland. Similarly to a Finnish general population study, Psychological issues are important for counselling and intervention we found influences of sociodemographic characteristics on general in late-onset diseases, namely in the process of adjustment to the acceptance of gene tests. results of genetic testing. Our aim was to evaluate psychological wellbeing in persons coming for pre-symptomatic testing. E-P42. Measurements of Breast Cancer Risk Perception: We studied 30 at risk-individuals (15 men/15 women), aged 18- An Ongoing Study in the General Public. 70 (mean 26.9 years), who requested testing, when compared to F. Reitz, J. Barth, A. Helmes, J. Bengel; 200 controls from the general population, using the “Psychological University of Freiburg, Institute of Psychology, Rehabilitation General Wellbeing” scale of Dupuy (22 itens, 6 subscales). Psychology, Freiburg, Germany. The study-group included persons at risk for familial amyloid Breast cancer risk perception is an important predictor of the intention polyneuropathy (24), Huntington disease (5) and Machado-Joseph to obtain predictive genetic testing for breast cancer risk. However, disease (1). Both individuals at-risk and controls were currently many women tend to overestimate their own risk. To understand healthy. this bias it is necessary to take problems of measurement into Pre-symptomatic individuals showed better indicators regarding (1) consideration. Many studies found that open-ended probability scales humour (F=10,229; p<0.002) and (2) health and wellbeing (F=4,676; lead to an increased use of the 50% option, maybe as an expression p<0.032), but not (3) concern with health. This was in agreement with of having difficulties with understanding and using probabilities. This the item analysis, which was significant for self-control (F= 10,991; could lead to problems in the comparison of empirical (i.e. Gail) and p<0.001), nervousness (F=4,345; p<0.038), melancholy (F=4,759; personal risk estimates. p<0.030), tension (F=23,955; p<0.000), sadness (F=6,008; p<0.015), In the context of the ongoing study AttRisk a random sample restfulness (F=5,148; p<0.024), vigour (F=20,058; p<0.000), anxiety of women of the general public recieved an information letter. (F=6,442; p<0.012), happiness (F=6,845; p<0.009), and stress Women completed a brief telephone survey that assessed eligibility (F=12,689; p<0.000). In all these, the pre-symptomatic group had criteria and risk status. Eligible participants were mailed a longer more favourable indicators of psychological well-being than controls. questionnaire and a consent form with a return envelope. Four One may have expected that individuals at-risk who came for pre- different measurements were used for breast cancer risk estimates: symptomatic testing were more concerned about their health and a) opend-ended probability scale b) visual analog scale, c) 7-point- showed more adverse indicators regarding their psychological scale and d) 5-point-scale to assess the personal risk in comparison wellbeing. Our results, however, proved to be different, and may to peers. Additionally, they were asked how certain they were in each suggest (a) a defensive and denial attitude from the group of judgement. individuals at-risk, and/or that (b) these are psychologically more To date, data from 218 respondents has been collected (response resilient, what may have motivated adhesion to pre-symptomatic rate: 59%). About 84% were women with neither FDRs nor BC. testing, through their own auto-selection. About 20% reported a personal risk of 50%. There were strong 324 EMPAG Posters 325 E-P45. An appraisal of the German version of the Genetic Participants in a breast/ovarian cancer family study were offered Knowledge Index (GKI) results from BRCA1/2 mutation analysis. 70 individuals (58%) A. Dinkel1, H. Berth1, F. Kreuz2, F. Balck1; completed this survey of which 46% chose not to receive their test 1Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Medizinische Psychologie, results. The most important factor influencing the decision about Dresden, Germany, 2Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Institut receiving results was the desire for specific cancer risk information, für Klinische Genetik, Dresden, Germany. followed by having information for children, concern about genetic Background: As more reliable and low-cost gene tests become discrimination for children, and use of results to help with cancer available, knowledge of genetic concepts is increasingly relevant. screening decisions. Using the information to assist in decisions Adequate understanding of gene technology is necessary to provide about chemoprevention, prophylactic surgery, childbearing, informed consent to genetic testing. Furthermore, genetic knowledge concern about worry/anxiety, difficulty finding time to get results and is necessary for participation in the public discourse about the further competing demands of caring for an ill relative were ranked as less advancement of gene technology. important. There were no differences in knowledge of basic cancer Purpose: In order assess lay people’s basic genetic knowledge, genetic concepts between those who received and did not receive Furr & Kelly (1997) developed the Genetic Knowledge Index (GKI). results. Those who chose not to receive results considered concern We translated the items of the GKI, and we aimed to investigate its that results might cause worry/anxiety and difficulty finding time for usefulness in the German population. genetic counseling more important and obtaining specific cancer risk Methods: The GKI which comprises five true-false-items was information less important (p values <.02). These results suggest administered to N = 420 individuals. This complete sample consisted that the desire to obtain more specific cancer risk information was of three subsamples: n = 131 persons from the general population, n the most significant factor associated with the decision to obtain test = 129 medical students, and n = 160 students from other faculties. results. Concern about results causing worry/anxiety and finding Results: The total score of the GKI discriminated between the three time for genetic counseling were not ranked as important but were groups. However, the internal consistency of the GKI was very low. associated with the decision not to receive results. Implications for There were no significant correlations between the GKI score and genetic counseling will be discussed. external criteria (self-reported interest in genetics, self-evaluated general knowledge of genetics, attitudes towards genetic testing, E-P48. Changes in Approach to Children with Down and a genetic knowledge index based on questions from the medical syndrome in the Cyprus Society over the Past Seven state examination). Furthermore, the factorial solution was different Years. from the original study. E. Spanou Aristidou1, A. Kotti Kitromilidou2, V. Christophidou Discussion: Because of the weaknesses in reliability and validity, the Anastasiadou1,2; German version of the GKI seems not to be an appropriate tool for 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, assessing genetic knowledge. Further refinement is necessary. We 2Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. propose to add further items covering a wider range of genetics and Cyprus is a small island in the eastern Mediterranean with a thus to increase the content validity of the questionnaire. population of approximately 700,000. This constitutes it a small and rather closed society. In the past, differences were stigmatized and in E-P46. The behavioural phenotype of Bardet-Biedl particular individuals with Down syndrome tended to be isolated and syndrome institutionalized. P. L. Beales1, S. Barnett2, S. Reilly3, L. Carr1, I. Ojo4, T. Charman1; Seven years ago the general genetics services were established 1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2University on the island and were offered primarily by a clinical geneticist and College London, London, United Kingdom, 3LaTrobe University, a genetic counsellor. Also through these new services a program of Melbourne, Australia, 4St. George’s Hospital, Hornchurch, Essex, public education was developed. These two factors in conjunction United Kingdom. were responsible for the change in perception of Down syndrome Background: within society. Although behavioural characteristics, including disinhibited behaviour, The majority of babies born with Trisomy 21 were referred to an inability to recognise social cues and obsessive and compulsive the genetic services so that support was offered initially and tendencies, have been noted in individuals with Bardet-Biedl subsequently guidelines for early intervention were established. syndrome (BBS), to date no studies have systematically studied the Most of these children are now attending regular schooling as behavioural phenotype. opposed to being institutionalized. They are integrating well with their Method: peers and the education system is slowly, but surely adapting to cater Parents of 21 children with BBS seen for a multidisciplinary clinical to their needs. assessment completed standardised measures of behaviour. We believe that the same factors that caused the stigmatization, the Results: size and closeness of the population, were beneficial to the rather Children with BBS showed elevated levels of internalising problems quick change in approach of this society. including feeling withdrawn and anxious/depressed. They also had elevated levels of social, thought and attention problems. A significant E-P49. Trisomy 16q: qualitative analysis of behaviour minority scored in the clinical range on a measure of autistic phenotype symptoms, although none met clinical diagnostic criteria. The children M. Rubczewska1, A. T. Midro1, L. Anderlik2, S. Stengel-Rutkowski3; also had elevated scores on a measure of repetitive behaviour and 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical Akademy in Bialystok, the majority was reported to be obsessive by their parents. Bialystok, Poland, 2Kinderzentrum, University of Munich, Munich, Conclusions: Germany, 3University of Munich, Munich, Germany. These findings indicate considerable clinical need that had been Trisomy 16q, a rare finding in clinical genetics, is yet poorly unmet in many families. Further, they suggest that BBS has a understood in terms of behaviour phenotype. Starting with a single characteristic behavioural phenotype that may be related to mutation case of partial trisomy 16q with dysmorphic, clinical, and cytogenetic type. traits, we undertook a detailed qualitative study of a behavioural profile of trisomy 16q. We performed the qualitative analysis of E-P47. Decision Making Factors Associated with Whether static images extracted from a video recording of a therapist-guided to Receive BRCA1/2 Genetic Test Results playwork was conducted in a structured environment according K. A. Calzone1, A. Eisen2, K. Armstrong1, J. Stopfer1, M. Racioppo1, principles and philosophy of Maria Montessori. Our observation J. C. Coyne1, B. L. Weber1; revealed that the tested persons were provided with a wide range 1University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, of psychomotoric skills ( the ability to follow movements of second 2Hamilton Regional Cancer Center, Hamilton, ON, Canada. persons or moving objects or to keep the attention focused despite Study Design: Retrospective study of individuals offered research involuntary movements or an ability to react to repeating invitations BRCA1/2 mutation analysis results. to act, sound or touch), social abilities ( the ability to establish eye Instrumentation: Self administered questionnaire assessing: 1) contact or the ability to display an outward reaction in response to factors involved in the decision whether to receive results; 2) basic demonstrated objects or the ability to approach other persons or cancer genetics knowledge. objects) and emotional capacities ( manifestations of proudness, EMPAG Posters 326 327 boredom or interests or the ability to focus the attention on sound particular, the latter understood as a causally oriented classification or the ability to use the therapist‘s support). This knowledge on on the one hand and as an assignment to the specialty human behavioural features and prospective development modalities of genetics within the realm of medicine on the other. children with trisomy 16q is important for genetic counselling in order Answers of study participants reflected the present prominence of to determine the development prognosis. human genetics for the diagnosis of monogenetic diseases and diseases with a well established mode of inheritance; they highly E-P50. The Evolution of Clinical Genetic Referrals in overestimated the importance of human genetics in the diagnosis of Cyprus Over the Past Seven Years. multifactorial diseases and in therapy and prevention of disease with V. Christophidou Anastasiadou1,2, A. Kotti Kitromilidou2, E. Spanou a known genetic aetiology. The teaching of medicine has to place Aristidou1; more emphasis on the development of a realistic estimation of human 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, genetics for medical practice in general. 2Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. Clinical genetic services, other than those offered for the E-P52. Feeling at risk: How do women express Thalassemias, were established in Cyprus in 1995. themselves? This clinic covers the whole population of the Cyprus Republic S. van Dijk, W. Otten, M. Zoeteweij, D. Timmermans, C. van (population 700.00), and for a vast variety of disorders. Asperen, N. van Duijn, M. Breuning, J. Kievit; During the first years the referrals from physicians and other health Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands. professionals were limited. One of the primary reasons for this was Introduction probably a lack of relevant education. Gradually, there has been a Although genetic risk counselling improves the accuracy of women’s significant increase in the rate of physicians requesting the services perceptions of the risk of developing breast cancer, many women of clinical genetics. Referrals have increased particularly from the still tend to over -or underestimate their risk. To understand the way pediatric specialties and other health professionals caring for children in which women perceive their risk, we collected interview data of with special needs. women who applied for genetic counselling. We assess how women We are presenting the data illustrating this increase and will discuss verbalise their personal risk. Furthermore, we investigate how the risk the factors that we believe have changed the approach of health information provided in the counselling influences the way women professianals towards the clinical genetic services. spontaneously express their risk. Finally, we inquire what being at risk for familial breast cancer means to these women. E-P51. Concept and Understanding of Disease in the Method Genetics Era We collected data of 86 women who participated in a face-to-face E. Hoffmann, B. Press, J. Pelz; interview after their genetic consult on breast cancer. Women were Reformstudiengang Medizin, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany. asked to describe their personal risk in their own words, and were The phrase ‘genetic disease’ is heard on a daily basis, but the invited to reflect on the meaning of the risk. In addition, the clinical concept ‘genetic disease’ is far from clear. Most human diseases geneticists completed a checklist to document the information have a complex aetiology, involving genetic, physiological, provided in each individual consultation. psychological, etc. factors on their causal pathway. Genetic Results explanations of a disease are highly context dependent (state of Preliminary analysis shows that the majority of the women chose knowledge, background of nongenetic factors, study population). to use a verbal format to express their personal risk. Many women Even with a complete knowledge of aetiology a classification of spontaneously mention negative emotions associated with the risk; diseases in terms of cause would not be satisfactory. Diseases have “I’m afraid to die young”; or “It’s frustrating to go on living with an to be described in terms of aetiology as well as in the pathology and uncertainty like this”. Furthermore, many women reflect on actions pathophysiology which results. to escape the risk: “no evening passes by, without me checking [my Six groups of students of medicine differing in their level of clinical breasts]”. and theoretical experience (1st, 2nd, 3rd and 6th year of medical Discussion education, 300 from the regular curriculum, 100 from the reformed We will discuss the results with respect to psychological distress curriculum) were interviewed by a structured questionnaire focussing and coping with the risk for familial breast cancer, and whether this on their concept of disease in general and genetic disease in implies recommendations for counselling.