Plenary Lectures 54 Abstracts of sulfur metabolism- enriched the knowledge of human biology in at least two areas: i/it identified homocysteine as a possible risk factor for common complex diseases such as arteriosclerosis; ii/ epidemiological PL01. Garrod´s inborn errors of metabolism: Lessons from a studies suggests that the common practice may in fact identify only defective heme pathway a fraction of individuals affected by this diseases, which calls for re- evaluation of newborn screening programs. P. Martásek; Department of Pediatrics and Center of Applied Genomics, First School of PL03. TEL/AML1 fusion gene in childhood acute lymphoblastic Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. leukaemia Heme, iron-containing tetrapyrrole, is indispensable for life. It is utilized by a whole host of proteins involved in numerous cellular processes J. Trka; such as oxygen transport (hemoglobin), respiration (cytochrome CLIP – Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, Department of Paediatric oxidase), vascular homeostasis (nitric oxide synthases), detoxification Haematology and Oncology, 2nd Medical School, Charles University, Prague, (cytochromes P450), and cell death (cytochrome c). Heme is produced Czech Republic. in the mitochondrion by a complex cellular machinery comprising eight Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) is the most common malignancy enzymes that are evolutionarily conserved from bacteria to humans. in childhood. The cryptic translocation t(12;21), discovered only in Mutations in genes encoding the heme biosynthetic pathway enzymes 1994 and resulting in TEL/AML1 chimaeric gene, is the single most lead to diseases broadly classifed as porphyrias. In the past two frequent non-random chromosomal aberration in childhood ALL decades these genes have been cloned and the disease-causing (~25%). It was shown to be specifically related to the leukaemias with mutations have been identified. We have established a web site (www. the onset in the pre-school age. Twin and backtracking studies showed porphyhria_europe.com) that details the efforts to diagnose and treat that TEL/AML1-positive leukaemias originate in utero and the TEL/ porphyrias. In this presentation I will focus on the antepenultimate step AML1 fusion was later identified as a first leukaemogenic event. The of this pathway in which deficiency of coproporphyrinogen oxidase analysis of the non-translocated TEL allele deletions proposed this (CPO) activity results in hereditary coproporphyria (HCP) - an autosomal aberration as an ultimate leukaemia-triggering hit. Both partner genes dominant disorder characterized by accute attacks (severe abdominal of the fusion are important for the development and maintenance of pain, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and / or skin lesions). First, we normal haematopoiesis. The TEL part of the fusion protein contains cloned the cDNA and characterized the gene (3q11.2) encoding CPO. domains interacting with mSin3A, N-CoR and HDAC-3 corepressors. Next, we purified, crystallized, and determined the novel structure of Consequently, TEL/AML1 is supposed to negatively regulate the CPO to gain insights into the structural basis of HCP. Thus, mutations expression of genes that, under normal conditions, are transactivated primarily destablize molecular interactions that are critical for activity. by AML1, thus affecting the differentiation during haematopoiesis Since prokaryotes employ two different gene products to mediate CPO by chromatin remodelling via association with histone deacetylases activity, we hypothesized that an ortholog of the second bacterial gene (HDAC). Indeed, TEL/AML1-positive cells show dose-dependent may be found in humans. A bioinformatics approach validated this arrest in proliferation and also the maturation drift after treatment with prediction and led to the discovery of a gene called RSAD1 (radical S- HDAC inhibitors, thus supporting this hypothesis. adenosyl methionine domain 1). Interestingly, RSAD1’s mitochondrial The prognosis of children with TEL/AML1-positive ALL tends to be function is not redundant with CPO. We have since discovered that better-than-average, however, relapses occur also in this subgroup it is involved in cardiovascular development. Therefore, a detailed in approximately 15% of children. Since the response to the initial study of heme biosythetic pathway enzymes have not only resulting in treatment is the main predictor of outcome in childhood ALL, molecular insights into porphyrias, but have provided leads regarding quantitative detection of TEL/AML1 transcript in early phases of mitochondrial homeostasis mechanisms. treatment can serve as suitable tool for the risk stratification of patients. Detectable minimal residual disease predicts relapse in children with PL02. Garrod´s inborn errors of metabolism: Lessons from TEL/AML1-positive ALL both on front-line treatment and after stem cell homocystinuria transplantation. These findings have important clinical implications for the determination of prognosis and potentially also for the treatment of V. Kozich; 25% of children with ALL. They also represent the progress in the field Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University, First Faculty of of paediatric acute leukaemias during the past decade. Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. Four decades ago homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase PL04. New Mouse Model of Human Aneuploidy syndrome (CBS) has been described as a typical inborn error of metabolism partially resembling the Marfan syndrome. As extremely high J. Forejt1, R. Blatný1, M. Ort2, T. Vacik1, J. Bures2; concentrations of plasma homocysteine result in vascular pathology, 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, mild hyperhomocysteinemia has been subsequently considered a risk Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Physiology, Academy of Sciences of the factor for arteriosclerosis and other complex diseases. In the past ten Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. years our Prague team had an opportunity to explore selected facets Aneuploidy syndromes, such as Down syndrome, represent complex of CBS deficiency, some of which are discussed below. developmental disorders with the known cause, but with largely The CBS gene-located at chromosome 21- spans 28 kbp and unknown mechanisms that link the triplicated chromosome with contains numerous non-pathogenic variants with population specific abnormal developmental/physiological traits. The hypothesis of frequencies. Analyzes of more than 550 patient-derived CBS alleles dosage-sensitive genes explains the abnormal phenotype as a specific worldwide revealed over 130 different pathogenic mutations, which are consequence of elevated expression of a subset of triplicated genes, deposited at http://www.uchsc.edu/cbs. As pathogenic mechanisms in while the amplified developmental instability hypothesis posits a rather CBS deficiency are only partially understood a substantial part of our non-specific effect of a large number of overexpressed genes. One work was aimed at exploring molecular consequences of selected way to distinguish between these two hypotheses is to compare, at the mutants: i/we observed that some - but not all- RNA molecules phenotype and gene expression levels, unrelated partial trisomies that carrying premature termination codons are unstable owing to the differ in size as well as in the number of triplicated genes. The existing rapid degradation by nonsense-mediated decay; ii/our current work is mouse models are not sufficient in this respect because they triplicate focused on studying misfolding of mutants as a common mechanism overlapping subsets of orthologs to human chromosome 21. In this in homocystinuria. Homocystinuria is traditionally perceived as a rare study we investigated an independent mouse model of segmental disease with worldwide incidence of 1:355,000. However, recent trisomy, Ts43H, which triplicates 30 Mb of proximal chromosome 17, studies based on detecting heterozygotes for selected mutations in encompassing >300 known genes of ENSEMB 29 database. This anonymous newborn samples suggest that CBS deficiency may be trisomy shows a limited overlap with Ts65Dn segmental trisomy (40- considerably more common throughout Europe with expected birth 70 genes) and no overlap with other mouse models. The Ts43H mice prevalence of homozygotes ranging between 1:6,400 in Norway and exhibited spatial learning deficits in Morris Water Maze similar to those 1:15,000 in the Czech Republic. observed in Ts65Dn. qRT PCR of the brain expression of 20 genes Intense research of CBS deficiency- a supposedly rare inborn error inside the trisomic interval and of 12 genes lying outside on Chr17Plenary Lectures 55 revealed 1.2-fold average increase of mRNA levels of triplicated genes by colchicine, to the continuation of translation by gentamycin in and 0.9-fold average downregulation of genes beyond the border of cystic fibrosis and hopefully to correction of abnormal splicing by trisomy. We propose that systemic comparison of gene expression antisense RNA in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (at least in vitro). levels with global phenotype (phenome) data between unrelated Similarly, it is now possible 1) to clear a toxic compound (benzoate in segmental trisomies, such as Ts65Dn and Ts43H, will help to disclose urea cycle diseases, cysteamin in cystinosis), 2) to lock an impaired the affected functional networks leading from the triplicated sequences pathway (NTBC in tyrosinemia type 1), 3) to activate a pathway to the complex developmental anomalies. (fibrates in carnitine palmityl transferase 2 deficiency), 4) to inhibit a Vacík, T., Ort, M., Gregorová, S., Strnad, P., Blatný, R. Conte, N., function (bisphophonates in osteogenesis imperfecta), 5) to replace Bradley, A., Bureš, J., Forejt. J.: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.102:4500- a function (melatonin in Smith Magenis syndrome), or to protect a 4505 2005. targeted function (idebenone in free-radical induced oxphos injury in Friedreich ataxia. Based on this variety of procedures, it is clear that PL05. Pharmacogenetics of drug metabolising enzymes. understanding the exact disease mechanism can help devising original Implications for a safer and more efficient drug therapy therapeutic approaches to fight genetic diseases. One should not M. Ingelman-Sundberg; ignore any of these approaches and one should not put "all his eggs Division of Molecular Toxicology, IMM, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Swe- in one basket". Finally, while genotyping is not presently required for den. diagnosing a genetic disease, identifying the disease causing mutation Drug treatment is in many cases ineffective. Non responders and (splicing, nonsense..) might soon become mandatory to devise "à la patients suffering fram adverse drug reactions is estimated to cost carte" therapeutic strategies. the US society 100 billion USD and over 100,000 deaths per year. Many drug transporters are polymorphic. In addition, the majority of PL08. Asthma phase I and phase II dependent drug metabolism is carried out by J. Kere; polymorphic enzymes which can cause abolished, quantitatively or Dep.of Biosciences at Novum & Clinical Research Center, Karolinska Institutet, qualitatively altered or enhanced drug metabolism. Stable duplication, Huddinge, Sweden. multiduplication or amplification of active genes, most likely in response No abstract received. to dietary components that have resulted in a selection of alleles with multiple non-inducible genes, has been described. Several examples PL09. Genes and mechanisms in type 1 diabetes exist where subjects carrying certain alleles suffer from a lack of drug J. Todd; efficacy due to ultrarapid metabolism caused by multiple genes or by Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflam- induction of gene expression, or, alternatively, adverse effects from the mation Laboratory, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of drug treatment due to the presence of defective alleles. The evolutionary Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. aspect of the genetic polymorphism in these genes includes genetic At least 90% of cases of type 1 diabetes who are absolutely insulin- drift but also selection because of environmental stress.The information dependent since diagnosis suffer from an autoimmune destruction about the role of polymorphic drug transporters and drug receptors for of the insulin-producing beta cells of the pancreas. There are four efficiency of drug therapy is scarcer, although promising examples are confirmed susceptibility genes in type 1 diabetes, the HLA class II seen in drug treatment of e.g. asthma. In addition, certain polymorphic complex, insulin (INS), CTLA4 and PTPN22, with evidence for a fifth, genes can be used as markers for optimisation of the drug therapy. It is mapping to the CD25 region (Vella, A et al Am J Hum Genet, 76, Epub, likely that predictive genotyping in the future will be of benefit in 20-30 2005). The known functions of these four genes, and their unequivocal % of drug treatment and thereby allows for prevention of causalities association with the disease, indicates that a major pathway in beta- as a cause of ADRs and thus improves the health for a significant cell destruction is the breakdown in immune tolerance to preproinsulin. fraction of the patients. Recently several important clinical examples Further gene discovery will identify what other pathways are involved have been given. In the lecture an overview of the current status in the (Wang, W et al Nat Rev Genet, 6, 109-118, 2995). For example, field will be given. we have evidence that the HLA class I gene, HLA-B, in associated independently of the class II genes, which would substantiate the PL06. The future of pharmacogenetics assumed direct involvement of CD8 cytotoxic T cells in disease and A. Roses; could perhaps implicate natural killer cell activity. Knowledge of gene Genetics Research, GlaxoSmithkline, Research Triangle Park, NC, United association has also begun to help in the first steps towards sub- States. classification of type 1 diabetes: we have found that 11% of paediatric No abstract received. cases of type 1 diabetes have autoantibodies to the autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD)-associated antigen, thyroid peroxidase, and PL07. Advances in human genetics: what benefits for the that the T cell immunoregulatory CTLA-4 gene acts almost exclusively patients? in this smaller subgroup of patients. These results indicate that AITD- A. Munnich; complicated type 1 diabetes is different in an aetiological way to the Hopital des Enfants Malades Necker, Paris, France. isolated form of the disease, in which the effects of the soluble form of The recent advances of human genetics have raised considerable CTLA-4 (Ueda, H et al Nature 423, 506-511, 2003) are greatly reduced, hopes for a better future of patients with genetic diseases. Yet, apart perhaps by the action in these cases of other, as yet undiscovered from early diagnosis and prevention, have disease gene identification genes, that bypass or mask the negative T cell signalling component improved their condition and changed their life ? In fact, while gene of the AITD-complicated sub-class of the disease. therapy has riveted most of attention/investments with hitherto limited impact on their condition, it appears that understanding the disease PL10. Genetics of Crohn disease, an archetypal inflammatory mechanisms has occasionally fostered spectacular improvement in barrier disease their lifespan and quality of life. This includes 1) the dietary management S. Schreiber; of recently identified metabolic diseases (CDGIb), 2) their occasional Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, University Hospital Schleswig Holstein, responsivensess to vitamins, cofactors (quinones, carnitine) and Kiel, Germany. lacking compounds (creatine-responsive mental retardation), 3) Chronic inflammatory disorders such as Crohn disease, atopic eczema, organ transplantation (kidney, liver, heart, bone marrow) and neuro- asthma, and psoriasis are triggered by hitherto unknown environmental electrostimulation (torsion dystonia, DYT1), 4) protein engineering factors, acting on the background of some polygenic susceptibility. (hemophilia, diabetes, growth hormone deficiency, congenital adenal The share the common theme of inflammation of barrier organs. This hyperplasia), 5) enzyme replacement therapy (Gaucher, Fabry, includes similarities in clinical manifestations, a chronic relapsing Pompe, Hurler disease), and, 6) conventional pharmacology. Indeed, character of disease and a striking overlap in disease pathophysiology. elucidating the molecular bases of diseases has led to successful Recent technological advances have allowed to unravel the genetic re-expression of fetal hemoglobin by hydroxyurea for thalassemias etiology of these and other complex diseases. Using Crohn disease and sickle cell anemia and improvement of periodic familial fever as an example, it will be shown how the discovery of susceptibilityConcurrent Symposia 56 genes furthers our understanding of the disease mechanisms involved in MAD and RD, secondary, due to defects in ZMPSTE24, encoding a and, ultimately, will give rise to new therapeutic developments. The metalloproteinase involved in processing of Lamin A precursors. While long-term goal of such endeavors is to develop targeted prophylactic LMNA mutations responsible of most laminopathies, as well as of the strategies that most likely will concern the molecular interaction on the less severe segmental progeroid syndromes LIRLLC, atypical WS, mucosal surface between the genome and the microbial metagenome MAD, affect both Lamins A and C, LMNA mutations responsible of the of a patient. more severe HGPS and RD, specifically affect Lamin A. HGPS and RD have recently been shown to be due to intranuclear accumulation PL11. Identifying the genes encoding longevity of unprocessed, truncated or wild type, prelamin A, respectively due R. G. J. Westendorp1, P. E. Slagboom2; to intrinsic lack of key post-translational processing sites or lack of 1Department of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Leiden University Medical Hospital, ZMPSTE24. These accumulated precursors seem to have dominant Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Department of Molecular epidemiology, Leiden Uni- negative effects on residual wild type proteins' function. Furthermore, versity Medical Hospital, Leiden, The Netherlands. it has been recently showed in vitro and in vivo, that a reduction of the Each species has its own characteristic life span but within a species amounts of prelamin A produced by the cells can spectacularly reverse individual life spans vary widely. This variation is in part the result the cellular pathological phenotype. These observations constitute of an individual ability to avoid or cope with internal and external indeed an exciting hope towards targeted molecular therapeutic damage. For example, single point mutations in the insulin-signaling strategies in patients. pathway of C. elegans can lower the rate of aging and lengthen life span up to nearly five times as long as the wild type worms. These experimental data suggest that a major part of the age-related changes S01. Systems biology in cardiovascular disease are under coordinated genetic control. Twin studies have shown that approximately 25% in the variation of human lifespan is explained by F. Cambien; genetic factors. INSERM U525, University Paris VI 'Pierre et Marie Curie', Paris, France. The search into the genetic loci that explain the inter-individual No abstract received. differences in human longevity has peculiar characteristics. By virtue of the extremeness of the phenotype, linkage studies in extended S02. Bioinformatics of signalling pathways families are cumbersome as members are often too young to determine R. Eils; their phenotypic status, whereas others whose status is beyond doubt Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center have already deceased. An ordinary association study also generates (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. problems as the long-lived cases originate from a birth cohort that has No abstract received. never been defined and of which the controls have already deceased. When a younger control group is used for comparison a particular form S03. Integral Membrane Proteins and Visual Defects of bias is introduced as these have been selected for fertility over two J. B. C. Findlay; generations. Evolutionary theory predicts that a genetic predisposition The LIGHT Laboratories, School of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University for fertility has a cost at survival. Haplotypes that associate with fertility of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. and a shorter life are thus, by design, increased in the control group. The visual system in humans is prone to arguably the widest range of Two alternative approaches are presented: (1) investigating linkage human genetic defects leading to different levels of visual impairment. in an affected sib-pair design, and (2) assessment of association Examples include various forms of colour blindness and retinitis in a classic prospective follow-up design. Recent studies have pigmentosa. Several proteins are subject to mutational change. This demonstrated a clustering of extreme longevity within families and presentation will focus on two most heavily implicated in the machinery localized a locus on chromosome 4. These data will be discussed in of light capture-rhodopsin and peripherin, both integral membrane the light of the outcomes of the Leiden Longevity Study that also uses proteins in the discs of the rod cell. linkage in an affected sib pair design. Finally, data will be presented There are four visual opsins in the human genome, each of which on genetic variation in the evolutionary conserved insulin-signaling combines with 11-cis retinal to generate the pigments responsible for pathway from the prospective Leiden 85-plus study. colour vision and vision under conditions of dim light. Colour blindness results from the absence of colour pigment genes whilst mutations in PL12. IGF signalling and aging rhodopsin give rise to a number of different conditions some of which M. Holzenberger; result in blindness. The 3-D structure of rhodopsin is known: thus this Inserm U515, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France. presentation will provide structural explanations as to how mutational No abstract received. changes could impair the function of the protein and consequently give rise to the clinical effect. PL13. Genetics of early and accelerated ageing syndromes The role of peripherin is less clear but mutations in this protein give N. Levy; rise to the degeneration of the retina. Topographical mapping using Inserm U491, Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France. glycosylation has established that the protein probably consists Segmental aging disorders have been caracterized at the clinical level of 4 transmembrane regions and a large loop which is located in for many years. Most of them were shown to be due to alterations the intradiscal (intralumenal) space of the retina discs. Most of the of DNA repair/replication/recombination/transcription mechanisms. clinically meaningful mutations in peripherin are located in this loop Among these latter, autosomal recessive Werner syndrome, caused region. A probable role for the protein in causing the invagination and by mutations in RecQl2 encoding a DNA helicase, has been widely flattening of the plasma membrane to give the characteristic discs explored and is the better characterized at the clinical molecular of photoreceptor cells has been demonstrated. Natural mutations in and cellular level. More recently, a distinct set of premature and the protein are unable to produce this effect, due to improper folding, accelerated segmental aging syndromes has been uncovered, due processing or protein assembly. to Lamins A/C defects. Lamins A/C are ubiquitous nuclear proteins Finally, the mechanism by which retinol is taken up by the visual belonging to the intermediate filament family; mutations in LMNA, system and how retinol binding protein dysfunction seriously perturb encoding them, are responsible of different allelic disorders, known vision will be outlined. as "laminopathies", varying in severity from mild to lifespan-reducing/ neonatal lethal syndromes. Lamin-related segmental progeroid S04. Lessons from rare disorders: The Bardet-Biedl syndrome syndromes include, increasing in severity: lipodystrophy-atypical P. L. Beales; Werner syndromes (LIRLLC, WS), Mandibuloacral Dysplasia (MAD), Institute of Child Health & Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria syndrome (HGPS) and Restrictive United Kingdom. Dermopathy (RD). These syndromes are characterized by alterations The Bardet-Biedl syndrome is an uncommon disorder, traditionally of Lamins A/C expression levels, function and distribution which can viewed as having a recessive pattern of inheritance. First described either be primary, due to LMNA pathogenic sequence variations, or, some 140 years ago, significant advances in our understandingConcurrent Symposia 57 of its pathogenesis have recently come to light. In the early 1990s, of matrix-derived signals came in the focus as potential candidates heterogeneity became apparent, both hindering and informing progress for other syndromic forms of CNS of which disorders associated with in the field. Although, all eight mapped loci have been identified, they cerebral maldevelopment (e.g. Galloway-Mowat syndrome; OMIM do not yet account for all cases (in fact around 55% of families do not 251300) represent an important subgroup. Additionally, animal models have identified mutations). Segregation analyses of some BBS families have implicated several genes (neph1, itga3, actn4, cd2ap; arhgdia) in have also identified a departure from Mendelian inheritance requiring the pathogenesis of nephrotic disorders. Future progress in that field us to view this and perhaps other disorders in a new manner. Most will probably lead to a substitution of the conventional morphological recently however, our studies have indicated that BBS is fundamentally classification of CNS by a new, etiology-based nosology. a disorder of primary cilia function which might account for the retinal degeneration and renal tubular abnormalities characteristic of the S07. Mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegeneration syndrome. I will summarise the wealth of evidence that has brought A. Suomalainen-Wartiovaara, A. Hakonen, P. Luoma, S. Heiskanen, K. Pel- us to these conclusions and highlight some of the recent discoveries tola, H. Tyynismaa; within this rare disorder which continue to enlighten us. Programme of Neurosciences and Department of Neurology, Biomedicum Hel- sinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. S05. Nephronophthisis Mechanisms involved in mitochondrial DNA maintenance have recently C. Antignac; turned out to be important causes of neurodegeneration. The proteins Inserm U574 and Department of Genetics, Paris 5 University, Necker Hospital, involved are nuclear-encoded, targeted to the mitochondria, and they Paris, France. participate in mtDNA replication and possibly repair. Their defects are Nephronophthisis (NPHP) is an autosomal recessive, genetically often associated with secondary mutagenesis of mitochondrial DNA, or heterogeneous, chronic nephropathy characterized by renal interstitial mtDNA depletion. Polymerase gamma, POLG, is the replicative DNA fibrosis and medullary cyst formation. It represents the most common polymerase of the mitochondria. The mutations of its catalytic alpha genetic cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in children and subunit are the most common cause of familial progressive external adolescent. Three distinct forms of the disease (juvenile, adolescent ophthalmoplegia (PEO). However, recent data suggest that the clinical and infantile) have been described depending on the age of onset phenotypes resulting from POLG defects are exceptionally variant. of ESRD. Extra-renal anomalies have been described in association We recently reported that dominantly transmitted parkinsonism can be with juvenile NPHP, namely retinal dystrophy [Senior-Løken syndrome caused by POLG mutations. The age-of-onset of the symptoms varied (SLSN)] in 10-20% of the patients, ocular motor apraxia (Cogan between families from early to late onset. A severe infantile multisystemic syndrome), bone and liver anomalies. disorder, Alpers disease, was also found to be caused by recessive Five genes have been identified so far, NPHP1 and NPHP4 in juvenile POLG mutations. Furthermore, we identified POLG spacer domain nephronophthisis, NPHP3 in the adolescent form, IQCB1/NPHP5 in mutations underlying a spino-cerebellar ataxia phenotype, which SLSN and INVS encodin inversin in the infantile form. All except the has turned out to be the most common adult ataxia-type in Finland, inversin gene are novel genes. They encode nephrocystins, widely and possibly also in the Western and Northern Europe. Recessive expressed cytosolic proteins containing multiple protein-interacting mutations of the helicase-partner of POLG in the mtDNA replication, domains. They are all, at least partially, localized to the primary cilia in called Twinkle, also may result in a spinocerebellar ataxia disease, renal tubular cells, as virtually all products of human renal cystic genes. manifesting already in the early childhood. In the SCA group, these However, at least for inversin and nephrocystin-4, they also show mitochondrial SCAs mostly resemble Freidreich's ataxia. The data various other sub-cellular localizations, which altogether suggests of ours and collagues indicate that mitochondrial DNA maintenance that nephrocystins are implicated in various cell processes, such as mechanisms are of crucial importance for the well-being of neurons, cytoskeleton organization, cell cycle regulation, adhesion processes and their defects can result in late-onset neurodegeneration, as well as and cilia function. Furthermore, nephrocystin-5 is expressed in the in acute infantile encephalopathies. Our recently developed transgenic connecting cilia of photoreceptors and interacts with RPGR (retinitis mouse model may give clues to the pathogenetic mechanisms. pigmentosa GTPase regulator), thereby suggesting a common mechanism for retinal and kidney defects. S08. The assembly of OXPHOS complexes in health and disease L. Nijtmans; S06. Molecular basis of congenital nephrotic syndrome Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Univer- M. Zenker; sity Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Institute of Human Genetics, University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Ger- Mitochondria are considered to be ‘the powerhouse’ of the cell. In this many. organelle, the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system confers Congenital nephrotic syndrome (CNS) is a heterogeneous disorder the energy released by the breakdown of organic nutrients to produce caused by loss of glomerular permselectivity. It presents with proteinuria ATP, the free energy currency of the cell. The mammalian OXPHOS and edema at or even before birth. The common target of different system comprises five large membrane complexes, which are believed pathogenetic mechanisms leading to CNS are the podocytes. These to be organised in higher order assemblies, supercomplexes. The cells cover the outer surface of the glomerular capillaries and, by their complexes are built from numerous polypeptide subunits and prosthetic interdigitating foot processes, form highly specialized intercellular groups and their biosynthesis is a complicated process that requires contacts, the filtration slits representing the intrinsic protein barrier. both nuclear and mitochondrial gene products. Many genetic defects CNS is mostly genetic. In the more common, isolated CNS, autosomal- can occur that cause improper function of the OXPHOS system and a recessively inherited mutations in the genes encoding nephrin (NPHS1; decrease in ATP production, but also can lead to an increase of toxic OMIM 602716) and podocin (NPHS2; OMIM 604766), proteins reactive oxygen species. expressed specifically at the slit diaphragm, can be frequently found. Although many mutations have been found to be associated with a Certain mutations in the transcription factor WT1 (OMIM 607102), which large spectrum of clinical phenotypes, they cover only a fraction of the is specifically expressed in podocytes, are associated with early-onset proteins involved in the biogenesis of mitochondria. Still a number of nephrosis and due to diffuse mesangial sclerosis (DMS) and Denys- known and unknown OXPHOS defects remain to be explained at the Drash syndrome in males (OMIM 194080). Still, the mechanisms of genetic-molecular level. It is very likely that many new mutations in aberrant WT1 signalling that lead to defective podocyte differentiation mitochondrial proteins will be detected in the future. are incompletely understood. The genetic basis of other syndromic Our studies into the biogenesis of the OXPHOS system have forms of CNS is even less known. We recently reported that loss-of- revealed that defects can occur at various stages. In addition the use function mutations of LAMB2 lead to Pierson syndrome (OMIM 609049) of functional complementation studies allowed the identification of a characterized by CNS with DMS and distinct ocular anomalies. Laminin mutation in a component of the mitochondrial translation machinery β2, a component of the glomerular basement membrane and certain causing progressive hepatoencephalopathy. This finding reveals a other basal laminae, is believed to convey critical extracellular matrix new class of proteins as a potential cause of mitochondrial disorders. signals for the differentiation and attachment of podocytes. Thereby, molecules at the cell-matrix interface and intracellular transducersConcurrent Symposia 58 S09. Immunohistochemical tests for mitochondrial dysfunction also various other tumors, such as hepatocellular carcinomas. Wnt R. Capaldi; signaling is controlled by the negative regulator conductin (also termed Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, United States. axin2 or axil) or the related protein axin, which induce degradation of No abstract received. β-catenin by functional interaction with APC and the serine/threonine kinase GSK3β. We show that conductin but not axin is a target of the S10. Genetic and Epigenetic Changes in Early Carcinogenesis Wnt signaling pathway and is upregulated in human colorectal and liver tumors as well as in the APC-deficient intestinal tumors of Min mice. T. D. Tlsty; Upregulation of conductin may constitute a negative feedback loop Department of Pathology, UCSF Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of that controls Wnt signaling activity. Furthermore we present evidence California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States. that conductin is involved in mitotic checkpoint control and generation Studies of human epithelial cells and fibroblasts from healthy individuals of chromosomal instability linking aberrant Wnt signaling to alterations are providing novel insights into how early epigenetic and genetic of genomic integrity of cancer cells. events affect genomic integrity and fuel carcinogenesis. Key epigenetic changes, such as the hypermethylation of the p16 promoter sequences, S13. VEGF in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis create a previously unappreciated pre-clonal phase of tumorigenesis in P. Carmeliet; which a subpopulation of epithelial cells are positioned for progression Centre for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy, KU Leuven, Campus to malignancy (Nature 409:636, 2001). These key changes precede Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium. the clonal outgrowth of pre-malignant lesions and occur frequently in healthy, disease-free individuals (Caner Cell 5:263, 2004). Prior work No abstract received. from our laboratory has shown that surrounding stroma can dramatically influence tumorigenesis. Proper stromal-epithelial interactions can S14. Leukoencephalopathies: from MRI pattern to basic defect actually suppress the expression of preneoplastic phenotypes in M. van der Knaap; epithelial cells and conversely, altered stromal-epithelial interactions Department of Child Neurology, Free University Medical Center, Amsterdam, can promote the probability that preneoplastic lesions progress to The Netherlands. malignancy (Cancer Research 61:5002, 1999). Understanding more No abstract received. about these early events should provide novel molecular candidates for prevention and therapy of cancer. S15. BDNF Signaling in Anorexia and Bulimia X. Estivill1, M. Ribases1, J. M. Mercader1, H. Howard1, B. Puchau1, F. Fernan- S11. Cell Cycle Control: How to Preserve Genome Integrity dez-Aranda2, M. Gratacos3; during Cell Division ? 1Genes & Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), CeGen E. A. Nigg; Spanish Genotyping Network, Barcelona, Spain, 2Psychiatric Service, Ciutat Max-Planck-Institute for Biochemistry, Dept. of Cell Biology, Martinsried, Ger- Sanitaria Bellvitge, L’Hospitalet, Spain, 3WGenes & Disease Program, Center many. for Genomic Regulation (CRG), CeGen Spanish Genotyping Network, Barce- The error-free segregation of duplicated chromosomes during cell lona, Spain. division is vital to the development and growth of all organisms. Eating disorders (ED), such as anorexia nervosa (AN) and bulimia Chromosomal instability and imbalances (aneuploidy) are typical of nervosa (BN), predominantly affect women and adolescents, and many solid human tumors and often correlated with malignancy. Many have a high prevalence and mortality rate in European populations. chromosome aberrations are likely to result from the deregulation of Although environmental factors play an essential role in the aetiology mitotic progression, a defective spindle checkpoint and/or centrosome of ED, there are strong evidences of a genetic participation in the abnormalities. Our research aims at elucidating the role of protein predisposition and development of AN and BN. Experiments on murine kinases (and phosphatases) in the control of cell division (Nat Rev models and pharmacological studies in rats indicate the potential Mol Cell Biol. 2001, 2:21-32), the detailed function of the spindle role of BDNF in the regulation of food intake and body weight as an assembly checkpoint (EMBO J. 2002, 21:1723-1732; Science 2002, anorexigenic factor. We have performed several case-control studies 297:2267-7220), and the regulation of the centrosome cycle (Nat finding a consistent association between the -270C/T BDNF SNP Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2001, 2:21-32). This talk will focus on the human and bulimia nervosa (BN), and the Val66Met variant to both AN and centrosome, the major microtubule-organizing center. In every cell BN in six European populations. Furthermore, haplotype relative risk cycle, the centrosome needs to be duplicated once, and only once analysis and the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) in ED trios for - much like the genome. We have been able to show that several BDNF alleles have been confirmed in a large collection of trios from protein kinases control distinct steps in the centrosome cycle (Dev different European countries. We have analyzed 24 SNPs with a minor Cell. 2003, 5:113-25). Furthermore, in collaboration with Matthias allele frequency higher than 0.10, covering the entire BDNF gene Mann’s laboratory (Univ. of Southern Denmark, Odense), we have using the SNPlex technology in a total sample of 174 ED patients and recently used a mass-spectrometry based proteomics approach 174 sex-matched unrelated controls, permitting a dense and targeted to establish an inventory of centrosome components (Nature 2003, genetic characterization of the variability of BDNF in ED. We have also 426:570-574). Finally, we have begun to investigate the mechanisms screened the entire NTRK2 gene in patients with ED and show evidence that might cause centrosome amplification in human tumor cells. Our of association of a specific NTRK2 haplotype with binge-eating/purging results identify both errors during mitosis and/or cytokinesis (EMBO AN, and a reduced frequency of another haplotype in BN patients. J. 2002, 21:483-492) and bonafide overduplication of centrosomes Finally, we have assessed BDNF plasma levels in 50 discordant sib (Mol Biol Cell (2005), 16:1095-1107) as prominent routes to numerical pairs with ED and found that BDNF levels were significantly higher centrosome aberrations. (P = 0.004) in ED patients than in their unaffected sibs. These data strongly indicate that this neurotrophic factor has an important role in S12. Functional genomics of the Wnt signaling pathway in the genetic susceptibility to ED and strongly argue for a role of BDNF tumorigenesis signaling in eating behavior and body weight regulation. J. Behrens; Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Zentrum, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. S16. Digital karyotyping Colorectal tumors develop as a consequence of genetic alterations in M. R. Speicher; various tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes. The tumor suppressor Institut für Humangenetik, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) is mutated at an early stage of No abstract received. colorectal tumorigenesis and has been proposed to act as a gatekeeper in this process. Mutations of APC lead to aberrant activation of the Wnt signaling pathway by stabilization of the cytoplasmic component β-catenin and formation β-catenin/TCF transcription factor complexes. Thus, constitutive activation of of β-catenin/TCF target genes including c-myc is a key event in the development of colorectal carcinomas andConcurrent Symposia 59 S17. Canceromics: Molecular, cellular and clinical biochip that can be joined by ligation when pairs of reagents bind the same technologies for cancer genetics target protein molecule. The process effectively reverse translates O. Kallioniemi; target proteins to linear or circular signature DNA molecules that can Medical Biotechnology Unit, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, and then be amplified and identified in extremely sensitive and precise University of Turku, Turku, Finland. homogenous or solid-phase protein assays. The procedure is being Our aim has been to develop and apply new biochip technologies and adapted for parallel analyses of large sets of proteins. approaches for high-throughput drug target and biomarker discovery, Both reacted padlock and proximity probes can be amplified by copying validation and therapy selection in oncology. This has involved the circular molecules in so-called rolling-circle replication reactions. development of microarray strategies in the molecular, cellular and We have shown that the method allows analysis of the intracellular clinical ”dimensions”. distribution of individual mitochondrial genomes, differing in single- Molecular biochips: We are applying microarray-based Comparative nucleotide positions. In a variant of this procedure, proximity ligation- Genomic Hybridization (CGH) and Non-sense Mediated RNA based detection of single or interacting pairs of Myc and Max proteins Decay (NMD) to identify genes that undergo mutational activation or can be locally amplified by rolling-circle replication, for single molecule inactivation in cancer. CGH and NMD microarray data may highlight detection in situ in cells and tissues. critical primary causative genetic events in the multi-step progression of cancer. As demonstrated by several recently approved targeted S19. cis regulatory variation in the human genome drugs for cancer, such mutated genes represent attractive targets for B. E. Stranger1, M. Forrest1, S. Tavare2, A. G. Clark3, S. Deutsch4, B. Kahl5, S. the development of effective cancer-specific therapeutics. E. Antonarakis4, P. Deloukas1, E. T. Dermitzakis1; Cell-based biochips: We are developing cell-based functional 1The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Department microarrays for the high-throughput analysis of gene and protein of Oncology, Cambridge Univesrity, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Depart- functions in living cells. A number of different cell biochip platforms ment of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaka, NY, United can be applied, including the reverse transfection approach (or "cell States, 4Department of Genetic Medicine, University of Geneva Medical School, carpet" approach), where cDNAs, siRNAs or other biomolecules Geneva, Switzerland, 5Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, United States. are printed on microscope slides and cells plated to grow on top of The goal of this work is to identify and characterize functionally variable the array. Functional cell-based microarray studies make it possible regulatory regions that are likely to contribute to complex phenotypes to identify and validate drug targets in a highly parallel, miniaturized and disorders in human populations, through effects on regulation fashion, eventually in a genomic scale. Cell biochips can also be used of gene expression. We surveyed gene expression levels for ~ 700 for cell-based drug screening as well as for the analysis of causative genes in a sample of immortalized lymphoblastoid cell lines from 60 gene-drug interactions. These unrelated humans of the CEPH pedigrees, and used the publicly- technologies may in the near future facilitate the design of individualized available HapMap SNP genotypes of the same individuals to perform therapies and more effective therapy combinations. association analyses, in an attempt to localize the genetic determinants Clinical biochips: Sample-based microarray strategies, such as tumor of these quantitative traits. Approximately 300 of the 700 genes gave tissue microarrays (TMA), facilitate the analysis of individual DNA, RNA a detectable expression signal relative to background, and for most and protein targets in thousands of arrayed patient samples, typically of those loci, we observed significant gene expression variation from formalin-fixed tumors. TMA analysis with target specific antibodies among individuals. We identified loci that exhibited highly significant can rapidly establish definitive clinical diagnostic profiles for molecular associations between gene expression and SNP variants located targets, and quantify drug target distributions at the population level cis- to the coding locus. We are finding many regulatory haplotypes (target epidemiology). Further development of methods to print tissue several Mb away from the target gene suggesting that the regulatory lysates from frozen samples in an array format will help to automate landscape may be different from what has been hypothesized. For and expand antibody-based screening of molecular targets in large other genes, a cis- signal was detected, but its effect was spread cohorts of tissue specimens. over many SNPs and thus did not meet our significance threshold. By In summary, biochip technologies can be applied in molecular, cellular working with the complete genomic set of HapMap SNP genotypes, and clinical studies, thereby expanding the concept of "microarray we were also able to identify significant trans-acting SNPs influencing analysis" beyond traditional gene expression studies. Integration of expression variation. the various microarray platforms will facilitate a deeper, integrated, ”systems biological” and mechanistic understanding of cancer cell S20. Activation of Non-coding RNAs by Epigenetic Therapy biology, which eventually will be required for the development of next- P. A. Jones, Y. Saito, G. Liang, G. Egger, J. C. Chuang; generation targeted therapeutics for cancer. University of Southern California, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, United States. S18. Single-molecule detection in situ using padlock and The abnormal methylation of CpG islands located near the transcriptional proximity probes start sites of human genes plays a major role in carcinogenesis. U. D. Landegren, M. Nilsson, J. Banér, F. Dahl, O. Ericsson, S. Fredriksson, M. Methylation of cytosine residues in these regions is associated with Gullberg, S. Gustafsdottir, J. Göransson, J. Jarvius, M. Jarvius, H. Johansson, alterations in chromatin structure which reinforce gene silencing. M. Kamali, C. Larsson, J. Melin, E. Schallmeiner, L. Spångberg, J. Stenberg, O. Abnormally silenced genes serve as targets for epigenetic therapy in Söderberg; which the goal is to reverse DNA methylation and chromatin changes Rudbeck Laboratory, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden. and reactivate silenced genes. Until now, the focus has mainly been on Total genome sequence information provides a theoretical overview protein coding genes but we have now found that epigenetic therapy of all nucleic acids and protein molecules in cells and tissues. We can activate microRNAs (miRNAs) which in turn can downregulate now need efficient strategies to probe this multitude of molecules for specific gene products by translational repression. Simultaneous information about their distribution, concentrations, interactions, and treatment of human cancer cells with 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine and about their roles in biological processes. phenylbutyric acid (epigenetic therapy) resulted in the activation of We have established a set of molecular tools that represent detected miR-127. Activation of miR-127 transcription was accompanied by DNA, RNA, or protein molecules as short, circular strings of DNA for changes in the DNA methylation and increased levels of histone H3 highly specific analysis of large sets of molecules in solution, or for in acetylation and lysine 4 methylation around the transcriptional start situ analyses of even single or interacting sets of molecules. site. Interestingly, we also detected decreased levels in BCL6 protein, Padlock probes are linear oligonucleotide probes that are converted to a potential target of miR-127. Thus, epigenetic therapy can activate DNA circles in the presence of specific target nucleic acid sequences. expression of some microRNAs resulting in downregulation of target Large sets of such circles can be amplified and identified, for example products important in human carcinogenesis. by hybridization to universal tag microarrays. The method presently permits genotyping of tens of thousands of DNA sequences in parallel. In proximity ligation, antibodies are equipped with DNA strandsConcurrent Symposia 60 S21. Ultraconserved elements in the human genome S23. Circulating fetal cells and cell free fetal DNA: what is the D. Haussler1, G. Bejerano2, S. Salama2, B. King2, J. Kent2, N. Ahituv3, E. M. current status? Rubin3; S. Hahn; 1Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UC, Santa Cruz, CA, United States, 2Center University Women’s Hospital, Basle, Switzerland. for Biomolecular Science and Engineering, UC, Santa Cruz, CA, United States, Fetal cells from maternal blood were first enriched in 1979 by 3Dept. of Energy Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA, United States. Herzenberg and co-workers using the then newly developed approach The availability of multiple mammalian genomes has allowed us of flow cytometry. In the intervening years developments in molecular to partially infer the evolutionary history of most of the bases in the biology (FISH and PCR) permitted the reliable analysis of such cells. human genome since the time of the mammalian radiation. Analysis In addition the development of more efficacious or simpler enrichment has revealed about 500 DNA segments that show remarkably methods (MACS) lead to the remise that diagnostic applications would strong negative selection: stretches of at least 200bp that are totally soon become a reality. These hopes have largely been dashed by the unchanged in human mouse and rat, and averaging 96% identity with large scale NIH funded NIFTY study, in which close to 3000 clinical species as distant as chicken (diverged about 310 MYA). A significant cases, enriched by either MACS or FACS and examined by XY-FISH, number of these ultraconserved elements overlap the mRNAs of genes, indicated that these approaches were not all suited for clinical use. especially genes involved in RNA processing. The remainder, which Recent data has also suggested that the fetal erythroblast, may not constitute the majority of the ultraconserved elements, neither code for be the most suitable target cell, as its nucleus displays an apoptotic protein nor appear in the UTRs of known genes. These latter elements character which renders it impervious to FISH analysis. For this do not appear to have any orthologs in invertebrate species. They reason current endeavours, are focussing on optimised enrichment often appear in clusters within ~1 Mb regions surrounding transcription procedures, automated detection, and the analysis of other cells types, factors involved in embryonic development. Experimental analysis of such as trophoblasts. These analyses are largely being conducted in a some of these elements has provided evidence that many are distal multi-centre manner in the recently funded EU Network of Excellence enhancers, located many hundreds of Kb from the transcription factor “SAFE”. that they regulate. The most extremely conserved elements in the The presence of cell free circulatory nucleic acids was first reported human genome (>1000bp, >99% identical in chicken) lie in the introns of almost 60 years ago by Mandel and Métais, however, it is only in POLA, the gene for DNA polymerase alpha on chromosome X. Recent recent years that this phenomenon has gained the interest of the wider evidence suggests that these ultraconserved elements do not regulate scientific community, especially in oncology and prenatal medicine. POLA, but rather are distal enhancers for a gene located a few hundred Prompted by observations made in cancer patients, that tumour- Kb downstream from them. This is the aristaless related homeobox derived DNA was detectable in plasma samples, Lo and colleagues in (ARX) gene, involved in forebrain development, and associated with 1997 detected cell free fetal DNA in the plasma of pregnant women, X-linked myoclonic epilepsy with spasticity and intellectual disability, thereby opening a new avenue for the non-invasive assessment of X-linked West syndrome, Partington syndrome, nonsyndromic mental fetal genetic traits. In those instances where the fetal loci being retardation, and X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia. We interrogated are completely absent from the maternal genome, such will discuss the evolutionary origins and properties of these and the as the fetal RhD gene in Rhd pregnant women, this approach has other intriguing ultraconserved elements. been found to be so reliable that it is already being used clinically in several European centres. S22. Overview of preimplantation diagnosis The detection of other fetal genetic loci which differ slightly from L. Gianaroli; maternal ones has proven to be more problematic, as the vast majority S.I.S.Me.R. Reproductive Medicine Unit, Bologna, Italy. (>95%) of circulating cell free DNA in maternal plasma is of maternal Following its first clinical application in the year 1990, PGD origin. Therefore, the detection of fetal loci involving point mutations, (Preimplantation genetic diagnosis) was integrated into in vitro which are of greatest interest for single gene disorders, has been fertilization programs for the analysis of genetic disorders before the restricted to single case reports. corresponding embryo is transferred to the patient. This approach In this regard we have recently made the observation that circulatory represents an important alternative for couples at high reproductive fetal DNA sequences are generally smaller than comparable maternal risk which otherwise, in case of an affected fetus, have to decided ones, and that by selecting sequences with a small size a selective whether to interrupt a pregnancy after conventional prenatal diagnosis. enrichment of fetal DNA sequences can be attained. By using this Throughout the years, the indications were expanded and now PGD approach we have shown that otherwise masked fetal loci, such as is proposed in the following situations: 1) to carriers of monogenic STRs or point mutations, can be reliably detected. By optimising this diseases; 2) to carriers of balanced translocations; 3) to couples at approach, it is hoped, that future developments will permit the detection risk of generating high proportions of aneuploid embryos for which of both the paternal and maternal fetal loci, thereby permitting a clear they are exposed to failed or abnormal implantation; 4) to couples non-invasive prenatal diagnosis. having an affected child requiring bone marrow transplantation from an Once again, these facets are being explored in the NoE “SAFE”. HLA-identical sibling; and 5) to carriers of predisposition to late onset disorders. S24. Practice of preimplantation genetic diagnosis According to the reports of the International Working Group on PGD I. Liebaers; and the ESHRE PGD Consortium, the demand for PGD has constantly Centrum Medische Genetica AZ-VUB, Brussels, Belgium. increased and the number of cycles performed worldwide until now No abstract received. exceeds 6000. The reported pregnancy rate ranges from 25 and 30% per cycle with an incidence of obstetric and neonatal complications S25. LD in genetic isolated populations similar to that reported after ART. The incidence of malformations at C. M. van Duijn; birth is also in the same range as that characterized in ICSI children. Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Eras- The attitude towards PGD is extremely different in the different mus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. countries, due to cultural and religious aspects. This variability is No abstract received. present also in Europe, with some countries like Austria, Germany, Italy and Switzerland prohibiting by law the use of the technique. As S26. Selecting the right SNPs for genetic mapping studies in a results, a form of reproductive tourism began, and couples questing European populations for PGD are now looking for it in the European countries in whom PGD T. Meitinger; is currently applied. GSF National Research Center, Munich, Germany. The success of genetic mapping strategies for both rare and common disorders is critically dependent on the choice of study populations. As an increasing number of national genetic databases are being set up, sampling strategies have come under scrutiny. For the identification of genes mutated in Mendelian disorders, samples from isolatedSpecial Lecture - Late Breaking Research Session 61 founder populations especially from the periphery of the European These same networks tolerate telomeres, in part because the TRF2 subcontinent have proved extremely valuable mainly because of the protein prevents recognition of telomeric ends as DSBs. Unexpectedly, uneven distribution of disease causing variants between and within we find TRF2 and another telomere maintenance protein, TRF1, populations and because of the wealth of genealogical data often involved in the DSB response. available in isolates. Both simulation and experimental studies also TRF1 and TRF2 form transient foci that colocalize with laser suggest that the genetic variety provided by diverse populations will microbeam-induced DSBs in human fibroblast nuclei. TRF1 and TRF2 in the same way optimize the use of linkage disequilibrium mapping of are detectable at DSBs <3 seconds post-irradiation, earlier than ATM, common disease genes. a kinase that controls the major DSB surveillance network. Like many Because of the low effects observed in complex disorders, large sample DNA damage response proteins, TRF2 is phosphoyrlated after DSB sizes are required which can often not be collected in more isolate induction. Phospho-TRF2 associates with induced DSBs but not populations. This brings about an urgent need for the determination of undamaged telomeres. The TRF2 response to DSBs is dependent genetically defined subpopulations within continental populations. An on its basic domain and occurs in the absence of functional DNA- appropriate number of tagging SNPs has to be determined for each PKcs, the MRE11/Rad50/NBS1 complex or the Ku70, WRN and BLM of those subpopulations to ensure sufficient capture of information repair proteins. Multiple lines of evidence suggest that TRF2 and ATM especially in whole genome mapping approaches. Recent studies functionally interact at DSB sites: the two proteins colocalize at DSBs, testing population based samples from across Europe suggest that �-ray induced phosphorylation of TRF2 is ATM-dependent, and over- the CEPH trios used by the HapMap Consortium as a reference for expression of TRF2 impairs DSB-induced ATM autophosphoyration as tagSNP selection will only provide partial information for an as-yet- well as ATM-dependent phosphorylation of H2AX and p53. unknown proportion of genes, and especially for peripheral European These results provide evidence that TRF2 and TRF1 interact with populations. DSB-containing chromatin, TRF2 competes with or attenuate ATM responses to DSBs and DSB-induced modifications may shift TRF2 S27. Influence of LD on high-density SNP genome linkage scans from telomere maintenance to DSB repair. Our findings also indicate B. Müller-Myhsok; that human cells practice a strategic economy in using the same Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. proteins in telomere maintenance and DSB repair. No abstract received. LB2. Mutations in ESCO2, establishment of cohesion 1 homolog 2 (S. cereviseae), cause Roberts syndrome H. Vega1,2, Q. Waisfisz3, M. Gordillo2,4, N. Sakai2, I. Yanagihara5, M. Yamada5, SP1. The success of the oppositions against the BRCA1 patents: D. van Gosliga3, H. Kayserili6, K. Ozono2, E. Wang Jabs4, K. Inui2, H. Joenje3; how did it occur and what will be the impact on genetic testing? 1Instituto de Genética, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Ciudad Universitaria, G. Matthijs1, D. Halley2, G. Lenoir3, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet4; Bogotá, Colombia, 2Department of Developmental Medicine (Pediatrics) D-5, 1Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Dept of Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan, 3Depart- Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Institut Gustave- ment of Clinical Genetics and Human Genetics,VU University Medical Center, Roussy, Villejuif, France, 4Institut Curie, Paris, France. Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medi- In 2001, the European Patent Organisation (EPO) has granted 3 cine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5Department of patents on the BRCA1 gene. The patentees included Myriad Genetics, Developmental Infectious Diseases, Research Institute, Osaka Medical Center the United States of America and University of Utah. Their option to for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi, Osaka, Japan, 6Division of Medical Gene- strictly exert their monopoly right by requesting that all diagnostic testing tics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey be done at Myriad Genetics Laboratories in Utah, has evoked strong Roberts syndrome (RBS; MIM 268300) is an extremely rare autosomal reactions. Several European genetic societies and research institutes, recessive disorder. Clinical characteristics include pre- and postnatal and other parties including the Dutch and Belgian governments, growth retardation, microcephaly, bilateral cleft lip and palate, mental have filed oppositions against these patents. These procedures have retardation and tetraphocomelia. Cells from Roberts syndrome patients recently been concluded. show a characteristic premature centromere separation, also known In May 2004, the first patent, which claimed ‘a method for diagnosing as heterochromatin repulsion/puffing, or the RS effect. To identify the a predisposition for breast and ovarian cancer’ by comparing the disease locus we performed genome wide homozygosity mapping using patient’s BRCA1 sequence with a reference sequence, has been a cluster of four RBS families from Colombia that shared a common revoked. In January 2005, the 2 other patents were maintained after ancestor in the XVIIIth century and an additional fifth Colombian the final hearings, but in amended - say slimmed - form: they no family. Significant linkage was established for chromosome 8p12-21.2 longer include a method for diagnosis, but only relate to a probe for between markers D8S258 and D8S505. Multipoint linkage analysis of the BRCA1 gene and a probe for the common Ashkenazi 185delAG 11 affected individuals gave a maximum LOD score of 13.4 at marker mutation, respectively. D8S1839. A new transcript LOC157570, recently renamed as ESCO2, In practice, these patents will no longer interfere with diagnostic testing appeared to encode a protein that belongs to a conserved family of for familial breast and ovary cancer in Europe. The successful attack proteins which play a role in the establishment of cohesion between on the patents was based on errors contained in the original sequence, sister chromatids. We performed sequence analysis of ESCO2 and as it was disclosed in the patent application in 1994. On the discussion identified homozygous mutations in all patients that were studied. about ‘inventive step’ for diagnostic methods or specific mutations, In 19 patients from 16 families of different ethnic backgrounds eight the EPO has largely decided in favour of the patentees. The authors different mutations were identified (one nonsense, one missense and witnessed the hearings in Munich and would like to give the genetic six frameshift mutations). Northern analysis identified a predominant community a firsthand account of the case. mRNA of approximately 3.3 kb in all human fetal tissues tested and in a subset of tested adult tissues (thymus, placenta and small intestine). We suggest that the RBS-related developmental abnormalities result from the impaired cell proliferation observed in RBS cells and that this LB1. The Human Telomeric maintenance Proteins trf2 and trf1 growth impairment results from the cohesion defect and subsequent are involved in a EARLY DNA damage response mitotic arrest. P. Bradshaw1,2, D.J. Stavropoulos1,2 D. Gilley3, M.S. Meyn1,2,4; 1Genetics, Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto, Canada, 2Molecular & Medical LB3. Prospects of a Protein Therapy by means of PTDs-MeCP2 Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 3Medical & Molecular Genet- fusion protein for Rett syndrome ics, University of Indiana, Indianapolis, United States; 4Paediatrics, University of F. Laccone, P. Kempaiah; Toronto, Toronto, Canada Institute of Human Genetics University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany Human cells protect their genomes by using DNA damage surveillance Mutations in the MECP2 gene are the principle cause of the Rett networks that can activate DNA repair, cell cycle checkpoints and syndrome and several lines of evidence show that the disease is apoptosis in response to <4 double-strand breaks (DSBs)/genome. caused by a loss of function of the MeCP2. It is therefore plausible thatConcurrent Sessions 62 the “introduction” of a wild type MeCP2 into the brain should be able at PHA-stimulated lymphocytes. 72 metaphases from adult and 56 from least to mild the course of the disease. Recently it has been reported fetal lymphocytes were analyzed. Immunofluorescent detection with that the protein transduction domain (TAT) when fused to a variety of monoclonal antibodies was performed for 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA proteins is able to deliver them into cells and even into the brain of regions reveling. Fluorescent signals appeared to be preferentially living animals. We have produced large amount of recombinant MeCP2 localized in the certain regions. Specific landmarks were identified for isoform A protein tagged at the N-terminus with the TAT peptide. The each chromosome pair, the new type of banding which we called M- data collected until now demonstrate that the TAT-MeCP2 protein is banding was described. Intensity of signals varied. Pericentromeric able to transduce after 8 to 10 hours in vitro several cell lines including heterochromatin of chromosomes 1 and 16, short arms of acrocentric primary fibroblasts of patients with Rett syndrome with an efficiency chromosomes, majority of T and some R-bands demonstrated the most of 100%. The treatment of a clonal fibroblast cell line expressing the intensive fluorescence. Average to weak fluorescence was detected in T158M mutation with the TAT-MeCP2 recombinant protein reverts the majority of R-, in some T-bands and in pericentromeric heterochromatin hyperacetylation of both H3 and H4K16 to a level comparable to the of chromosomes 3 and 9. Very weak fluorescence was observed in one of the cell line expressing the wild type MeCP2. The TAT-MeCP2 all G-bands. Thus, the majority of GC-rich bands were shown to be when injected intraperitoneally is able to trespass the Blood-Brain- highly methylated. However, certain GC-rich bands of 6,9,10,13,15 Barrier and localizes in the nuclei of wild type mice. Experiments chromosomes (6q15,6q21,6q23,9p13,9q22,9q32,10q24,13q22,15q15 in knockout mice show that the TAT-MeCP2 protein influences the ,15q24) demonstrated hypomethylated status, suggesting their special acetylation state of both H3 and H4K16. functional activity in lymphocytes. Our results show that it is possible to introduce a consistent amount Certain bands of fetal and adult chromosomes, with similar M-banding of biologically active recombinant proteins into the brain of knock out patterns, differed in their fluorescence intensity (chromosomes 1-3,5- animals proving that the transduction technology may be applied to 18,20-22). Differences in staining of pericentromeric heterochromatin genetic diseases. of chromosomes 1,9,16, heteromorphic staining of homologous Acknowledgements chromosomes were registered. We thank the “Elternhilfe für Kinder mit Rett Syndrome e.V.” for the Further analysis of structural and functional peculiarities contributing to support of this project. We thank Pandian Arunachalam, M. Prinz, S. M-banding characteristics in other adult and embryonic human tissues Wolf and W. Engel for their help. is needed. C03. Systematic re-examination of carriers of balanced reciprocal translocations identifies multiple candidate regions C01. The splitting of human chromosome bands into sub-bands for late-onset and common disorders U. Claussen, H. Lehrer, R. Hliscs, A. Kuechler, A. Weise, T. Liehr; I. Bache1, K. Brondum-Nielsen2, G. Bruun-Petersen3, M. Bugge1, M. Hjorth1, S. Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. Holstebroe1, P. K. A. Jensen4, C. Lundsteen5, E. Niebuhr6, K. Rasmussen7, L. The splitting of chromosome bands into their sub-bands has its Schmidt8, N. Tommerup1; implications for the precise mapping of DNA probes at the sub-band 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, University of level and for the understanding of the chromosome architecture. Copenhagen, Denmark, 2John F. Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 3Dept Surprisingly, there have been nearly no scientific investigations dealing of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Sygehus, Denmark, 4Dept of Clinical Genetics, Aar- with that process. Here we investigated the hierarchically organised hus Kommunehospital, Denmark, 5Dept of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, splitting of bands in detail using the multicolour banding (MCB) probe Denmark, 6Dept of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Copen- set of different human chromosomes (#5, 6, 18,19, X) hybridised to hagen, Denmark, 7Dept of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Den- normal human metaphase and prometaphase chromosomes at the mark, 8Institute of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. different band level. The analysis were performed by comparing the Balanced reciprocal translocations associated with genetic disorders disappearance and appearance of pseudo-colour bands of the four have facilitated the identification of genes especially for monogenic different band levels according to ISCN95. The regions to split first disorders with an early-onset. To assess whether chromosomal are telomere- and centromere-near. In contrast to the GTG-band breakpoints may be associated with common and later onset disorders, ideograms published in ISCN 95 at the 850-, 550-, and 400-band level we performed a systematic questionnaire-based re-examination of pseudo-colours assigned to GTG-light bands are resistant to band known reciprocal translocation carriers in Denmark. splitting. GTG-dark bands split into their dark and light sub-bands In total, questionnaires were mailed to 875 carriers of which 733 because inside dark bands light sub-bands appear which are rather accepted to participate (compliance = 84%). The reported traits/ resistant to further elongation. This confirms the results obtained by diseases were confirmed by medical files and personal contact with stretching of GTG-banded chromosomes (Cytogenet Cell Genet the family. 79:162-166, 1997). In this respect the nomenclature of the ideograms We observed 27 unrelated carriers with a disease where a breakpoint of GTG-banding patterns for normal human chromosomes should be involved a cytogenetic band known to harbour a corresponding locus. reassessed. Furthermore, the results indicate to fundamental doubts This included very common disorders (e.g. allergy, asthma, myopia, on the well established concept of chromosome condensation during obesity, hypertension, coronary heart disease, Type 2 diabetes), mitosis which should be replaced by the recently proposed concept of autoimmune disorders (Type 1 diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, chromosome region-specific protein swelling. hyperthyroidism), neurological/neuropsychiatric disorders (e.g. bipolar Supported in part by the Deutsche Krebshilfe/Mildred Scheel Stiftung disorder, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease) and cancer. We found für Krebsforschung (70-3125-Li1) and the IZKF together with the a significant linkage (LOD = 2.1) of dyslexia and a co-segregating TMWFK (TP 3.7 and B307-04004). translocation with a breakpoint in a confirmed locus for dyslexia, and we identified 10 other families, where the translocation co-segregated C02. Peculiarities of 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA distribution on with a specific phenotype. Furthermore, we identified carriers with the adult and fetal human metaphase chromosomes same disease (e.g. cervix dysplasia, hypertension), where independent O. A. Efimova1, A. A. Pendina2, A. N. Kaminskaya1, T. V. Kuznetzova2, V. S. breakpoints involved the same chromosomal band. Baranov2; Our study indicates that a systematic re-examination of translocation 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott's carriers promises to be a powerful way to identify loci and genes for Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa- a variety of human traits and disorders. To expand this approach to tion. larger populations, we have initiated an international consortium DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification of human genome and to systematize the questionnaire-based re-examination and data- is known to have an essential role in regulation of gene silencing and handling. For further information, see http://www.mcndb.org. stabilization of chromosome structure. We have investigated 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA localization on human metaphase chromosomes and have carried out a comparative analysis of 5-methylcytosine distribution on fetal and adult chromosomes fromConcurrent Sessions 63 C04. Molecular karyotyping detects structural low grade C06. Interphase FISH mapping of translocation breakpoints mosaics in ~4 % of patients with idiopathic mental retardation using paraffin-embedded tissue: Identification of a candidate and multiple congenital aberrations gene for phocomelia N. M. C. Maas1, B. Menten2, C. Melotte1, B. Thienpont1, K. Buysse2, G. Froyen1, L. Harewood; P. Marynen1, A. De Paepe2, J. Fryns1, G. Mortier2, K. Devriendt1, F. Speleman2, MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. J. R. Vermeesch1; Disease-associated balanced chromosomal rearrangements (DBCRs) 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Medical Genetics, have proved to be extremely useful in mapping disease loci and Gent, Belgium. the positional cloning of disease-causing genes. In these cases the Chromosomal abnormalities are a major cause of mental retardation phenotype is likely to arise from direct interruption of one or more genes and multiple congenital anomalies. Screening for these chromosomal or regulatory elements. Generally, breakpoint mapping is done using imbalances has mainly been performed in the past by standard or high fluorescent in-situ hybridisation (FISH) on metaphase preparations resolution karyotyping. Unfortunately, the resolution of these analyses but these are not always available. We have extended our previously is limited to about ~5 to 10 Mb. Recently, so-called array or matrix CGH reported technique for mapping DBCR breakpoints using interphase was developed to provide a better resolution for detection of subtle FISH to enable the use of archive paraffin embedded tissue sections. structural rearrangements. The resolution of array CGH depends on the We have shown that this is an effective strategy using two cases with size and density of the genomic fragments. Since arrayCGH provides de novo, apparently balanced translocations: namely: t(1;2)(q41;p25.3) a molecular approach for genome wide detection of unbalanced with bilateral renal dysplasia and t(2;12)(p25.1;q23.3) with upper karyotypic defects, we propose the term molecular karyotyping. limb peromelia and lower limb phocomelia. The latter case has In this study, molecular karyotyping was performed using arrays proven particularly interesting as the gene CMKLR1 was found at the of 1 Mb resolution. Eighty patients with mental retardation, multiple translocation breakpoint on chromosome 12. This gene is known to be congenital anomalies and normal standard karyotypes were analysed. expressed in the developing limb and is likely to be part of the retinoic In 18 patients (~22%) a chromosomal imbalance was detected and acid signalling pathway. Our own studies using immunocytochemistry confirmed by FISH analysis. Interestingly, in three cases we found suggest that the limb expression may be myoblast specific. The evidence for mosaicism for the detected structural chromosomal phenotype of the proband is consistent with recent data suggesting abnormality. Mosaicisms ranged between 20 and 60%. that myoblasts may be requires for normal limb outgrowth We are Our results indicate that in over 20% of patients with unexplained mental currently screening a case with a similar phenotype but no visible retardation and congenital anomalies cryptic chromosomal imbalances chromosomal abnormalities for mutations in CMKLR1 and a mouse can be detected when using arrayCGH at 1 Mb resolution. We show model is being created. This gene is an excellent candidate for the limb that not only the resolution, but also the sensitivity to detect mosaics phenotype and its discovery emphasises the usefulness of this method for small structural defects is higher than traditional karyotyping. in studying cases with no available metaphase chromosomes. *These authors share equal contribution to the work presented in this abstract. C07. Rad50 deficiency causes a variant form of Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome C05. CASP8 constitutional haploinsufficiency in a girl with R. Bendix-Waltes1, R. Kalb2, M. Stumm3, A. Sobeck2, P. Heidari1, B. Brinkhoff1, del(2)(q32.3-q33.1) associated with congenital abdominal B. Wieland1, R. Varon-Mateeva4, D. Schindler2, T. Dörk1; neuroblastoma, psychomotor retardation and dysmorphisms 1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2University of Würzburg, Würzburg, G. Gregato1, E. Rossi1, S. Gimelli1, T. Pramparo1, R. Giorda2, R. Tenconi3, O. Germany, 3University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 4University Clinics Zuffardi1; Charite, Berlin, Germany. 1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2IRCSS la nostra famiglia, The Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 complex is assumed to act as a sensor of DNA Bosisio Parini, Italy, 3Genetica Medica, Padova, Italy. double-strand breaks. Mutations of Mre11 and Nbs1 are associated with Neuroblastoma is a neuroblastic tumor of neuroectodermal cells the radiation sensitivity syndromes ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder derived from the neural crest. We studied a patient that underwent (ATLD) and Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), respectively. Here to medical evaluation at 2 and 4 years of age due to psychomotor we report that Rad50 deficiency also occurs as an inherited condition and growth retardation, hypotonia, joint laxity and some dysmorphic in man due to hypomorphic RAD50 germline mutations. An 18-year-old features. She was operated soon after birth for a monolateral abdominal German who has a variant form of the NBS without immunodeficiency, stage 1 neuroblastoma identified prenatally. No chemotherapy but is a compound heterozygote for a nonsense and a stop codon only surveillance was recommended. Cytogenetic and FISH analysis mutation in the RAD50 gene. Rad50 protein expression is reduced to revealed a complex translocation involving chromosomes 6, 10 and 15 less than one tenth in her fibroblasts and lymphoblastoid cells. This with four breakpoints. The same translocation was found in her normal Rad50 deficiency is associated with a high frequency of spontaneous mother. The FISH breakpoints were narrowed by PCR amplification of chromatid exchanges. Rad50 deficient fibroblasts fail to form Mre11 STS markers in somatic hybrids. No cryptic deletions were present at and Nbs1 foci in response to irradiation. Phosphorylation of p53 at the translocation breakpoints neither in the proposita nor in her mother. serine 15 and the transcriptional induction of p21/WAF1 mRNA are Later array-CGH experiments demonstrated a 2q32.3q33.1 deletion. reduced and Ser343 phosphorylation of Nbs1 is undetectable in the FISH refined the deletion breakpoints within BAC RP11-267L23 and patient´s lymphoblastoid cell line following irradiation. These defects the two BACs RP11-53H10 (deleted) and RP11-35B12 (not deleted). could be complemented by transient transfection of wildtype Rad50 The same region deleted in the patient (about 8 Mb) was inverted in cDNA into the lymphoblastoid cells. Our findings expand the clinical one of the maternal chromosomes 2. Microsatellites analysis confirmed spectrum of DNA double strand break repair disorders and provide the maternal origin of the deletion. evidence that Rad50 is required for the recruitment of Mre11 to sites of The deleted 2q32.3q33.1 region contains genes known to be involved DNA damage and modulates some functions of the ATM kinase. in neuroblastoma: CASP8 (and also CASP10), and caspase-8-related FLICE-inhibitory protein (FLIP). Usually CASP8 gene is deleted or C08. Expression analysis of murine hemochromatosis genes in silenced by methylation in neuroblastoma cell lines while methylation anemia and iron overload of its promoter region is the predominant mechanism in tumor samples. A. Roetto1, F. Daraio1, A. Bondi1, P. Valentino1, S. Carturan1, E. Gottardi1, C. Constitutional hemizygous deletions involving these apoptotic genes Camaschella2; have never been reported. DNA copy number changes and methylation 1Università di Torino, Orbassano Torino, Italy, 2Università Vita-Salute, Milano, studies in the tumor sample of the proposita are in progress. Italy. Hereditary Haemochromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive disorder common among Caucasians, characterized by iron homeostasis disruption leading to parenchymal iron overload. Five different disease form have been characterized and the involved genes (HFE, HJV, HEPC, TFR2 and SLC40A1) have been individuated. All these genes are highly expressed in the liver and the correspondent iron proteinsConcurrent Sessions 64 (HFE, hemojuvelin, hepcidin, Tfr2 and ferroportin1) seem to be in 14 genes responsible for familial HCM have been identified. The correlated. Nevertheless, the molecular details of their interrelationship majority of these mutations are single nucleotide substitutions and have are still unclear. To clarify in vivo iron proteins function we utilized been identified throughout coding exons, intron-exon junctions and in murine models of two different strains in different iron conditions. promoter regions. Genetic testing for HCM is of considerable benefit Here we report the liver expression of hepcidin, ferroportin and of in diagnosis, prognosis or predictive testing. However, the genetic the other HH genes after phlebotomy-induced anaemia and following and allelic heterogeneity of HCM means that mutation detection by parenteral and oral iron loading. Furthermore, TFR2 and ferroportin classical methods is time-consuming, expensive and difficult to realise proteins expression variations have been investigated in liver and in a routine diagnostic molecular laboratory. We have developed a duodenum. Results demonstrate in liver a statistically significant 30 kb CustomSeq Resequencing Array (Affymetrix) enabling rapid reduction of hepcidin and ferroportin expression after phlebotomy, an molecular diagnosis of HCM. This array comprises all coding exons increase of Hepc and a decrease of Tfr2 expression after iron loading. (161), splice-site junctions and known promoter regions of 12 genes Hepatic ferroportin protein is decreased during anemia, while, 6 hour mutated in HCM. We designed PCR probes for a total of 44 amplicons after phlebotomy, when hepatic hepcidin expression is increased, (size ranging from 330-10’800 bp) which are pooled and hybridised to SLC40A1 duodenal expression increases but ferroportin resulted the array. Using this array, more than 90% of all mutations reported to to be diminished. This data would confirm that ferroportin protein is date can be detected by a single hybridisation experiment. regulated by hepcidin post-tradutionally. We report here the results of a first series of unrelated patients with In parenteral iron overload condition, TFR2 expression and protein HCM that we have analysed by our CustomSeq array and discuss our production decrease, while HFE expression remains constant. On the experience with this new highthroughput molecular diagnostic tool. contrary, in dietary iron overload TFR2 remains constant while HFE expression increases. This data supports the hypothesis that Hfe C11. An FGF23 missense mutation causes familial tumoral and Tfr2 are part of different pathways both causing final hepcidin calcinosis with hyperphosphatemia activation. A. Benet-Pages1, P. Orlik2, T. M. Strom1,3, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, GSF National Research Center for Environment C09. Gain-of-function amino acid substitutions drive positive and Health, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, Innsbruck Medical selection of FGFR2 mutations in human spermatogonia and University, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der explain the high prevalence of de novo Apert syndrome Isar, Technical University, Munich, Germany. mutations. Familial tumoral calcinosis (FTC) is an autosomal recessive disorder A. Goriely1, G. A. T. McVean2, A. M. M. van Pelt3, A. W. O’Rourke4, S. A. Wall5, characterized by ectopic calcifications and elevated serum phosphate D. G. de Rooij3, A. O. M. Wilkie1,6; levels. Recently, biallelic deleterious mutations in the GALNT3 gene 1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United have been described to cause FTC. We investigated a 12-year-old boy Kingdom, 2Dpt of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, from Austria with FTC who was negative for GALNT3 mutations. He 3Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 4The Churchill Hospital, Oxford, clinically presented with painful swellings at the left elbow and left tibia. United Kingdom, 5Department of Plastic Surgery, Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, Radiographs showed a calcified tumoral mass at the left elbow and United Kingdom, 6Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Univer- signs of diaphysitis at the left tibia. The FTC phenotype is regarded sity of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. as the metabolic mirror image of hypophosphatemic conditions, where Despite the importance of mutation in genetics, there are virtually no causal mutations are known in the genes FGF23 or PHEX. Hence, we experimental data on the occurrence of specific nucleotide substitutions considered these genes candidates for underlying FTC. Sequencing in human gametes. We have studied the occurrence of spontaneous revealed a homozygous missense mutation in the FGF23 gene mutations at position 755 of Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 2 (p.S71G) at an amino acid position which is highly conserved. Wild- (FGFR2) because 755C>G transversions cause Apert syndrome; this type FGF23 is secreted as intact protein and processed N-terminal and mutation, encoding the gain-of-function substitution Ser252Trp (birth C-terminal fragments. Expression of the mutated protein in HEK293 prevalence: 1:100,000), occurs with a birth rate elevated 500-800 cells showed that only the C-terminal fragment is secreted whereas fold above background and originates exclusively from the unaffected the intact protein is retained in the Golgi complex. Also, determination father. We previously demonstrated high levels of both 755C>G and of circulating FGF23 in the affected individual with an FGF23 ELISA 755C>T FGFR2 mutations in human sperm, and proposed that these showed a marked increase in the C-terminal fragment. These results particular mutations are enriched because the encoded proteins confer suggest that the FGF23 function is decreased by absent or extremely a selective advantage to spermatogonial cells (Goriely et al., Science reduced secretion of intact FGF23. We conclude that FGF23 mutations 301, 643; 2003). in hypophosphatemic rickets and FTC have opposite effects on We have now obtained further evidence consistent with this proposal. phosphate homeostasis. First, we show that mutation levels at the adjacent FGFR2 nucleotides 752-754 are low, excluding any general increase in local mutation rate. C12. Homozygosity for a Dominant-Negative Type I Collagen Second, we present three instances of double nucleotide changes Mutation Attenuates the Type IV OI Phenotype of the involving 755C, expected to be extremely rare as chance events. Two Heterozygous Brtl Mouse: Insight into Disease Mechanism are shown, either by assessment of the pedigree or by direct analysis A. Forlino1, C. Bergwitz1, T. E. Uveges1, K. M. Kozloff2, N. V. Kuznetsova3, G. of sperm, to have arisen in sequential steps; the third (encoding Gronowicz4, S. A. Goldstein2, S. Leikin3, J. C. Marini1; Ser252Tyr) was predicted from structural considerations. Finally we 1BEMB; NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Ortho Res Labs; U Mich, demonstrate that both major alternative spliceforms of FGFR2 (Fgfr2b Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3Sect of Phys Biochem; NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, and Fgfr2c) are expressed in rat spermatogonial stem cell lines. MD, United States, 4U Conn Health Center, Farmington, CT, United States. Taken together, these observations show that specific pathogenic The Brtl mouse is a dominant-negative model for type IV osteogenesis FGFR2 mutations attain high levels in sperm because they encode imperfecta, caused by a glycine substitution (G349C) knocked into one proteins with gain-of-function properties, favoring clonal expansion of col1a1 allele. Brtl/+ pups have 30% perinatal lethality. Surviving Brtl mutant spermatogonial cells in the human testis. mice are small with weaker and more brittle bones. In murine models for other dominant genetic disorders, homozygous C10. A 12 gene DNA resequencing chip for molecular diagnosis animals have a more severe or lethal phenotype than heterozygous.. of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy We present the novel genetic situation in which homozygosity for S. Fokstuen1, R. Lyle1, A. Munoz1, C. Gehrig1, U. Sigwart2, R. Lerch2, M. a dominant mutation (Brtl/Brtl) attenuates the phenotype of the Beghetti3, F. Mach2, J. Sztajzel2, S. E. Antonarakis1, J. L. Blouin1; heterozygous mice. Brtl/Brtl have normal perinatal survival, an 1Medical Genetics, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Car- intermediate weight versus Wt and Brtl/+, and lack the rib fractures, diology, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Pediatric Cardi- flared thorax, osteoporotic calvarium and vertebrae seen in Brtl/+. ology, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. Brtl/Brtl femurs have normal BMD, but intermediate CSA, TbTh and Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an autosomal dominant disease BV/TV. They withstand normal loading to fracture and are less brittle with a prevalence of approximately 1/500 adults. To date, mutations than Brtl/+. Cell numbers, MAR and BFR/BS were unchanged in allConcurrent Sessions 65 genotypes at 2 mos. (variable evidence for bone overgrowth and aortic root dilatation and/ Matrix insufficiency and collagen chain composition may contribute or dissection), none satisfied diagnostic criteria for MFS. Importantly, to the different homozygous and heterozygous phenotype. In Brtl/+, aneurysms appeared to be particularly aggressive, with rupture at a type I collagen containing one mutant chain is selectively retained by very early age or at a size below that seen in MFS. the cells and is deficient in lung and skin tissue. Approximately 1/3 of We identified heterozygous mutations in either type I or type II collagen with one mutant chain and 2/3 of collagen with two mutant transforming growth factor β receptor (TβRI or TβRII) in 4 and 6 families, α1 chains are secreted from the Brtl/+ fibroblasts, resulting in about respectively. Despite evidence that receptors derived from selected 40% matrix insufficiency of type I collagen in Brtl/+ versus only 15% in mutant alleles cannot support TGFβ signal propagation, heterozygous Brtl/Brtl. Additionally, collagen with one mutant chain present in Brtl/+ patient-derived cells do not show altered kinetics of the acute phase has a reactive SH group which might contribute to illegitimate collagen response to administered ligand. Furthermore, tissues derived from cross-links, while collagen of Brtl/Brtl contains only disulfide-linked α1 affected individuals show increased expression of both collagen and dimers. connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), as well as nuclear enrichment of phosphorylated Smad2, indicative of increased TGFβ signaling. C13. Germ-line and somatic PTPN11 mutations in human These data definitively implicate perturbation of TGFβ signaling in disease many common human phenotypes including craniosynostosis, cleft V. Cordeddu1, S. Martinelli1, C. Carta1, V. Petrangeli1, F. Pantaleoni1, V. Fo- palate, arterial aneurysms, congenital heart disease, and mental dale1, G. Zampino2, I. van der Burgt3, S. Jeffery4, P. D. Emanuel5, C. Schoch6, retardation, and suggest that comprehensive mechanistic insight will M. L. Loh7, N. Gatterman8, G. Basso9, A. Biondi10, M. Sorcini1, B. D. Gelb11, M. require consideration of both primary and compensatory events. Tartaglia1; 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, C15. LMX1B genotype-renal phenotype studies in 32 families Rome, Italy, 3University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4St. with nail patella syndrome George's Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom, 5University of E. M. H. F. Bongers1, F. T. Huysmans2, R. J. C. Admiraal3, J. R. M. Cruysberg4, Alabama, Birmingham, AL, United States, 6Ludwig-Maximilians-University of G. Borm5, A. van Remortele1, H. van Bokhoven1, L. H. Hoefsloot1, E. Levtch- München, München, Germany, 7University of California, San Francisco, CA, enko6, N. V. A. M. Knoers1; United States, 8Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 9Università di 1Dept Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijme- Padova, Padua, Italy, 10Università di Milano Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 11Mount Sinai gen, The Netherlands, 2Dept Internal Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States. Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Dept Otorhinolaryngology, Rad- We recently demonstrated that germ-line mutations in PTPN11 cause boud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Dept Noonan syndrome (NS), and that somatic mutations in the same gene Ophthalmology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The recur in a heterogeneous group of hematologic malignancies. PTPN11 Netherlands, 5Dept Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Radboud University Nijme- encodes the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, a transducer that gen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 6Dept Pediatric Nephrology, relays signals from activated receptors to RAS and other intracellular Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. signaling molecules. Both germ-line and somatic PTPN11 mutations Nail-patella syndrome (NPS) is characterized by developmental defects promote SHP-2 gain-of-function by destabilizing the catalytically of dorsal limb structures, nephropathy, and glaucoma and caused inactive conformation of the protein. by heterozygous mutations in the LIM homeodomain transcription Here, we describe the diversity of PTPN11 mutations in human disease, factor LMX1B. In order to identify possible genotype-phenotype and trace the parental origin of de novo PTPN11 lesions in NS. correlations, we performed LMX1B mutation analysis and in-depth DNAs from individuals with NS (N=107), juvenile myelomonocytic investigations of limb, renal, ocular, and audiological findings in 106 leukemia (N=64), myelodysplastic syndromes (N=234), chronic subjects from 32 NPS families. Remarkable phenotypic heterogeneity myelomonocytic leukemia (N=84) and acute myeloid leukemia at the individual, intrafamilial, and interfamilial level was observed (N=393) were screened by DHPLC analysis. Mutations were identified for different NPS manifestations. We detected low tension glaucoma in 49 subjects with NS and 45 individuals with a hematologic disorder. (LTG) and hearing impairment as new symptoms associated with NPS. Most of mutations altered residues located in or around the interacting Quantitative urinanalysis revealed proteinuria in 21.3% of individuals. surfaces of the N-SH2 and PTP domains that stabilize SHP-2 in Microalbuminuria was observed in 21.7% of subjects without overt its catalytically inactive conformation. However, no overlap in the proteinuria. Interestingly, nephropathy appeared significantly more precise residue substitutions was observed. Such dramatic genotype- frequent in females. A significant association was identified between phenotype relationship defines a novel class of mutations of PTPN11 the presence of renal involvement in an NPS patient and a positive with role in cancer. These data also support that distinct gain-of- family history of nephropathy. Sequencing of LMX1B revealed function thresholds for SHP-2 activity are required to induce cell-, 18 different mutations, including 9 novel variants, in 28 families. tissue- or developmental-specific phenotypes, each depending on the Individuals with an LMX1B mutation located in the homeodomain transduction network involved. showed significantly more frequent and higher values of proteinuria Finally, by analyzing intronic portions flanking the exonic PTPN11 compared to individuals carrying mutations in the LIM-A and LIM-B lesions in 49 sporadic NS cases, we traced the parental origin of domains. No clear genotype-phenotype association was apparent for mutations in 14 families, and demonstrated that they were transmitted extrarenal manifestations. This is the first study indicating that family by the father in all cases. history of nephropathy and mutation location might be important in precipitating the individual risk for developing NPS renal disease. We C14. The Loeys-Dietz syndrome: a new aortic aneurysm suggest that the NPS phenotype is broader than previously described syndrome caused by mutations in TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 and that LTG and hearing impairment are part of the syndrome. B. L. Loeys1, J. De Backer2, P. J. Coucke2, J. Chen1, H. C. Dietz1, A. M. De Further studies on modifying factors are needed to understand the Paepe2; mechanisms underlying phenotypic heterogeneity. 1McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium. C16. A new XLMR syndrome characterized by mental retardation, A novel aortic aneurysm syndrome characterized by the triad of primary ciliary dyskinesia and macrocephaly, caused by a novel widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), bifid uvula and/or cleft palate, mutation in OFD1. and generalized arterial tortuosity with ascending aortic aneurysm/ B. Budny1,2, W. Chen1, M. Wisniewska2, A. Tzschach1, H. Omran3, M. Fliegauf3, dissection was previously described (Loeys-Dietz syndrome; ASHG M. Badura2, L. R. Jensen1, M. Raynaud4, A. Latos-Bielenska2, S. Lenzner1, H. 2004). This syndrome shows autosomal dominant inheritance and H. Ropers1; variable clinical expression. Here were present other findings in multiple 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2University of systems that include: craniosynostosis, Arnold-Chiari malformation Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Albert Ludwigs University, Freiburg, Ger- with hydrocephalus, mental retardation, congenital heart disease, many, 4Service de Genetique et INSERM U316, Tours, France. and aneurysms with dissection throughout the arterial tree. While We report on a new syndrome characterized by mental retardation, some individuals show some overlap with Marfan syndrome (MFS) primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) and macrocephaly in a large three-Concurrent Sessions 66 generation family with an X-linked recessive inheritance. The 11- de novo mutations in ZFHX1B located at 2q22, whereas for GOSHS, year-old index case had delayed motor development, severe mental which is autosomal recessive inherited, no causative gene has been retardation (IQ=20), and macrocephaly. Recurrent respiratory identified yet. To unravel the genetic basis of GOSHS we studied a problems led to the diagnosis of PCD at the age of 8 years. Eight large inbred Moroccan family segregating GOSHS and polymicrogyria other affected males died because of bronchopulmonary infections as part of the syndrome. We identified, by homozygosity mapping, before the age of 5 years. Five obligate female carriers were clinically a critical region of 3.8 Mb on 10q21.3-q22.1. We sequenced all the inconspicuous. We performed pairwise and multipoint linkage analysis genes in the region and identified a homozygous stop codon in a gene using SNP markers, and found tight linkage to a 25 cM interval in we named GOSHS. In a second Pakistani family we identified another Xp22.32-Xp21.3 (LOD score 2.99 at DXS8019). Based on the specific homozygous stop codon. As mutations in this gene are associated with phenotype of PCD, the candidate interval was screened for cilium- Hirschsprung disease and polymicrogyria, the encoded protein likely associated genes. Therefore, we performed an in silico comparative plays a role in neural crest and cerebral development. genomic approach, comparing 164 genes from the candidate interval with those from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii as a ciliated and those C19. Different mechanism of second hit in neurofibromas from Arabidopsis thaliana as a non-ciliated organism. For 4 of these depending on the germline NF1 mutation genes, orthologs were only detected in C.reinhardtii. Subsequent T. De Raedt1, O. Maertens2, H. Brems1, I. Heyns1, J. R. Vermeesch1, R. Sciot3, screening of these genes revealed a causative mutation in the OFD1 L. Messiaen2, E. Legius1; gene, known to be mutated in X-linked dominant Oral-Facial-Digital 1Department of Human Genetics, KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for syndrome type 1 (MIM#311200). An insertion of four nucleotides Medical Genetics, UGent, Gent, Belgium, 3Department of Pathology, KULeu- (AAGA) in exon 16, present in affected males and all obligate carrier ven, Leuven, Belgium. females, causes a frameshift leading to a premature stop codon. Thus, Neurofibromatosis type I is an autosomal dominant disorder caused despite its different mode of inheritance, the disorder in this family is by mutations in the NF1 tumor suppressor gene. The hallmarks of allelic to OFD1, and our findings suggest that the OFD1 gene plays an NF1 are neurofibromas, café-au-lait spots, Lisch noduli and learning important role in the biogenesis and/or functioning of cilia. difficulties. The NF1 population can, on the basis of their germline mutation, be subdivided into two main patient groups i.e. those with a C17. CHARGE syndrome: the phenotypic spectrum of mutations mutation confined to NF1 and those with a microdeletion of the entire in the CHD7 gene NF1 region (1,4Mb) including neighboring genes. Patients with an M. Jongmans1, L. Vissers1, L. Hoefsloot1, R. Admiraal2, J. M. van Hagen3, J. A. NF1 microdeletion have on average a larger tumor load and have an Veltman1, B. B. A. de Vries1, A. G. van Kessel1, H. G. Brunner1, C. van Raven- increased risk for malignancy. swaaij-Arts1; We investigated if the difference in tumor phenotype originates 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen- from a difference in somatic inactivation of NF1. We analysed 35 tre, The Netherlands, 2Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University neurofibromas of NF1 microdeletion patients and 28 neurofibromas Nijmegen Medical Centre, The Netherlands, 3Department of Human Genetics, of NF1 non-microdeletion patients for LOH. LOH was found in 7/28 VU University Medical Centre Amsterdam, The Netherlands. neurofibromas of the non-microdeletion patients and in none of the 35 The main features of CHARGE syndrome are coloboma, heart microdeletion patients (P=0.002, Fisher exact). Using semi-quantitated malformations, choanal atresia, retarded growth and development, PCR and array-CGH we further investigated the mechanism of LOH. genital hypoplasia, ear anomalies and/or deafness. Other common Of the 7 neurofibromas with LOH, 3 exhibited LOH due to a deletion on aspects of this syndrome are cleft lip/palate, balance disturbances, chromosome 17, and 4 due to mitotic recombination. facial palsy and renal malformations. The clinical variability is high and The reason for the absence of LOH in neurofibromas of NF1 a clinical diagnosis is not always straightforward. microdeletion patients remains speculative. LOH in microdeletion Recently, the CHD7 gene, a new member of the chromodomain gene cases results in a homozygous deletion of 17 genes and this might family, was identified as an important gene involved in CHARGE not be viable for the Schwann cell or alternatively this might lead to syndrome1. Since this discovery we studied more than 60 patients with a malignant tumor. This study points to an important difference in the CHARGE syndrome and identified CHD7 mutations in over 60% of pathogenesis of neurofibroma formation in both NF1 patient groups. cases. The clinical details of our CHD7 positive patients confirm the phenotypic C20. Inducible oncogenic ERBB2 signaling identifies premature variability of CHARGE syndrome. This spectrum includes patients senescence as a primary tumor-protective response in who do not meet the diagnostic criteria for CHARGE syndrome as mammary carcinogenesis proposed by Blake et al.2, as will be illustrated by some atypical cases. C. Spangenberg1, T. M. Trost1, E. U. Lausch1, S. A. Fees1, D. Reutzel1, A. For example a mutation was found in a boy with an above average May1, S. Schmitt2, I. B. Schiffer3, J. G. Hengstler4, D. Prawitt1, B. U. Zabel1; IQ. Also in a patient without coloboma, choanal atresia or heart defect 1Universitätskinderklinik, Mainz, Germany, 2FACS Core Facility, Mainz, Ger- a mutation was identified. Furthermore we were able to demonstrate many, 3Universitätsfrauenklinik, Mainz, Germany, 4Rudolf-Böhm Institut für intrafamilial variability in sibs carrying the same CHD7 mutation. Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Leipzig, Germany. An overview of the mutations identified thus far will be given and the ERBB2 plays a central role in the development of breast cancer and clinical spectrum of CHD7 positive patients will be discussed. other epithelial malignancies. Enhanced ERBB2 expression leading 1) Vissers LE. Nat Genet. 2004 Sep;36(9):955-7. to aberrant signaling in the course of tumorigenesis can frequently be 2) Blake KD. Clin Pediatr. 1998 Mar;37(3):159-73. attributed to genomic amplification of the ERBB2-locus on chromosome 17q21. In order to inducibly express oncogenic ERBB2 (NeuT) in MCF- C18. Identification of a novel locus for Hirschsprung disease 7 breast carcinoma cells we applied a tetracycline (Tet)-controlled associated with microcephaly, mental retardation and expression system. Interestingly, tet-mediated upregulation of NeuT polymicrogyria does not result in a mitogenic response but instead leads to prominent A. S. Brooks1, A. M. Bertoli-Avella1, G. M. Burzynski2, J. Osinga2, J. A. Hurst3, biochemical and phenotypical alterations compatible with premature G. M. S. Mancini1, E. de Graaff1, B. A. Oostra1, R. M. W. Hofstra2; senescence (e.g. cell cycle arrest and expression of senescence 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, associated beta-galactosidase). Molecular dissection of the underlying 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, Groningen, The mechanisms provides direct evidence that upregulation of the Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor P21 via the P38 MAPK pathway is Oxford, United Kingdom. necessary to elicit the senescence response upon oncogenic ERBB2 At least two syndromes present with a similar association of signaling. Hirschsprung disease, microcephaly and mental retardation, namely Premature senescence represents a tumor-protective program that Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) and Goldberg-Shprintzen syndrome has previously been shown to be induced by overexpression of other (GOSHS). Although some of the key features in GOSHS are more or oncogenes (e.g. activated forms of RAS or RAF). Our results suggest less similar to the ones in MWS, patients can be distinguished on the a multistep model of ERBB2-positive mammary carcinomas that basis of their facial dysmorphism. Furthermore, MWS is associated with anticipates further specific hits in addition to upregulation of ERBB2.Concurrent Sessions 67 Such lesions may functionally inactivate premature senescence as de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal, 6Hosp de Sao Joao, Porto, the inherent anticarcinogenic program, targeting constituents of the Portugal, 7Willink Biochemical Genetics Unit, Royal Manchester Children’s Hos- premature senescence program (like P21), regulatory molecules, or pital, Manchester,Novato, United Kingdom, 8Department of Pediatrics, Univer- downstream effectors. sity of Padova, Padova, Italy, 9NYU Departments of Medicine, Physiology and Neuroscience, NYU School of Medicine, USA, New York, CA, United States, C21. Pharmacogenetics studies in patients with advanced lung 10BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA, United States. cancer: prognostic value of the thymidylate synthase 2R/3R MPS VI (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome) is a lysosomal storage disease polymorphism and predictivity of NER factor XPD K751Q caused by insufficient activity of the enzyme N-acetylgalactosamine and XRCC1 R399Q polymorphisms following platinum-based 4-sulfatase (arylsulfatase B or ASB). The clinical course is chronic, chemotherapy progressive, and life threatening. Results are reported here for a D. F. Giachino1, P. Ghio2, S. Regazzoni1, G. Mandrile1, S. Novello2, G. Sel- multicenter, multinational, open-label extension of the Phase 3 study vaggi2, M. De Marchi1, G. V. Scagliotti2; of enzyme-replacement therapy (ERT) using weekly treatment of 1 1Medical Genetics, ASO San Luigi, University of Torino, Orbassano, Italy, 2Tho- mg/kg recombinant human arylsulfatase B (rhASB). Nineteen patients racic Oncology Unit, ASO San Luigi, University of Torino, Orbassano, Italy. in each of the rhASB and placebo groups completing the 24-week Lung cancer is one of the most frequent killers in most populations, placebo-controlled study were enrolled. The primary objective was to and treatment is mainly based on platinum derivatives. Survival is evaluate rhASB’s ability to enhance endurance based on an increase limited and highly variable, probably depending both on tumor features in the number of meters (m) walked in a 12-MinuteWalk at Week 48 and sensitivity to treatment. Pharmacogenetic studies can contribute compared to baseline (Week 0) and with entry into the extension to better understand both kind of variables. As candidate genes we study (Week 24). As a reference, the rhASB group improved by a choose TS, whose expression controls cell proliferation and the 3R mean distance of 109 m relative to 26 m for the placebo during the allele is associated with higher expression, XPD, whose K751Q SNP double-blind phase (p=0.025). From Week 24 to Week 48, the original affects repair activity, and the XRCC1 R399Q SNP. We enrolled 322 placebo group received rhASB and showed a mean increase of 65 m consecutive patients, 80% males, 86% smokers, 82% NSCLC. Among relative to Week 24 values (p=0.007), and an increase of 90 m relative them, 244 received platinum derivatives, mainly in combination with to baseline for the entire 48 weeks (p<0.001). From Week 24 to Week gemcitabine. The control group was represented by 253 healthy medical 48, the original rhASB group improved their mean walk distance an students. Uni- and multivariate statistical analysis was performed with additional 36 m (p = 0.15) for a total of 145 m relative to baseline the SPlus package. On December 2004, the median follow up period (p=0.001). Similar changes were observed for each group in a 3- was 320 days. Survival was estimated on a subgroup of 128 patients Minute Stair Climb, a secondary endpoint variable, providing additional with enrollment <6 months from diagnosis and >9 months follow-up. evidence of improved endurance. Additional efficacy and safety data Patients' genotype frequencies were not significantly different will be presented. from controls'. Median survival was significantly increased in TS 2R homozygotes (17.3m) vs. 9.6m in 2R/3R and 8.7m in 3R/3R, C24. Development of antisense-induced exon skipping for independently of the treatment. The effect of platinum treatment was clinical applications in Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy. statistically significant in KK homozygotes, who showed a significantly J. C. T. van Deutekom1, A. Aartsma-Rus1, A. A. M. Janson1, C. L. de Winter1, R. longer survival (13.3m in Pt-treated vs 7.7m in nonPt-treated), while it C. J. Schotel1, J. T. den Dunnen1, G. Platenburg2, G. B. van Ommen1; was ineffective in QQ homozygotes. Relapses were 22.8% in KK and 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 43.5% in QQ. The XRCC1 SNP was not significantly associated with 2Prosensa B.V., Leiden, The Netherlands. any of the clinical parameters. Manipulation of pre-mRNA splicing using antisense oligoribonucleotides Pharmacogenetics may predict non-responsiveness and address (AONs) has shown great therapeutic promise for Duchenne muscular patients to alternative non-platinum based treatments. dystrophy (DMD). By inducing the skipping of one or more exons, an out-of-frame transcript associated with DMD can be converted C22. All-trans retinoic acid treatment of Wilms tumor cells into an in-frame transcript as found in patients with the less severe reverses expression of genes associated with high risk and Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD). This may alleviate or even stop relapse in vivo the progression of muscle wasting in DMD. We have characterized B. Zirn1, B. Samans2, M. Krause2, M. Eilers2, M. Gessler1; a series of AONs with which the skipping of 30 out of 79 DMD exons 1Physiological Chemistry I, University of Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Institute of can be induced. Ten were successfully applied to cultured muscle Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), University of Marburg, Germany. cells from a series of DMD patients carrying a variety of mutations. Wilms tumor is one of the most frequent neoplasias in children. Our The synthesis of BMD-like dystrophins was detected in up to 90% of previous microarray screening in a large series of Wilms tumors treated muscle cells. Furthermore, by applying combinations of AONs, revealed several candidate genes that are deregulated in advanced we demonstrated the simultaneous skipping of two, and even multiple, tumors and are part of the retinoic acid signalling pathway. To investigate consecutive exons. This multiexon skipping increases the therapeutic whether retinoic acid could be employed as a novel therapeutic agent applicability to over 85% of DMD patients, and renders it significantly in these tumors, we treated cultured Wilms tumor cells with different less mutation-specific. In the mdx mouse model, intramuscular concentrations of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and assessed gene injections of an exon 23 skipping AON restored dystrophin in up to expression changes by real time RT-PCR as well as microarray 20% of fibers. We also set up human sequence-specific exon skipping analysis. Several genes like RARRES3, CTGF, CKS2, CCNA2, in transgenic mice carrying a copy of the full-length human DMD gene. IGFBP3, CCL2 or ITM2B that were previously found to be deregulated Intramuscular delivery of human-sequence specific AONs showed in advanced tumors exhibited opposite expression changes after dose-and time-dependent skipping of the human (but not the murine) ATRA treatment. In addition to enhanced retinoid signalling, the TGFß exons in hDMD mice. We are currently planning a clinical proof of pathway was strongly activated by ATRA treatment of Wilms tumor concept study to determine the tolerability and efficiency of an exon cells. Both the retinoic acid and the TGFß pathway mediate inhibition 51-specific AON following local intramuscular injections in patients. of cell growth. These findings represent the first molecular evidence of a potential benefit from ATRA treatment in Wilms tumors. C25. Significant decrease of BMI in individuals carrying the 103I MC4R allele - Association analysis in 7937 participants of two C23. Follow-up Extension Study of a Double-Blind Phase 3 population-based surveys Clinical Study of Recombinant Human Arylsulfatase B (rhASB) C. Vollmert1, I. M. Heid1, A. Hinney2, A. Döring1, F. Geller3, H. Löwel1, H. Wich- in Patients with Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (MPS VI). mann1, F. Kronenberg4, J. Hebebrand2, T. Illig1, &. the KORA group5; M. Beck1, P. Harmatz2, R. Giugliani3, I. Schwartz3, N. Guffon4, C. Sá Miranda5, 1GSF National Research Center for Environment and Health, Neuherberg, Ger- E. Teles6, J. Wraith7, M. Scarpa8, K. Berger9, S. Swiedler10; many, 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Duisburg- 1Children's Hosp, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Children's Hosp & Re- Essen, Germany, 3Institute of Medical Biometry and Epidemiology, Philipps-Uni- serach Center, Oakland, CA, United States, 3Hosp de Clinicas de Porto Alegre versity of Marburg, Germany, 4Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of - UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4Hosp Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France, 5Instituto Medical Genetics, Mol. and Clin. Pharmacology, Innsbruck Med. Univ., Austria,Concurrent Sessions 68 5The KORA group consists of H.-E. Wichmann (speaker), H. Löwel, C. Meis- postimplantation loss of female embryos that inherited the alleles of inger, T. Illig, R. Holle, J. John, and their coworkers, who are responsible for the their grandfather. To further investigate the mechanism underlying TRD design and conduct of the KORA studies. The MONICA Augsburg study was and the role of methylation we repeated the backcrosses with mice that initiated and conducted by U, Keil and coworkers., Germany. carry mutations in the DNA methyltransferase gene 1 (Dnmt1), which The melanocortin-4-receptor gene (MC4R) is part of the encodes the enzyme involved in maintenance DNA methylation and is melanocortinergic pathway that controls energy homeostasis. The essential for normal embryo development. Two mutations were tested: MC4R_V103I (rs2229616) polymorphism was recently shown to be the Dnmt1c and Dnmt1n that target the catalytic and N-terminal regions associated with body weight regulation: A meta-analysis of 14 case- of DNMT1, respectively. As predicted by our model, Dnmt1 mutations control studies reported a mild negative association with obesity caused loss of TRD (P=0.0007), i.e. normal Mendelian transmission (OR=0.69, p=0.03). However, evidence in a large population-based of alleles. Furthermore, the transmission ratios did not depend upon study in a homogeneous population and a significant estimate of the the genotype of the offspring, but depended upon the genotype of the change in quantitative measures of obesity was still lacking. mother, suggesting a maternal factor effect. These results confirm the We performed an association analysis of the genotyping data of two role of methylation and Dnmt1 in the genesis of TRD and explain the population-based surveys of Caucasians with the same high quality genetic heterogeneity observed in human studies. study protocol including a total of 7937 participants. Linear regression analysis showed a significant decrease of 0.52 BMI C28. Identification of a fifth locus involved in Autosomal units (95%CI=[-0.02, -1.03], p=0.043) for carriers of the heterozygote Dominant Hypercholesterolemia rs2229616G/A genotype, a genotype observed in 3.7% of the M. Trillard1, D. Allard1, M. Abifadel1,2, M. Devillers1, D. Erlich1, C. Junien1,3, M. participants. Logistic regression illustrated a significantly negative Varret1, C. Boileau1,3, J. P. Rabès1,3, A. D. H. French Research Network4; association of the MC4R variant with “above average weight” (BMI 1INSERM UR383, Paris, France, 2Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Saint Jo- ≥median BMI) yielding an odds ratio of 0.75 (95%CI=[0.59, 0.95], seph, Beirut, Lebanon, 3Laboratoire de Biochimie, Hormonologie et Génétique p=0.017). Comparing obese (BMI ≥30 kg/m², WHO 1997) to non- moléculaire, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, AP-HP, Boulogne, France, 4GIS-Institut obese (BMI <30 kg/m²) we obtained similar results. The findings were des maladies rares, Paris, France. detected for each gender and each survey separately and did not Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH), a major risk depend on the modelling of age-, sex- and survey effects. factor for atherosclerosis, is associated with mutations in two genes : Our study confirms previous findings of a meta-analysis that the LDLR (encoding low-density lipoprotein receptor) or APOB (encoding relatively infrequent G/A genotype of the V103I_MC4R polymorphism apolipoprotein B). Our team has pioneered the claim that the disease is negatively associated with obesity in population-based original data is far more heterogeneous. We have shown that defects in at least 2 of 7937 participants. Our study extends previous findings by showing other genes (HCHOLA3 and HCHOLA4) are implicated in the disease for the first time a significant decrease of BMI in individuals carrying and recently identified HCHOLA3 as PCSK9 (proprotein convertase the infrequent allele of this MC4R variant. subtilisin/kexin type 9). Through the ADH French Research Network, we collected genetic material from a large french pedigree. Molecular C26. Linkage of chromosome 7p and association of the GPRA diagnostic laboratory excluded linkage to the major genes LDLR gene region in Italian asthmatic families and APOB and sequencing analysis did not reveal any mutation in G. Malerba1, E. Trabetti1, L. Xumerle1, R. Galavotti1, J. Kere2, P. F. Pignatti1; the PCSK9 gene. Furthermore, the study of 6 microsatellite markers 1Section of Biology and Genetics, Dept of Mother and Child, and Biology-Ge- spanning the HCHOLA4 interval clearly excluded linkage to this netics, Verona, Italy, 2Dept of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, locus. To evaluate the power of the family for linkage, 500 simulations Finland. were carried out using the SLINK software in which genotypes were In 2001, a genome scan for asthma and IgE described linkage of a 20cM simulated using parameters compatible with ADH. The average lod region on chromosome 7p14-p15 in Finnish and French- Canadian score was 2.08 and the maximum lod score was 3.96 indicating that families, and in 2004 the GPRA gene region has been associated with the statistically significant threshold of 3 can be reached in this single elevated IgE in the same populations. family. Genomewide scan will be performed in collaboration with We performed the screening of chromosome 7 to investigate whether the National Genotyping Center. After the fine mapping of the locus, it may contain a susceptibility gene for asthma phenotypes in the candidate gene approach through sequencing and Southern blot will Italian population. The screening of 117 families with 19 microsatellite be developed to identify the corresponding gene. Identification of this markers showed potential linkage at different positions ranging from gene, called HCHOLA5, could reveal a new regulatory pathway or 22 cM to 54 cM in the marker map, for asthma (p<0.005 at 44 cM), mechanism and lead to the development of new potent drugs. elevated IgE (p<0.002 at 22 cM), and atopy (p<0.005 at 54 cM). The PDT (pedigree disequilibrium test) was performed on 211 families C29. Two new putative loci for ADNFLE identified in an Italian using 7 SNPs in the GPRA gene region. Elevated IgE levels were family suggest a digenic inheritance for the disease associated with 2 SNPs (Hopo 546333 p=0.0046; Hopo 49 p=0.006) R. Combi1, L. Dalprà2, L. Ferini-Strambi3, M. L. Tenchini1; and with 7-SNP haplotypes in the global test (p=0.019). 1University of Milano, Milano, Italy, 2University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy, These results are in agreement with the recent report in Finnish and 3Scientific Institute H San Raffaele, Milano, Italy. French-Canadian families and suggest that a common susceptibility Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is an factor for atopic manifestations in asthma is likely to map in the GPRA idiopathic partial epilepsy characterised by cluster of short repeated gene region. seizures occurring mostly during non-REM sleep. This epileptic phenotype has been up to now considered a simple Mendelian trait C27. Effect of Dnmt1 mutations on transmission ratio distortion. caused by mutations in neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor A. K. Naumova1, S. Croteau1, M. Freitas Andrade1, C. M. T. Greenwood2; (nAChR) subunit genes. However, for the 88% of the identified cases 1McGill University Health Centre Research Institute, Montreal, PQ, Canada, such mutations were not identified. We recently demonstrated that in 2Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. a three generation Italian family the disease was unlinked to all known Transmission-ratio distortion (TRD) (transmission of parental alleles ADFNLE loci as well as to all known brain-expressed nAChR subunits. that deviate from expected 1:1 ratio) has been observed in different We therefore performed a genome-wide linkage analysis on this family, species and at different genetic loci. We hypothesized that TRD by analysing approximately 400 STR markers equally distributed on resulted from failure to erase epigenetic marks during gametogenesis, the whole genome and calculating LOD and NPL scores. Two new and therefore TRD is one of the manifestations of epigenetic putative ADNFLE loci (NPL score > 3) on chromosomes 3p22-p24 and inheritance . This hypothesis was strongly supported by our finding 8q11.2-q21.1 were identified. These findings, together with several of grandparental-origin dependent TRD for loci closely linked to previously ADNFLE characteristics (i.e. the impossibility to draw a imprinted regions in humans and mice. We found evidence for genetic phenotype-genotype correlation, the variability of symptoms observed heterogeneity with regard to TRD in human families. In the mouse, even among individuals of the same family and with the same genetic we determined that the preferential transmission of grandmaternal defect, the rarity of the identified mutations, the difficulty in linking the alleles (58%) in the imprinted region of chromosome 12 was due to phenotype to the mutated receptor properties and the presence ofConcurrent Sessions 69 locus heterogeneity) which cannot be explained by a simple Mendelian that will provide an updated catalog of these large-size variations inheritance of the disease suggest that this epilepsy could be, at least for accurate interpretation of whole-genome-directed array-based in the above family, a complex disorder. In particular, the reported data CGH assays in the research and clinical settings. This previously are conceivable with a digenic transmission of the disease. unappreciated large-scale genomic heterogeneity argues for a more dynamic impression of the structure of human genome. Further studies C30. Co-localization on human chromosome 1 of susceptibility will likely yield evidence for whether these regions are associated with loci for Atopic Dermatitis (ATOD2) and Psoriasis (PSORS4) disease-associated rearrangements or account for genetic differences C. Sinibaldi1, E. Giardina1, M. Paradisi2, A. Provini2, F. Nasorri3, S. Chimenti4, in susceptibility to diseases or reaction to specific environmental G. Marulli4, S. Nisticò4, P. Rossi5, V. Moschese5, L. Chini5, G. Girolomoni6, G. stimuli. Novelli1,7; 11Department of Biopathology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Department C32. Identification of submicroscopic DNA alterations in mental of Pediatric Dermatology,IDI - IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 3Laboratory of Immunology retardation using whole genome tiling-resolution arrayCGH and Department of Immunodermatology, IDI- IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 4Department B. B. A. De Vries, R. Pfundt, M. Leisink, D. A. Koolen, L. E. L. M. Vissers, of Dermatology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 5Division of Immunology N. De Leeuw, D. Smeets, E. Sistermans, A. Geurts van Kessel, E. F. P. M. and Infectious Disease, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital 'Bambino Schoenmakers, H. G. Brunner, J. A. Veltman; Gesu' and Department of Pediatrics, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 6Dept. Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences, Section of Dermatology, University of Background: Mental retardation occurs in 2-3% of the general Verona, Italy, 7Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Arkansas population and is caused by microscopically visible chromosomal for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States. aberrations in approximately 10% of the cases. The frequency of Atopic dermatitis (ATOD) [OMIM%603165] is a chronic inflammatory submicroscopic chromosomal alterations in these patients is, as yet, skin disease typified by itchy inflamed skin characterized by an onset unknown. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (arrayCGH) mainly in early childhood. ATOD is a complex disease triggered by both allows for the detection of submicroscopic chromosome alterations genetic and environmental risk factors and twin studies indicate that the and, through this technology, the complete human genome can now genetic contribution is substantial. Many genome wide linkage studies be analysed at a 100 kb resolution. mapped a number of susceptibility regions on chromosomes 1q21 Methods and patients: In total 100 patients with mental retardation (ATOD2), 3q21 (ATOD1), 5q31-q33 (ATOD6), 13q12-q14 (ATOD5), and/or congenital anomalies were included in this study. Prior 17q25 (ATOD4), 20p (ATOD3). Four of these loci (1q21, 3q21, routine cytogenetics, including subtelomeric analysis, failed to reveal 17q25 and 20p) are closely coincident with psoriasis [OMIM*177900] anomalies in all cases. susceptibility loci, although ATOD is quite distinct from psoriasis and We constructed a 32K tiling resolution BAC array with complete rarely the two diseases occur together in the same patient. coverage of the entire human genome. DNA from all patients were We performed a fine-mapping approach to refine the localization of hybridized in duplicate onto this array, and novel statistical algorithms ATOD2 and PSORS4 in a large series of 115 Italian nuclear families were developed for automated copy number analysis. Predicted with ATOD and 128 trios with psoriasis using a set of 16 microsatellites alterations were validated by FISH and MLPA, and parents were tested mapping within 1q21 segment spanning 3.5 Mb. Genotype and for de novo occurrence. haplotype analysis revealed that ATOD and psoriasis overlap in Results: Tiling resolution arrayCGH screening detected DNA copy an interval of 65 Kb. This region contain at least 4 genes including number alterations in most patients. Analysis of parental samples, SPRR2C, SPRR2G, LOR, PGLYRP3 and some ESTs. These results however, indicated that the majority of these alterations were inherited confirm preliminary reports on the existence of an ATOD susceptibility large scale copy number variations, i.e., polymorphisms. Fourteen locus on human chromosome 1 and provide the exact localization in a patients exhibited de novo alterations, 10 deletions and 4 duplications. smallest region of overlap (SRO) with PSORS4. This data support the These clinically relevant alterations varied in size between 300 kb and “common soil” hypothesis (identical predisposing genes are involved 10 Mb, and were scattered throughout the genome. in different complex diseases like diabetes, asthma, osteoporosis and Conclusions: This study demonstrates the diagnostic value of inflammatory bowel disease). tiling resolution DNA copy number screening in patients with mental AKNOWLEDGEMENTS retardation and congenital abnormalities, revealing causative COFIN and Ministry of Health submicroscopic alterations in ~14% of the cases. C31. Detection of large-scale copy number polymorphisms in C33. Interchromosomal segmental duplications of the the human genome pericentromeric region on the human Y chromosome C. Lee1, A. J. Iafrate1, L. Feuk2, M. N. Rivera1, Y. Qi2, S. W. Scherer2, M. L. S. Kirsch1, B. Weiß1, T. L. Miner2, R. H. Waterston2, R. A. Clark3, E. E. Eichler3, Listewnik3; C. Münch4, W. Schempp4, G. Rappold1; 1Harvard Medical School / BWH, Boston, MA, United States, 2The Hospital for 1University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Genome Sequencing Center, Sick Kids, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, St. Louis, MO, United States, 3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United United States. States, 4University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) Basic medical research critically depends on the finished human experiments, using 1 megabase interval microarrays containing genome sequence. Two types of gaps are known to exist in the human Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC)-based DNA clones, were genome: those associated with heterochromatic sequences and those performed in pair-wise analyses using genomic DNAs from 39 embedded within euchromatin. We have identified and analysed a unrelated and apparently healthy individuals. These experiments euchromatic island within the pericentromeric repeats of the human Y led to the identification of over 200 loci in the human genome that chromosome. This 450 kb island, although not recalcitrant to subcloning contain large-size copy number polymorphisms, scattered throughout and present in 100 tested males from different ethnic origin, was not the human genome and account for locus-specific variations, some detected and is not contained within the published Y chromosomal of which involve hundreds of kilobases of DNA. An average of 12 sequence. The entire 450 kb interval is almost completely duplicated large-size polymorphisms were detected in a given individual when and consists predominantly of interchromosomal rather than a pooled DNA source containing 10 unrelated, healthy individuals intrachromosomal duplication events that are usually prevalent on was used as a control DNA source. Over 50% of these genomic the Y chromosome. We defined the modular structure of this interval regions overlap with known genes and approximately 25% of the and detected a total of 128 underlying pairwise alignments (≥90% and identified loci map to regions previously thought to contain segmental ≥1kb in length) to various autosomal pericentromeric and ancestral duplications. Interestingly, some 10% of the loci reside within 100 kb pericentromeric regions. We also analyzed the putative gene content of gaps in the current presentation of the human genome. Together, of this region by a combination of in silico gene prediction and paralogy these large-sized copy number variations may represent as much as analysis. We can show that even in this exceptionally duplicated a ten fold increase in human genetic variation than single nucleotide region of the Y chromosome eight putative genes with open reading polymorphisms (SNPs). We have established a searchable database frames reside, including fusion transcripts formed by the splicing ofConcurrent Sessions 70 exons from two different duplication modules as well as members of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, the homeobox gene family DUX. United States. The 21-22 nucleotides long microRNA (miRNA) are an abundant C34. Natural antisense transcripts (NATs) associated with genes class of non-coding RNA, that regulate gene expression. Hundreds of involved in eye development miRNA genes have been reported, and many of these were shown to S. Banfi1, G. Alfano1, C. Vitiello1, T. Caramico1, A. Carola1, C. Caccioppoli1, M. be phylogenetically conserved. Szego2, R. R. McInnes2, A. Auricchio1; To identify novel miRNA, we aligned the HSA21 genomic sequence 1TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. with the syntenic mouse sequences and selected sequences between Natural antisense transcripts (NATs) are a class of genes whose role in 36 and 99 bp long conserved with more than 70% identity and no gap. controlling gene expression is becoming more and more relevant. We Note that more stringent criteria, i.e. sequences longer than 100bp, describe the identification of eight novel mouse NATs associated with more than 70% identity and no gap were previously shown to be transcription factors (Pax6, Pax2, Six3, Six6, Otx2, Crx, Rax and Vax2) unsuitable to identify miRNAs, but perfect for Conserved Non-Genic that play an important role in eye development and function. These sequences and coding-exons. We isolated a total of 2796 of these newly-identified NATs overlap with the mature processed mRNAs or sequences and kept the seven candidates with the following features with the primary unprocessed transcript of their corresponding sense that characterize miRNAs: a) folding energies below -32.5 kcal/mol; b) genes, are predicted to represent either protein coding or noncoding 1 to 4 nt bulges and mismatches; c) GC content between 32.8% and RNAs and undergo extensive alternative splicing. Expression studies, 62.5%; and d) evolutionary conserved secondary structures. by both RT-PCR and RNA in situ hybridization, demonstrate that most To experimentally verify that these sequences were encoding bona fide of these NATs, similarly to their sense counterparts, display a specific miRNAs we tested their expression by RNase Protection Assay in total or predominant expression in the retina, particularly at postnatal RNA extracted from 3 different cell lines. This procedure allowed to stages. We found a significant reduction of the expression levels of readily show that at least three of the candidates sequences hybridized one of these NATs, Vax2OS (Vax2 opposite strand) in a mouse mutant to ~21-24 nt RNA. Further we analyzed their function with the DIANA- carrying the inactivation of Vax2, the corresponding sense gene. In microT program (http://www.diana.pcbi.upenn.edu). We searched addition, we overexpressed another NAT, CrxOS, in mouse adult retina 18,000 UTR’s of human genes and found more than 10 targets being using adeno-associated viral vectors and we observed a significant conserved in human and mouse. decrease in the expression levels of the corresponding sense gene, Our study provides novel insights into the identification of human Crx. These results suggest that these transcripts are functionally miRNAs. We are currently investigating their target genes in order to related to their sense counterparts and may play an important role in validate their functionality. regulating the molecular mechanisms that underlie eye development and function in both physiological and pathological conditions. C37. Whole Genome Genotyping (WGG) on High Density DNA BeadArrays. C35. Dissection of gene regulatory networks in liver cells using K. L. Gunderson, F. J. Steemers, K. Kuhn, G. Lee, H. Ren, L. Zhou, P. Ng, C. chromatin immunoprecipitation and high resolution genomic King, C. Tsan, W. Chang, D. Bullis, J. Musmacker, M. S. Chee, D. Barker, A. arrays of the ENCODE regions. Oliphant, R. Shen; C. Wadelius1, A. Rada Iglesias1, O. Wallerman1, C. Koch2, G. Clelland2, K. Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, United States. Wester1, S. Wilcox2, O. M. Dovey2, P. D. Ellis2, V. L. Wraight2, K. James2, R. High resolution genotyping is a fundamental requirement for linkage Andrews2, J. Komorowski3, C. Langford2, N. Carter2, D. Vetrie2, F. Pontén1, I. disequilibrium-based disease or pharmacogenomic association Dunham2; studies. Even with the judicious selection of tagging SNPs by the 1Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, International HapMap Project, at least several hundred thousand SNPs Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformatics, Uppsala, will need to be scored requiring a highly multiplexed genotyping assay Sweden. that allows the user to select SNPs of interest. Standard PCR-based Detailed information on how genes in the human genome are regulated genotyping assays typically do not scale effectively and complexity is not available. One objective for the ENCODE project is to evaluate reduction approaches cannot target specific SNPs. methods to analyse this in 1% or 30 Mb of the genome. Antisera As such, we have developed a novel, array-based whole genome against HNF3b, HNF4a, USF1 and acetylated histone H3 were used genotyping (WGG) assay that overcomes the multiplexing barrier and in chromatin immunoprecipitation to enrich DNA interacting with each effectively enables unlimited SNP genotyping from a single sample protein in the liver cell line HepG2. Precipitated DNA and reference preparation. This was accomplished by hybridizing the product of a DNA were differentially labelled and hybridised to a high resolution tiling single-tube whole genome amplification (WGA) reaction to 50-mer path genomic array of ~19500 PCR fragments covering 75% of the probe arrays and conducting an array-based allele-specific primer ENCODE region. Spots with highly significant signal for the enriched extension assay. This approach is unique among genotyping methods DNA were identified. The results indicate that HNF3b and HNF4a are in that essentially the entire genome is present in the sample; there is no frequent regulators of gene activity in HepG2 cells, with 117 and 132 need for a complexity reduction step. With this approach, multiplexing binding sites respectively. USF1 is more specialised with 29 binding is only limited only by the number of features on the array. sites. Many sites are in 5’ ends of genes but presumed regulatory We have combined this WGG assay with our high density BeadChips sequences are frequently also found in intronic and intergenic regions. which currently support over 250,000 bead types (corresponding Acetylated histones are mostly found at 5’ ends of genes but also to 125,000 SNP assays) to create a BeadChip with over 100,000 in other locations. Protein distribution was also determined in tissue “exon-centric” SNP assays. Processing of these BeadChips including microarrays comprising 45 different normal tissues, 20 cancers and 50 hybridization, washing, array-based primer extension, and signal cell-lines. HNF4a is mutated in type 2 diabetes (MODY1) and together amplification is performed on an automated slide processing robot --- with HNF3b important for fatty acid metabolism. USF1 is proposed the Tecan Genesis GenePaint system. Details and performance of the as the cause of familial combined hyperlipidemia so the results are of 100k chip will be presented. importance for common human diseases. This strategy can be used for many other transcription factors and with improvements in array C38. Disentangling linkage disequilibrium and linkage from technology may be scaled up to still larger parts of the genome. dense trio SNP data G. M. Clarke, L. R. Cardon; C36. Identification of miRNA on chromosome 21. Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. C. Borel1, C. Tapparel1, E. T. Dermitzakis2, A. Kouranov3, A. G. Hatzigeorgiou3, Parent-offspring trios are widely collected as part of disease gene S. E. Antonarakis1; mapping studies, and also being extensively genotyped as part of the 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva International HapMap Project [1]. Transmission of haplotypes from Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, parents to offspring is dependent on both linkage disequilibrium (LD) Wellcome Trust genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 3Department of and linkage. With dense maps of markers on parent-offspring trios, the effects of LD and linkage can be separated allowing estimation ofConcurrent Sessions 71 recombination rates in a model-free setting. We define a model-free waves 1 and 2. The multivariate genome scan highlighted three new multipoint method based on dense sequence polymorphism data from possible QTLs on chromosomes 4, 5 and 10 with p-values < 0.003. parent-offspring trios to estimate recombination rates between adjacent The multivariate method also allowed us to investigate the relationship markers. We present simulations to show that this method can detect between phenotypes influenced by loci SLI1 and SLI2. recombination hotspots (>25 times background intensity) over a region typed with as few as 10 markers (p<0.001) and that the numbers of C41. Chromosome 6p22 risk haplotype for dyslexia is associated markers required to locate a hotspot of a given intensity decreases with a reduced expression of KIAA0319 gene with marker density. Using Centre d'Etude du Polymorphism Humain S. Paracchini, R. Wade-Martins, B. J. Keating, T. Caffrey, C. Francks, J. C. pedigree data across a 10Mb region of chromosome 20, a comparison Knight, A. P. Monaco; of population recombination rate estimates obtained from our method University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. with estimates obtained using a coalescent based approximate- Dyslexia is one of the most prevalent childhood cognitive disorders and likelihood method implemented in PHASE 2.0 [2] shows detection is caused in large part by genetic factors. We have recently identified of same coldspots and most hotspots. Spearman rank correlation an association with a haplotype on chromosome 6p22 and dyslexia between the two sets of estimates is 0.58 (p<2.2 x10-16). (Francks et al., 2004). The haplotype spans a 77 kb region of strong [1] The International HapMap Consortium \emph{The International inter-marker linkage disequilibrium, encompassing the first four exons HapMap Project}. Nature 2003;426:789-796. of KIAA0319, the entire TTRAP gene and the first exon of THEM2. [2] Stephens M, Donnelly P \emph{A comparison of Bayesian methods Mutation screening by DHPLC of all exons and predicted promoters did for haplotype reconstruction from population genotype data}. AJHG not detect obvious functional variants that would disrupt any of the three 2003;73:1162-1169. genes. The risk haplotype might influence gene transcription regulation. To test this hypothesis we used the MassARRAY (Sequenom) platform C39. A 2-locus TDT for testing gene-gene interaction: to determine relative differences quantitatively in allele-specific Application to the study of HLA-DRB1 and CTLA4 in Multiple transcription in cell lines that were heterozygous for the risk haplotype. Sclerosis We identified six lymphoblastoid and three neuroblastoma cell lines, S. Kotti, M. Bourgey, H. Mohamdi, E. Génin, F. Clerget-Darpoux; which carry one copy of the risk haplotype and were heterozygous Inserm U 535, Villejuif, France. for at least one marker within the transcript of each of the three Given the increasing interest in gene-gene interactions in the genes. Heterozygous markers in proximity of the promoters were also research of genetic factors in complex diseases, it is important to analysed in immuno-precipitated chromatin (haploChIP assay) from have reliable methods to assess these interactions. Here, we propose the lymphoblastoid cells. All markers analysed for TTRAP and THEM2 a straightforward method: the 2-locus TDT which considers the showed no quantitative differences between transcripts generated segregation of alleles for two independent genes conditionally to the either on the risk or non-risk haplotypes. Conversely, all the markers parental genotypes at each locus. This approach may be used not only used for KIAA0319 showed consistently a transcription reduction of to test the effect of each gene but also their interaction. We develop about 40% associated to the risk haplotype. These data show, for this method to reconsider the suggested interaction between the HLA- the first time, a link between a genetic background and a biological DRB1 and CTLA4 genes involved in the predisposition to multiple mechanism that might be involved in the development of dyslexia. sclerosis (Alizadeh et al, J Neuroimmunol, 2003). The typing of 1266 members of 422 French family trios (one affected C42. The molecular basis of autoimmunity: using celiac disease patient and his two parents) is available for HLA-DRB1 gene and the as a model to unravel common pathogenic pathways using a -651 SNP (C/G) located in the promoter region of the CTLA4 gene. functional genomics approach The effect of each gene is confirmed by applying the 2-locus TDT but C. Wijmenga, A. Monsuur, E. van Oort, M. Bevova, L. Franke, A. Zhernakova, without evidence of any interaction between the two genes. In contrast, B. Diosdado, M. Wapenaar; when the transmission rate of the CTLA4 C allele from heterozygous University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. parents is compared between the HLA-DRB1*15 positive and negative Celiac disease (CD) is the most common food-induced (gluten) patients (homogeneity transmission test), we show a significant autoimmune disorder (AID) in the western world. CD patients have difference and we conclude to an interaction. an increased risk of developing other AIDs, including type 1 diabetes, To explain this discordance, we study the robustness of the two autoimmune thyroiditis and rheumatoid arthritis, implying a common approaches to population stratification. We show that the 2-locus genetic origin to AIDs. AIDs affect more than 5% of the population and TDT is robust against population stratification unlike the homogeneity are often associated with specific HLA alleles. CD is the best understood transmission test. This latter test, which is often used in the literature, HLA disorder at the moment. However, HLA can only explain part of the may thus lead to a spurious conclusion of interaction. genetic susceptibility. Notably, genetic studies indicate that certain non- HLA loci appear to predispose to multiple AIDs, suggesting common C40. Multivariate linkage analysis of specific language pathogenic mechanisms. Moreover, CD is characterized by alterations impairment in intestinal mucosa permeability and these are also observed in other E. J. Banfield1, The SLI Consortium2; AIDs, suggesting a common pathogenetic role for an impaired integrity 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, of the intestinal barrier at the onset of AIDs. United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Ox- Using a sibpair approach we recently identified new CD loci on 6q, 9p ford; Cambridge Language and Speech Project (CLASP); Newcomen Centre, and 19p. The 6q locus might represent a more common autoimmune Guy's Hospital, London; Department of Child Health, University of Aberdeen; locus. Large-scale SNP studies using Illumina technology are Molecular Medicine Centre, University of Edinburgh, Various, United Kingdom. currently used in a cohort of 480 case/control pairs to fine-map these Specific language impairment (SLI) is defined as a difficulty in three regions. Using genetic-profiling on intestinal biopsies (the site developing language skills normally despite adequate intelligence and of disease lesion) of CD patients revealed major disturbances in the opportunity. Previous studies within the SLI Consortium have involved cell differentiation/proliferation ratio. A more comprehensive study a full genome scan of 98 families affected with the disorder (wave 1), determined the effects of gluten withdrawal on the restoration of the resulting in the identification of two possible quantitative trait loci (QTL) intestinal mucosa and has led to novel insights into the role of the on chromosomes 16q (SLI1) and 19q (SLI2), and a replication of the enterocytes and the epithelial barrier in CD. two linkage regions using an additional 86 affected families (wave This combined genetic/genomic approach will help to increase our 2). All linkage results were obtained by applying Haseman-Elston knowledge on AID pathogenesis. and variance-components approaches univariately. Investigations have suggested that in certain situations multivariate analysis of traits would offer more power to detect linkage. This study therefore uses the multivariate variance-components approach on the original genome scan data to detect further QTL, and also to investigate the previously determined SLI1 and SLI2 using the combined sample ofConcurrent Sessions 72 C43. Interstitial deletion of chromosome 9q22.32-q22.33: a novel C45. Brain malformations in oculocerebrocutaneous syndrome cause of syndromic overgrowth (OCCS) R. Redon1, G. Baujat2, D. Sanlaville2, M. Le Merrer2, M. Vekemans2, N. P. U. Moog1,2, M. C. Jones3, L. Bird3, W. B. Dobyns4; Carter1, A. Munnich2, L. Colleaux2, V. Cormier-Daire2; 1University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Research Insti- 1The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2INSERM tute Growth & Development (GROW), Maastricht University, Maastricht, The U393 and Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, Netherlands, 3Children's Hospital San Diego, San Diego, CA, United States, France. 4The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States. Overgrowth syndromes are characterized by a height over + 2 SD Oculocerebrocutaneous syndrome (OCCS), also known as Delleman- in association with a variable combination of macrocephaly, mental Oorthuys syndrome, is a rare multiple congenital anomalies/mental retardation, facial dysmorphic features, advanced bone aging and retardation syndrome characterized by a trias of eye, skin and brain hemihyperplasia. Apart from well know conditions and chromosome malformations. The ocular features consist of orbital cysts and an-/ anomalies - such as Sotos syndrome or del(22)(q13.1q13.2) - a microphthalmia, and skin abnormalities comprise focal a-/hypoplastic number of overgrowth patients remain undiagnosed. skin defects and skin appendages. These features are well described. In the course of a systematic screening of patients with unexplained The neuropathological abnormalities however, have not been overgrowth syndrome using microarray-based CGH, we identified well delineated. Up to now, 28 patients have been reported, with a two children with congenital overgrowth and nearly identical de novo preponderance of males; recurrence has not yet occured. The cause interstitial deletions del(9)(q22.32-q22.33). The clinical manifestations of OCCS is still unknown. include macrocephaly, pre and postnatal overgrowth (> + 2.5 SD), The brain imaging studies and further clinical data of 2 new and 9 and distinctive facial features (frontal bossing, down-slanted palpebral previously reported patients could be (re)evaluated. We found fissures, epicanthal folds, long tubular nose, small triangular mouth a remarkably consistent pattern of malformations in eight of 11 with thin upper lip, long philtrum, low-set ears). They both have a patients, consisting of polymicrogyria, enlarged lateral ventricles or psychomotor delay (walk at 24 months and a few words at 4 in case 1 hydrocephalus, agenesis of the corpus callosum sometimes associated and no walk and no speech at 33 months in case 2) and a strabismus. with interhemispheric cysts, and a novel mid-hindbrain malformation. In addition, one child has a craniostenosis and the other a thyroglossal The latter consists of a giant and dysplastic tectum, absent vermis, cyst. small cerebellar hemispheres in most cases, and a large posterior fossa Further analyses, based on the development of DNA microarrays fluid collection. We hypothesize that this mid-hindbrain malformation is covering the whole breakpoint intervals with fosmids and small-insert- pathognomonic for OCCS. clones (1.5 to 4 kb), allowed us to delineate the deletion breakpoints In particular the unique mid-/hindbrain malformation distinguishes within 5-kb intervals and demonstrated that, although similar, the 6- OCCS from related syndromes with comparable forebrain anomalies Mb segment deleted in each patient correspond to different deletion (as Aicardi syndrome) and from syndromes with similar skin and eye boundaries. features (as encephalocraniocutaneous lipomatosis, oculo-auricular- These data suggest giving consideration to cryptic 9q22 deletions in vertebral spectrum, and focal dermal hypoplasia). The described the diagnosis of unexplained overgrowth syndromes and may help in pattern of malformation thus shows that OCCS is a separate entity understanding the mechanisms and genome architecture underlying and helps in differentiating it from other entities. The mid-hindbrain chromosomal rearrangement in the 9q22.3 region. malformation points to a defect of the mid-hindbrain organizer as the underlying pathogenetic mechanism. C44. Pulmonary function abnormalities in children with osteogenesis imperfecta correlate with OI type and location of C46. Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type Ia : collagen mutation. clinical expression in 19 patients older than 12 years A. Flor-Cisneros1, H. Chaney2, J. Vojtova2, J. C. Marini1; D. Héron1, J. Albuisson1, V. Cormier-Daire2, V. Drouin3, C. Leanerts4, J. 1NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2CNMC, Washington, DC, United Marchais5, C. de Barace6, P. Khau Van Kien7, M. Mayer8, G. Ponsot8, J. Saudu- States. bray2, H. Ogier9, A. Brice1, N. Seta10; Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is characterized by osteoporosis and 1Hôpital Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 3Centre bone fragility. OI patients with severe chest wall deformities and Hospitalier, Rouen, France, 4Hôpital d'Amiens, Amiens, France, 5Centre Hélio- scoliosis develop respiratory insufficiency. To determine whether early marin, St Trojan, France, 6Centre Hospitalier, St Brieuc, France, 7Centre Hos- pulmonary abnormalities are detectable in children with types III and pitalier, Besançon, France, 8Hôpital St Vincent de Paul, Paris, France, 9Hôpital IV OI and to learn whether these abnormalities correlated with OI Robert Debré, Paris, France, 10Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France. type, severity of scoliosis or location of type I collagen mutations, we Whereas the paediatric symptomatology in CDG Ia syndrome is well designed a retrospective cross-sectional clinical study. Fourty-seven documented, consisting in neurological symptoms and/or multivisceral children with OI types III and IV, age 4.9 to 23 years underwent 131 disorder, the clinical expression of CDG Ia syndrome in adult patients pulmonary function evaluations (PFT) over 7 years. In 39 children, the is incompletly known. type I collagen mutation was identified. Multiple Regression analysis Methods We report the features of 19 CDG Ia patients from 16 of FVC, TLC, VC (% of predicted), age, mutation, OI type and degree unrelated families, aged 12 to 39 years, detected by Western Blotting of scoliosis were performed. Our results reveal a PFT decline during of serum transferrin, and confirmed by phosphomannomutase (PMM) childhood in both types of OI, (TLC: r=-0.41, p<0.0001; VC: r=-0.48, activities and PMM2 gene mutations. p<0.0001; FVC: r=-0.45, p<0.0001). Children with progressive type III Results Fifty percent of the patients had neonatal symptoms. All the OI had greater loss of FVC than moderate type IV OI. The decline of patients had variable developmental delay : all but two were able to PFT with age was significantly greater in a2(I) than in a1(I) collagen walk, 5 were able to read and write some words, and one followed chain mutations. PFT abnormalities correlated with severity of scoliosis. a normal school course. Nine had failure to thrive but only one had However a significant decline also occurred in children with minimal microcephaly. Epilepsy was observed in 6 patients, and stroke-like scoliosis. These findings suggest a direct effect of the abnormal episodes in only 3. Neurological and ophtalmological signs were : (1) collagen in lung tissue, (TLC: r=-0.42, p=0.01; VC: r=-0.31, p=0.0005; hypotonia in 16 patients, (2) ataxia in 14, (3) peripheral neuropathy in FVC: r=-0.43, p= 0.008). Pulmonary abnormalities are detectable in 5, (4) strabismus in 13, (5) ophthalmoplegia in 1, and (6) nystagmus asymptomatic children with types III and IV OI. This data provides the in 1. Retinal changes were detected by electroretinogramm in 4 of 6 basis for careful early monitoring and therapeutic intervention in OI cases. Extraneurological signs such as dysmophism, subcutaneous children to prevent cor pulmonare in adulthood. lipodystrophy, thoracic deformity and thromboembolic episodes were not frequent, except late or absent puberty in females. Severe internal organ symptoms were absent. There were 12 different genotypes and no obvious genotype-phenotype correlation. Conclusion This large series of teenagers and adults with CDG Ia syndrome highlights : (1) the great variability of disease expression, with the existence of mild forms, and (2) the non progressive course of CDG Ia syndrome after childhood.Concurrent Sessions 73 C47. Congenital myopathy and brain migration defects with cutis issues. A WHO expert consultation concluded that "genetics advances laxa and a combined defect of glycan biosynthesis will only be acceptable if their application is carried out ethically, S. Wopereis1, H. ter Laak1, M. Willemsen1, R. Wevers1, S. Gruenewald2, E. with due regard to autonomy, justice, education and the beliefs and Morava1; resources of each nation and community". 1UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Hospital for Sick Children, Lon- Public health authorities are increasingly concerned by the high rate don, United Kingdom. of births with genetic disorders especially in developing countries Congenital cutis laxa presents with decreased skin elasticity, connective where Muslims are a majority. Therefore it is imperative to scrutinize tissue involvement and variable associated features. In most cases the the available methods of prevention and management of genetic genetic etiology is not known. Based on a diagnosis of CDG type IIx in disorders. a child with cutis laxa we performed a screening for disorders of protein Islam is a religion which encompasses the secular with the spiritual, the glycosylation including a test for defective O-mucin type glycosylation mundane with the celestial and hence forms the basis of the ethical, in five patients with cutis laxa syndrome. Three patients from unrelated moral and even juridical attitudes and laws towards any problem or consanguineous marriages had an inborn error affecting the synthesis situation. of both N-linked and O-linked glycans. These three children presented Islamic teachings carry a great deal of instructions for health promotion with a severe neonatal cutis laxa, skeletal and joint involvement, and disease prevention including hereditary and genetic disorders, microcephaly, delayed closure of the fontanel, normal growth, severe therefore we will discuss how these teachings play an important role hypotonia, developmental delay and neurological findings. All patients in the diagnostic, management and preventive measures including: had an evident progress in the psychomotor development gradually. genomic research; population genetic screening, including premarital A significant improvement of the skin findings was observed with the screening, pre-implantation genetic diagnosis; assisted reproduction development of fat-pads at an older age. Two of the three children technology; stem cell therapy and genetic counselling. were diagnosed with pachygyria and seizures and one with severe sensoneural deafness. In one patient with a brain migration defect, C50. Towards cultural competence in cancer genetic counselling severe hypotonia and progressive congenital myopia a muscle biopsy and genetics education: lessons learnt from Chinese- Australians. was performed. This was combined with an immuno-staining for alpha- dystroglycan, a protein deficient in O-mannosylation defects, like Walker K. K. Barlow-Stewart1, S. Yeo2, M. Eisenbruch2, B. Meiser3, D. Goldstein3, K. Warburg and muscle-eye-brain disease. Alpa-dystroglycan carrys both Tucker4; O-mucin type- and O-mannoso-glycan groups. No muscular dystrophy, 1The Centre for Genetics Education, Sydney, Australia, 2Centre for International but a myopathy was confirmed in our patient and the immuno-staining and Multicultural Health, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, with alpha-dystroglycan was normal, suggesting that the congenital 3Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia, myopathy and pachygyria occurs due to a developmental defect 4Hereditary Cancer Service, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia. different from that in O-mannoso-glycan defects secondary to a In multicultural Australia, culturally determined attitudes to genetic testing dysfunction of a still unknown glycoprotein. and counselling may be incompatible with current genetics service provision. Australian guidelines for primary care medical practitioners C48. Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome in Dutch families on surveillance and referral to genetic counselling for breast, ovarian E. M. Leter, K. Koopmans, J. J. P. Gille, E. H. Jaspars, E. F. L. David, E. A. J. and bowel cancer are dependent on correct categorisation based M. de Jong, P. E. Postmus, M. E. Craanen, R. A. Manoliu, T. M. Starink, F. H. on family history using Anglo-Celtic concepts (bilateral) of kinship. Menko; Many cultures have profoundly different understanding of kinship VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. that is likely to impact on presentation of family history. Ethnographic studies to explore the diversity of beliefs about kinship, cancer and Background: Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome is an autosomal inheritance using Chinese-Australians, as a case. Participants in the dominant genodermatosis associated with skin fibrofolliculomas, first study attended two major familial cancer clinics in NSW1. Fifteen pneumothorax, renal carcinoma and possibly other neoplasms. A BHD Chinese-Australian community members were interviewed to confirm gene on chromosome 17p has recently been identified. the findings. Study aim: To identify and characterize Dutch families with BHD English speaking competence does not necessarily correlate with syndrome, both at the clinical and molecular level. holding “Western” biomedical views: those holding traditional beliefs Methods: Clinical evaluation of index patients with ≥ 10 skin most often had maintained strong links with the Chinese community. fibrofolliculomas, collection of family data and screening for BHD In addition, barriers to family communication can occur where there germline mutations by DNA sequence analysis. may be incompatibility between “western” and traditional beliefs about Results: We identified 28 subjects from 16 families who were clinically inheritance and kinship. Family history taking can also be impacted affected and/or carrier of a pathogenic germline BHD mutation. unless recognition is made of the patrilineal concept of kinship Pneumothorax was observed in three subjects, symptomatic renal prevalent in this community. carcinoma of mixed histological types was found in two patients at The findings have been used to develop strategies for culturally ages 39 and 40 years. Other malignancies were reported in five cases, competent genetic counselling for cancer susceptibility with Australian- no colorectal cancer was observed. BHD mutation analysis revealed Chinese patients and inform the development of genetics educational pathogenic mutations in 10 out of 13 (77%) index patients tested. The materials. frequently reported c.1740dupC mutation was found in three subjects. A novel nonsense mutation c.1065_1066delGCinsTA was detected in C51. Psychosocial impact of genetic counseling and testing for three index cases. One mutation carrier had minor skin features at age breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility genes. 28 years. One mutation carrier had no fibrofolliculomas or other BHD syndrome signs at age 67 years. V. Franková1,2, M. Havlovicová1, V. Krutílková3, A. Puchmajerová1, M. Korán4, Conclusions: BHD syndrome is highly variable at the clinical level. P. Goetz1; BHD mutation carriers around the age of 30 years may have minor 12nd Medical School of Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute skin features. The yield of mutation analysis is high. The novel BHD for Medical Humanities, 1st Medical School of Charles University, Prague, mutation c.1065_1066delGCinsTA may be a Dutch founder mutation. Czech Republic, 3Center of Medical Genetics and Prenatal Diagnosis Gennet Further insight into BHD syndrome will facilitate early diagnosis and s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic, 4Na Homolce Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. direct risk counselling and preventive measures. Last year our published data resulting from the study of psychosocial factors associated with genetic tests for predisposition to various C49. Ethics and Genetics: An Islamic Perspective types of cancer indicated the differences characteristic for patients A. I. Al-Aqeel; in Czech Republic which might be explained by different social and Riyadh Military Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. cultural background. Further extension of this study allowed us to divide a group of female individuals tested for BRCA1/2 mutation. We are at a time of unprecedented increase in knowledge of rapidly The aim of presented study was to evaluate separately in this group changing technology. Such biotechnology especially when it involves overall satisfaction with genetic services, motivation for undergoing human subjects raises complex ethical, legal, social and religiousConcurrent Sessions 74 genetic testing, information and support needs, screening and the diagnosis of HCM. We identified pathological mutations in the Beta- prophylactic surgery practices, test result disclosure and concerns MHC (MYH7) gene, troponin T (TNNT2) and myosin-binding protein C about discrimination. (MYBPC3), single in five (three MYH7, one TNNT2, one MYBPC3) Questionnaires containing 20 multiple choice questions were and double in one (MYH7 plus MYBPC3). These cases document distributed to female patients (N=77) who received pre- and post-test that when the diagnosis of HCM is uncertain, the identification of the genetic counseling for BRCA1/2 mutations testing. The questionnaires pathological mutation of the disease gene closes that diagnostic work- were returned back by 61 individuals and were divided into two groups: up and contributes to definitely convincing patients and families on the individuals affected by cancer (N=41) and asymptomatic individuals diagnosis. The psycological impact of an uncertain diagnosis and the (N=20). decision of stopping both competitive activity and training are hard, The preliminary results and high response rate (79%) show overall especially in “healthy” fully asymptomatic athletes. satisfaction with genetic services. Similarities in both groups were detected for further information needs (27%), professional psychological C54. Genetics education and general practice: impact of an help needs (18%) and adherence to preventive screening practices intervention (95%). Differences between cancer affected and asymptomatic S. A. Metcalfe1, A. Flouris1, M. Aitken1, J. Wallace2, C. Gaff3,4; individuals were observed in attitude towards prophylactic surgery 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Dept Paediatrics, University of (9% and 60% respectively), concerns about discrimination (14% and Melbourne, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 2Murdoch Childrens Research Institute 30%) and principal motivation for undergoing testing. All individuals and Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 3Genetic Health informed at least one member of family although the disclosure to Services Victoria, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff distant relatives differs between affected (33%) and asymptomatic University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. (20%) individuals. To support these findings statistic analysis also We report here final data evaluating a practical genetics educational based on demographic data will be presented. intervention developed for general practitioners (GPs) in Victoria, Australia, following an earlier needs assessment. The intervention C52. Genotype-based screening for hereditary includes a resource, available as a printed up-dateable folder, CD- haemochromatosis in Germany ROM and online, and a highly interactive case-based workshop. M. Stuhrmann1, C. Strassburg1, I. Nippert2, J. Schmidtke1; Content and format of the resource, The Genetics File, was informed 1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2University, Muenster, Germany. by GPs and includes sections on a number of topics, and focuses We conducted a pilot study on DNA-based screening of hereditary on practical aspects of GPs’ roles. Resource/workshop content was haemochromatosis (HH) in Germany. 5882 insurants of the sickness developed in close collaboration with GPs, specialists and consumers. fund Kaufmännische Krankenkasse - KKH requested information on The educational intervention attracted maximum CPD points and this project. 3961 of these individuals provided blood samples. The 23 workshops were conducted, attended by 447 GPs. Evaluation analytic specificity of the tests methods with respect to the detection included a validated questionnaire measuring categories of knowledge, of homozygosity for the HFE mutation C282Y was 100% (95% CI: attitudes, skills and behaviour, administered prior to workshop 99.95% - 100%), while the analytic sensitivity was 97% (95% CI: (n=332), then 1 (n=270) and 6 months (n=180) later. Referrals to 92.5% - 99.2%). The direct costs ranged from 11.20 - 16.35 Euro per clinical genetics services, genetic testing and support groups were test method. 67 of the tested individuals were homozygous for C282Y. also included in the evaluation. The mean rating of the intervention by 42.6% of the homozygotes already knew their clinical diagnosis HH GPs was 8.9 out of 10. Knowledge and behaviour were significantly before sending the blood sample. Iron accumulation with clinical signs improved (p<0.001) at 1 and 6 months, and attitudes, already positive or symptoms of HH was present in 8 of 34 newly diagnosed C282Y at baseline, improved further (p=0.032 at 1 month). These combined homozygous individuals. 69.9% of the tested individuals believed that measures assess the impact of the intervention on practice of genetic participation in the pilot study was probably beneficial for them and medicine by GPs. Recognition of its success has led to it forming 1% thought that it was probably harmful. 94.6% judged their decision the basis of a modified national Australian program, currently under to have participated as right and 0.3% as probably wrong. 59.1% of development. Furthermore, there has been international interest in this the KKH members would generally accept predictive genetic testing resource as a model, and views on the intervention and strategies for and 3.7% were objected to such tests in principle. We conclude that implementing this were outlined in interviews with GP educators in the the employed test methods for C282Y are robust, highly sensitive and USA and UK. specific.A DNA-based HH-screening program can be performed at reasonable laboratory costs and appears to be generally accepted and C55. JARID1C, a novel gene involved in X-linked mental beneficial. Potential long-term negative psychosocial consequences retardation, is frequently mutated should be taken into consideration when planning testing programs L. R. Jensen1, M. Amende1, U. Gurok1, B. Moser1, V. Gimmel1, A. Tzschach1, A. and can presumably be prevented by appropriate settings including R. Janecke2, G. Tariverdian3, J. Chelly4, J. P. Fryns5, H. V. Esch5, T. Kleefstra6, genetic counselling and follow-up-services. B. Hamel6, C. Moraine7, J. Gécz8, G. Turner9, R. Reinhardt1, H. H. Ropers1, S. Lenzner1; C53. Athlete’s hearts or hypertrophic cardiomyopathies 1Max Planck Institute, Berlin, Germany, 2Innsbruck Medical University, Inns- M. Tagliani, M. Pasotti, C. Lucchelli, E. Porcu, E. Disabella, N. A. Marsan, bruck, Austria, 3University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4CNRS/INSERM, A. Repetto, C. Campana, G. Magrini, F. Gambarin, M. Grasso, L. Tavazzi, E. CHU Cochin, Paris, France, 5Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, Arbustini; 6University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 7CHU Bretonneau, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. Tours, France, 8The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 9University of Distinct diagnostic criteria should prevent misdiagnoses of hypertrophic Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia. cardiomyopathy (HCM) in trained athletes with the so-called athlete More than 30% of mutations in families with non-syndromic X-linked heart; viceversa, clear criteria should guide diagnosis of HCM. These mental retardation (NS-XLMR) seem to cluster on proximal Xp and criteria include symmetrical versus asymmentrical, normal versus in the pericentric region. In a systematic screen of brain-expressed abnormal diastolic filling pattern, normal versus increased left atrial genes from this region in 354 families with XLMR, we have identified size, left ventricular wall thickness < or >16mm, left ventricular chamber 12 different mutations in JARID1C, including one frameshift and three normal or increased in athlete’s heart and reduced in HCM. nonsense mutations introducing premature stop codons as well as We report six cases of current or past professional (n = 4), pre- eight missense mutations changing evolutionarily conserved amino competitive (n = 1) and amateur (n = 1) athletes who had long-lasting acids. Affected individuals present MR in the range from mild to severe, uncertain diagnostic work-up when they were involved in their sport and short stature seems to be a prominent feature. In cell lines from activity. None of them complained of symptoms. The six cases share two affected families, mRNA expression studies revealed an almost as common feature, the first suspect raised by the electrocardiogram complete absence of the mutated JARID1C transcript, suggesting (ECG). Then all underwent echocardiography, that was repeated up to that the phenotype in these families results from a loss of JARID1C 11 times in at least 5 different centres and by different operators, and function. JARID1C belongs to the highly conserved ARID protein finally to cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI confirmed family. It contains several DNA binding motifs linking it to transcriptionalConcurrent Sessions 75 regulation and chromatin remodeling, a process, which is defective in protein and its effect in the normal biology of the mouse embryonic various other forms of mental retardation. The mutation frequency of fibroblast derived cell lines. 3.4% in our patient cohort suggests that mutations in JARID1C are a relatively common cause of XLMR, and that this gene might play an C58. Large genomic deletions influence expression levels of the important role in human brain function. Further studies will include the non-hemizygous flanking genes characterization of mice deficient in Jarid1c and expression profiling of A. Reymond1,2, R. Lyle2, C. Wyss2, C. Howald2, C. Monso-Hinard2, M. A. Mor- the respective brain tissues. These investigations should shed more ris2, M. Zabot3, S. Eliez4, G. Merla2; light on the pathogenesis of mental retardation. 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzer- land, 2Department of Genetic Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzer- C56. CDKL5 interacts with MeCP2 and it is responsible for the land, 3Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Debrousse, Lyon, France, 4Department early seizure variant of Rett syndrome. of Psychiatry, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. A. Renieri1, F. Mari1, S. Azimonti2, R. Caselli1, E. Scala1, I. Longo1, C. Pescuc- An increasing number of human diseases, such as the Williams-Beuren ci1, F. Ariani1, V. Broccoli3, F. Bolognesi2, I. Bertani2, M. Zappella4, C. Kilstrup- (WBS) and the DiGeorge (DGS) syndromes, result from recurrent DNA Nielsen2, N. Landsberger2; rearrangements involving unstable genomic regions. Rearrangements 1Medical Genetics, Dept. Mol. Biol., University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Dip. Bio- are facilitated by the presence of region-specific low-copy repeats and logia Strutturale e Funzionale, Università dell'Insubria, Busto Arsizio (VA), Italy, result from nonallelic homologous recombination. It is assumed that 3DIBIT, San Raffaele Hospital, Milano, Italy, 4Child Neuropsychiatry, Azienda these aneuploidies lead to underexpression of genes mapping to the Ospedaliera Senese, Siena, Italy. commonly deleted regions. Furthermore, it is conceivable that these MECP2 is responsible for both classic and preserved speech variant large chromatin rearrangements influence the transcription levels of of Rett syndrome. We report here the identification of mutations in genes that map centromerically or telomerically to the critical region CDKL5 gene, encoding a putative kinase, in 3 female patients: 2 early and the repeats, even if these genes are present in two copies. To test truncating mutations interrupting the catalytic domain (c.163_166del4; this latter hypothesis we used quantitative real-time PCR to accurately c.838_847del10) and 1 late truncating mutation (c.2635_2636del2). All measure the expression of genes mapping to the 7q11.23 and the 3 patients showed convulsions very early in life: in the first days of life in 22q11.2 regions. We studied in 20 WBS patients, 25 DGS patients two of them and at 1,5 months in the third one. They all had stereotypic and 10 controls the relative expression of 36 and 40 genes mapping hand activities and the older patients, 9 and 8 years old respectively, within the WBS and the DGS critical region, their flanking repeats showed acquired microcephaly. The clinical course of these patients and neighboring regions in two different cell lines (skin fibroblasts is strikingly similar and they fulfill the criteria for the early seizure and lymphoblastoids). As anticipated in WBS and DGS samples variant of Rett syndrome. We demonstrate that CDKL5 is a nuclear almost all of the genes mapping to the common deletion intervals factor whose expression in the brain of developing mice significantly show relative levels of expression decreased by 50%. Remarkably, overlaps the MeCP2 one. Moreover, we show in vitro and in vivo a direct a decrease in relative expression, albeit not as large, was observed interaction between MeCP2 and CDKL5. Functional characterization for the non-hemizygous genes that map on both sides of the common of CDKL5 showed that CDKL5 harbors an autophosphrylation activity, deletion region. Our results suggest that in “genomic disorder” not demonstrating that indeed it is a kinase. However so far we have only the aneuploid genes but also the genes that map close to the been unable to demonstrate that CDKL5 modifies MeCP2 under rearrangement should be considered as candidate genes for the standard conditions. These results are in keeping with the fact that specific features of these pathologies. phosphorylation reduces MeCP2 dissociation from methylated DNA. If CDKL5 were a MeCP2 kinase, it would be unlikely that CDKL5 C59. Mutations in Rab3 GTPase activating protein inactivation would lead to a phenotype similar to that produced by (RAB3GAP)catalytic subunit cause Microphthalmia, Cataract, MeCP2 inactivation. In conclusion, our results indicate that a specific Microcephaly and Micropenis (Warburg Micro syndrome) phenotype is associated with CDKL5 and trace out a molecular link I. A. Aligianis1,2, C. A. Johnson1, P. Gissen1, D. Chen3, D. Hampshire4, K. between MeCP2 and CDKL5. Hoffmann5,6, E. N. Maina1, N. V. Morgan1, L. Tee1, J. Morton7, J. R. Ainsworth8,9, D. Horn5, R. C. Trembath10, L. W. Harris11, S. Mundlos6, D. Tannahill3, C. G. C57. Use of murine models as a tool to dissect cognitive and Woods4, E. R. Maher1,2; physical phenotypes of Williams-Beuren syndrome 1Medical and Molecular Genetics, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, V. Campuzano1, J. Lucena1, C. Carreiro2, M. C. Valero3, I. Barthelemi2, S. Pe- United Kingdom, 2West Midlands Regional Genetics, Birmingham, United King- zzi1, J. L. Barbero2, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1; dom, 3Embryo Gene Expression Patterns, The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 1Genetics Unit. Dept. of Experimental Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Molecular Medicine Unit, St. James' University Barcelona, Spain, 2Dept. of Immunology and Oncology. Centro Nacional de Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, Charité Uni- Biotecnología, Madrid, Spain, 3Molecular Genetics Unit, Hospital Ramón y versity Hospital, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany, 6Max Planck Institute Cajal, Madrid, Spain. for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 7West Midlands Regional Genetics Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a developmental disorder Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 8Birmingham Midlands Eye Hospital, occurring in ~1/20000 live births, caused by the heterozygous Birmingham, United Kingdom, 9Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham, deletion of ~1.5Mb on chromosome 7q11.23. The commonly deleted United Kingdom, 10Division of Medical Genetics, Universityof Leicester, Leices- region encompasses 26-28 genes flanked by segmental duplications ter, United Kingdom, 11Division of Medical Genetics, University of Leicester, that predispose to the mutational mechanism in humans. The only Leicester, United Kingdom. phenotype unambiguously associated with deletion of a gene is Warburg Micro syndrome (MIM 600118) is a severe autosomal supravalvular aortic stenosis and the elastin gene. However, detailed recessive deletion mapping on atypical patients with smaller deletion has disorder characterised by severe developmental abnormalities of the identified two genes (GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I), encoding members of a eye and novel family of transcription factors, that are strong candidates for the central nervous system and microgenitalia. To elucidate the main aspects of the cognitive phenotype. pathogenesis of Micro syndrome we undertook a 10cM genome- To investigate the putative role of the general transcription factor wide linkage scan in eight consanguineous families. We mapped the gene GTF2I, we have used gene targeting in mice. In our model, the WARBM1 locus to 2q21.3 between markers D2S2282 and D2S2385 deletion of exon 2 of Gtf2i containing the start codon, abrogates to the (with a maximum 2-point LOD score of 8.016 (θ=0 at D2S1334) in five translation of a modified TFII-I protein lacking the first 90 aminoacids. kindreds. Previous in vitro studies have demonstrated that this mutated form is We then identified homozygous mutations in the catalytic subunit of unable to bind DNA and does not activate transcription. Mutant mice RAB3GTPase activating protein (RAB3GAP) in 12 kindreds. In mouse are viable and display some craniofacial anomalies and mild postnatal we found significant expression of RAB3GAP in the developing eye growth retardation, obvious in the homozygous state. We are currently and brain. RAB3GAP has a critical role in regulating the function of characterizing the neurocognitive and physical phenotype of these the four Rab3 family members that are implicated in neurotransmitter mutant mice, as well as the biochemical properties of the mutated and hormone release by calcium mediated exocytosis. The MicroConcurrent Sessions 76 syndrome phenotype demonstrates the that RAB3GAP for the normal C62. Molecular screening of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome in development of the eye, brain and genitalia. We hypothesise that the pregnant women from the Czech Republic - present results underlying pathogenesis is a failure of exocytic release of ocular and I. Drapalova1, J. Kofer2, R. Gaillyová3, J. Všetička4, L. Kozák1; neurodevelopmental trophic factors. 1Center of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Dept. of Medical Genetics, Ústí nad Labem, Czech Republic, 3Dept. of Medical C60. Heterozygous mutations in the OTX2 gene cause structural Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, Ostrava, Czech malformations of the eye Republic. N. K. Ragge1,2, A. Brown3, C. Poloschek4, B. Lorenz4, A. Henderson5, M. Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive Clarke5, I. Russell-Eggitt6, A. Fielder7, D. Gerrelli8, J. Martinez8, P. Ruddle8, J. metabolic disorder. Clinical severity ranges from mild dysmorphism Hurst9, R. Collin2, A. Salt2,6, S. Cooper10, P. Thompson11, S. Sisodiya11, K. Wil- to severe congenital malformation and intrauterine lethality. SLOS is liamson3, D. Fitzpatrick3, V. van Heyningen3, I. Hanson10; caused by the mutations in the gene for 3β-hydroxysterol-Δ7-reductase 1Dept of Human Anatomy and Genetics, Oxford University, United Kingdom, (DHCR7), which maps to chromosome 11q12-13. The DHCR7 catalyzes 2Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3MRC Human Genetics the final step in cholesterol biosynthesis. It results in an abnormally low Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4Dept of Pediatric Ophthalmology, University cholesterol level and increased level of 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC). of Regensburg, Germany, 5Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle, United King- The incidence of SLOS is estimated around 1 : 10 000 to 1 : 40 000 in dom, 6Great Ormond St Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 7Department of the Czech population. Optometry & Visual Science, City University, London, United Kingdom, 8Institute Pregnant women undergo biochemical screening examination for for Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 9Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals Trust, Down´s syndrome in the second trimester. When the level of human Oxford, United Kingdom, 10University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United King- chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and unconjugated estriol (uE3) appears dom, 11Institute for Neurology, London, United Kingdom. low, the suspicion for SLOS is registered. A group of 143 fetuses with Major malformations of the human eye including microphthalmia, and high risk for SLOS were examined by DNA analysis. A rapid PCR/RFLP anophthalmia are classical examples of phenotypes that recur in families technique and sequencing was used to detect mutations in DHCR7 yet often have no clear Mendelian inheritance pattern. Here we report gene. Cultivated amniocytes and/or blood of both parents were usually heterozygous coding region changes in the homeobox gene OTX2 in used as material for DNA isolation. eight families. The expression pattern of OTX2 in human embryos is From the group of 143 pregnant women with the positive biochemical consistent with the eye phenotypes observed in the patients, which screening results, we found 3 fetuses with SLOS and 4 fetuses, range from bilateral anophthalmia to retinal dystrophy. Defects of the which were heterozygotes for SLOS. Severe mutations IVS8-1G>C optic nerve, chiasm and brain were revealed by MRI in some cases. In and W151X were identified in most of the cases. Moreover, in one two families the mutations appear to have occurred de novo in severely case we found another mutation, W182C. Our results indicate that affected offspring and in two other families the mutations have been consequential molecular screening for Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome is inherited from a gonosomal mosaic parent. These four families support important in pregnant women with low level of hCG and uE3. a simple model in which OTX2 haploinsufficiency causes structural Supported by scientific project CEZ MZ/98/0001/00209627 from the eye malformations. However a further four families display complex Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic and grant S 4031209 AV inheritance patterns suggesting that OTX2 mutations show reduced CR. penetrance. The high incidence of mosaicism and reduced penetrance have implications for genetic counselling. C63. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia and chromosome 15q26: Determination of a candidate region by use of array-based C61. 'Genetic PAP' at 5-12 gestational weeks: A new screening comparative genomic hybridisation and fluorescent in situ method for Down Syndrome? hybridisation. A. Amiel1, M. Liberman1, M. Pomeranz2, M. Fejgin3; M. Klaassens, H. J. Eussen, C. Wouters, B. A. Oostra, D. Tibboel, A. de Klein; 1Genetic Institute, Meir Medical Center, Kfar-Saba, Israel, 2Department of Ob- Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. stetrics and Gynecology, Meir Medical Center, Kfar-Saba, Israel, 3Department In the etiology of congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), a severe of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Genetic Institute, Meir Medical Center, Kfar- birth defect, multifactorial inheritance, teratogenic agents, and genetic Saba, Israel. abnormalities all have been suggested as possible contributors. To At present clinically available methods for prenatal chromosomal define candidate regions for CDH, we analysed data collected on diagnosis (amniocentesis and CVS) are invasive, risky and costly. CDH cases since 1988. Karyotypic analysis of 200 patients showed Screening techniques are cumbersome and expensive, and carry a numerical chromosomal anomalies in 7% and structural anomalies in false negative rate of 20%. We assessed the feasibility of utilizing 5% of the cases. The most frequent structural anomaly is a deletion exocervically retrieved extra villous trophoblast cells for screening for of chromosome 15q, found in 3 patients. For this study, we have used chromosome 21-aneuploidy and gender determination. these patients along with genetic material from four other, previously Methods- Samples of fetal cells were obtained from the external published, CDH patients with a chromosome 15q deletion. We used cervical os of pregnant women using a cytobrush. Eight slides were array-based comparative genomic hybridisation (array-CGH) and prepared using a cytospin centrifuge. Immuno-histochemestry was fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) assays to determine the performed using HLA-G and other anti- trophoblast antibodies. The boundaries of the deletions in the patients. Most of the deletions marked cells were identified and scored. FISH for chromosomes X extended towards the distal 15q terminus. However, by including data and Y was applied and the previously marked cells were returned to from two non-CDH patients with terminal 15q deletions, we were able for diagnosis. FISH for chromosome 21 was applied in a second run to exclude a substantial portion of the telomeric region of chromosome to the same cells. 15. Moreover, one CDH patient harboured a small interstitial deletion. Results- Initially, samples were taken from 290 women prior to elective Together, this allowed us to define a minimal deletion region of pregnancy termination. In 252 (87%) were trophoblast cells detected. approximately 5 Mb at chromosome region 15q26.2. Our data Gender diagnosis concurred with that of the placental in 236 (93.6%). identifying this CDH-region on chromosome 15q26 will be presented. Subsequently 190 on-going pregnancies were screened. Trophoblast cells were detected in 164 (86.3%). Sex was correctly determined in C64. Antenatal presentation of Bardet-Biedl : the so-called 146 (89%). There were 2 cases of trisomy 21 and both were identified. Meckel-like syndrome There were 2 cases of missed abortions both initially diagnosed to be T. Attié-Bitach1, H. Karmous-Benailly1, J. Martinovic1, C. Ozilou1, J. Augé1, S. XY. Placental tissue karyotyping revealed both of them to be mosaics, Audollent1, N. Brahimi1, G. Goudefroye1, H. Etchevers1, A. Munnich1, F. Razavi1, 46,XY/45,XO and 47,XXY/46,XY . M. Gubler2, M. Vekemans1; Conclusion- this simple and inexpensive procedure may have 1Département de Génétique et Unité INSERM U-393, Paris, France, 2Unité the potential to replace currently available non-invasive screening INSERM U-574, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. techniques for Down syndrome. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, OMIM 209900) is a multisystemic disorder characterized by progressive retinal dystrophy, postaxial polydactyly, obesity, hypogonadism, learning difficulty and renal dysfunction.Concurrent Sessions 77 Other manifestations include diabetes mellitus, neurological signs, C66. CHD7 mutation in foetuses with CHARGE syndrome and heart disease, and hepatic fibrosis. The condition is genetically expression during human development heterogeneous and 8 genes have been identified during the 4 past D. Sanlaville1,2, M. Clément-Ziza2, H. Etchevers2, M. Gonzales3, F. Encha- years (BBS1-BBS8). In addition, a complex triallelic inheritance has Razavi1, J. Martinovic1, G. Goudefroye1, C. Ozilou1, E. Detrait2, S. Sidi4, S. been established in this disorder, i.e. in some families, three mutations Lyonnet1,2, M. Vekemans1,2, J. Amiel1,2, T. Attié-Bitach1,2; at two BBS loci are necessary for the expression of the disease. 1Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2INSERM U393, Paris, The only clinical features that can be observed prenatally include France, 3Hôpital Saint Antoine, Paris, France, 4Harvard Medical School, Boston, polydactyly, a kidney anomaly and hepatic fibrosis. Cystic kidney MD, United States. dysplasia, polydactyly, occipital encephalocele and liver anomalies The acronym CHARGE refers to the association of congenital (hepatic fibrosis and bile duct proliferation) also characterise Meckel malformations first described by Hall et al. (1979) and includes ocular syndrome (MKS). Based on these observations, we have decided to Coloboma, Heart malformation, choanal Atresia, Retarded growth, sequence all identified BBS genes in a series of 13 antenatal cases Genital hypoplasia, Ear abnormalities and/or deafness. The CHD7 mostly referred as Meckel or Meckel-like (because of association of a gene was recently been shown to be mutated in 60 % of CHARGE kidney anomaly, polydactyly and/or hepatic fibrosis to a brain anomaly, postnatal patients (Visser et al. 2004). CHD7 belongs to a large family or the familial history or the kidney histology). In 6 cases, we identified of proteins thought to play a role in chromatin organization through a recessive mutation in a BBS gene (respectively BBS2: 3 cases, their conserved “chromodomain”. BBS4: 2 cases and BBS6: 1 case). We also found heterozygous BBS6 We studied the coding sequence of the CHD7 gene, in a cohort of mutations in 3 additional cases. No BBS1, BBS3, BBS5, BBS7, or 11 severely affected CHARGE foetuses. We identified a truncating BBS8 mutation could be identified in our series. These results extend mutation in 10 cases confirming the diagnosis. Anatomopathological the clinical spectrum of BBS with possible brain anomalies or severe examination and X-rays showed that semicircular canal hypoplasia cystic kidney dysplasia and strongly suggest that MKS and BBS are as well as arhinencephaly are highly predictive diagnostic criteria. In overlapping conditions. addition to the C-H-A-E components of the acronym, facial dysmorphism or renal digestive and skeletal anomalies, should be considered to be C65. Vitamin K dependent Chondrodysplasia punctata minor diagnostic criteria for foetal CHARGE syndrome. In addition, S. G. Mehta, K. Metcalfe, J. Clayton-Smith, D. Donnai, U. Kini; we analysed the expression pattern of the CHD7 gene during early Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, St Mary's human development. CHD7 is widely expressed in undifferentiated Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. neuroepithelium and mesenchyme of neural crest origin, and continues Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP) is a well known syndrome to be expressed toward the end of the first trimester in dorsal root characterised by distinctive radiological features such as stippling in the ganglia, cranial nerves and ganglia, auditory and nasal tissues and the epiphyses of the long bones and spine. The craniofacial abnormalities neural retina. Absent from the myocardium, bones and genital ridge, include a short nose with a flat nasal bridge, short columella and CHD7 expression nevertheless correlates with defects in these areas maxillary hypoplasia. There are various forms of CDP reported in the because of its presence in neural crest cells and the pituitary. literature, e.g. Binder anomaly described as maxillonasal dysplasia, which is reported to be associated with prenatal phenytoin induced C67. Functional significance of minor MLH1 germline alterations Vitamin K deficiency. We report 4 cases with exposure to various found in colon cancer patients agents which reduce Vitamin K levels in the feto-maternal environment T. E. Raevaara1, M. Siitonen1, H. Lohi1, H. Hampel2, E. Lynch3, K. Lönnqvist1, and result in CDP. E. Holinski-Feder4, C. Sutter5, W. McKinnon6, S. Duraisamy6, A. Gerdes7, P. Peltomäki1, M. Kohonen-Corish8, E. Mangold9, F. Macrae3, M. Greenblatt6, A. de Case Age Sex Exposure Clinical Features la Chapelle2, M. Nyström1; 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2The Ohio State University, Colum- 21 Maternal an- Poorly formed bus, OH, United States, 3The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, weeks 1 Male tiphospholipid nose with maxillary 4University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 5University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, fetal syndrome hypoplasia. Germany, 6University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, United States, 7Odense Uni- death versity Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 8Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, 9University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. Very small nose Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is associated with 2 2 years Male Phenytoin at birth with short, deficiency of the mismatch repair (MMR) machinery. One half of 450 stubby fingers. mutations reported in an HNPCC database affect the MLH1 gene. A significant number of those are of missense type, whose pathogenicity Mild learning dif- is difficult to interpret, and which are associated with a variety of clinical 10 ficulties, a small 3 Male Carbamazepine phenotypes. Here, the pathogenicity of 31 MLH1 germline alterations, years nose and flat malar which were nontruncating and found in putative HNPCC families, was appearance evaluated. For this, the expression level and subcellular localization of the MLH1 variants, and the functionality of the mutated MutLα (MLH1 Flat face and and PMS2) complexes were studied. Furthermore, by correlating the 4 2 Female Warfarin underdeveloped genetic and biochemical data with clinical data, we tried to find some weeks nose. genotype-phenotype correlations. Among the 31 MLH1 mutations, 19 affected either the expression or stability of the encoded MLH1 protein. These variants also affected the subcellular localization of MutLα. Fifteen mutations disrupted the MMR function of MLH1. Comparative It is known that factors such as exposure to antiepileptic medication, sequence analysis correctly predicted functional studies for 82% anticoagulants, and maternal disease such as Systemic Lupus of missense variants. The aminoterminal MLH1 mutations caused Erythematosis or Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome may cause CDP protein instability and defective MMR, whereas pathogenicity of the by affecting Vitamin K dependent processes. Matrix Gla Protein, a carboxylterminal MLH1 mutations was caused by protein instability or Vitamin K dependent protein is upregulated by Vitamin D in bone cells. defective assembly of MutLα. The genotype-phenotype correlations A rat model shows that nasal septal growth retardation occurs because indicate that the mutations which affect both the function and stability the warfarin induced extrahepatic vitamin K deficiency prevents the of MLH1, are associated with typical HNPCC phenotypes. Instead, normal formation of the vitamin K-dependent matrix gla protein in the the MLH1 mutations, which affect only mildy or cause no effect at all embryo. on the encoded protein, are found in families with variable disease Vitamin K dependent processes play a role in CDP. A detailed maternal phenotypes. history is important when diagnosing children with features of CDP. A skeletal survey is recommended. Treatment with Vitamin K in at risk mothers may reduce the risk of CDP.Concurrent Sessions 78 C68. Gene expression profiling of leukemic cell lines and C70. Chromosome radiosensitivity and apoptosis in breast primary leukemias reveals conserved molecular signatures cancer susceptibility among subtypes with specific genetic aberrations: identification J. G. Barwell1, A. Georgiou2, L. Pangon3, I. Kesterton3, R. Gilchrist4, J. Ball3, C. of fusion gene-specific transcriptional profiles and expression Langman3, T. Carrier clinic collaborators5, J. Morris6, L. Wilkinson1, H. Hamed3, pattern of tyrosine kinase-encoding genes E. Solomon6, Z. Docherty3, J. Berg7, R. Camplejohn4, R. Eeles8,5, S. Hodgson1; A. Andersson1, P. Edén2, D. Lindgren1, J. Nilsson3, M. Fontes3, Å. Borg4, F. 1St George's Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Guy’s Hospital, London, Unit- Mitelman1, B. Johansson1, M. Höglund1, T. Fioretos1; ed Kingdom, 3Guy's Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4St Thomas' Hospital, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 2De- London, United Kingdom, 5The Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United King- partment of Complex Systems, Theoretical Physics, Lund University, Sweden, dom, 6King's College, London, United Kingdom, 7Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, 3Center for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 4Depart- United Kingdom, 8Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom. ment of Oncology, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. BRCA1, BRCA2 and CHEK2 proteins are known to be involved in Hematologic malignancies are characterized by balanced chromosomal cell cycle check points, the repair of DNA breaks and breast cancer abnormalities - translocations and inversions - that lead to deregulated susceptibility. However, it is not known whether individuals who are expression of genes located in the proximity of the breakpoints or result heterozygous for BRCA1, BRCA2 and CHEK2 mutations have an in tumour-specific fusion genes. Although hematologic malignancies altered cellular phenotypic response to irradiation. We have investigated have been extensively studied, our understanding of how individual apoptosis, chromosome breakage and cell cycle dynamics in response fusion genes elicit their leukemogenic properties is still quite limited. to irradiation in peripheral blood lymphocytes in the following:- 53 Today, the perhaps most widely used model system for studying BRCA 1/2 mutation carriers and age and sex-matched unaffected the biological consequences of leukemia-associated chromosomal controls and three CHEK2 mutation carriers treated for breast cancer. rearrangements is based on immortalized hematopoietic cell lines. The CHEK2 mutation carriers had a significant increased number of Although cell lines are known to differ from both neoplastic and normal breaks per cell compared with the BRCA mutation carriers (p<0.001), tissues, they provide powerful tools for investigating basic and applied age matched controls (p<0.001) and newly diagnosed breast cancer aspects of leukemia cell biology. In the present study, we investigate patients (p<0.002) using the classical G2 assay and also in metaphase a large number of cell lines, derived from all hematopoietic lineages, spreads enriched for cells in S phase at the point of irradiation. The and analyze a large number of specific genetic aberrations. Using BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers also have an increase in unsupervised algorithms, we show that immortalized hematopoietic radiation induced chromosome breaks and gaps compared with cell lines maintain a gene expression signature correlating with their controls (p<0.001) using the S phase assay. clinical subtype and primary genetic change. Moreover, by combining We have also investigated the apoptotic response to 4Gy in peripheral data from cell lines and primary acute leukemia samples, we show that blood lymphocytes. Overall, there is no evidence for a reduction in the identified expression signatures in cell lines are present also in radiation-induced apoptosis in BRCA1, BRCA2 and CHEK2 mutation leukemic cells with identical genetic changes. By applying discriminatory carriers vs controls (mean apoptotic response 50% vs 53% vs 52% analysis on the data set we have identified genes correlating with P=0.15). clinical subtype and genetic rearrangement. Finally, using supervised There is no evidence of a difference in peripheral blood lymphocyte methods, the expression signature of genes encoding protein-tyrosine cell cycle dynamics between BRCA1, BRCA2 and CHEK2 mutation kinases was studied, identifying members that could be targeted using carriers and age-matched controls in response to irradiation. The tyrosine kinase inhibitory drugs. results will be discussed in relation to possible mechanisms for cancer susceptibility. C69. Large scale variation copy number changes revealed by array CGH in CML C71. MicroRNAs as potential diagnostic and prognostic markers E. P. Nacheva, D. Brazma, B. Vaughn, L. Foroni, C. Grace; of disease Molecular Cytogenetics, Academic Haematology, Royal Free and University J. Shingara, K. Keiger, J. Shelton, P. Powers, I. Wolf, R. Jarvis, M. Byrom, A. College London Medical School, London, United Kingdom. Cheng, R. Conrad, E. Labourier, D. Brown; Chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML-BC) typically evolves in three Ambion, Inc., Austin, TX, United States. distinct clinical stages: chronic and accelerated phases and blast crisis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, siRNA-like molecules encoded in The mechanisms responsible for transition of CML chronic phase into the genomes of plants and animals that regulate the expression of blast crisis remain poorly understood. While the acquisition of extra genes by binding and modulating the translation of specific mRNAs. copies of chromosomes 8,19, the Ph and iso17q are recurrently found Several published reports have shown that the expression levels of in the majority of CML-BC patients, the knowledge about aberrations some miRNAs are reduced in chronic lymphocytic leukemia, colonic at molecular level are sparse. adenocarcinoma, and Burkitt’s lymphoma samples providing possible Here we present a genome wide screening by array CGH at a resolution links between miRNAs and cancer. We developed methods for isolating of 1Mbp (Spectral Genomics Inc) for genetic imbalances of total 36 and quantifying all of the known miRNAs in tissue samples. We have samples of CML and 10 CML cell lines. Using the same array CGH used these procedures to analyze tumor and normal adjacent tissues platform Ianfrate et al., (Nature Genetics, 2004) identified 255 loci that from patients with lung, colon, breast, prostate, bladder, thyroid, and contained large scale variations (LCVs) among unrelated individuals, pancreas cancer. Each tumor type can be readily distinguished from of which 24 were present in more than 10% of the cases. Our findings the accompanying normal samples based on the expression levels of seen in > 20% of the samples fall into four main categories: 3-10 miRNAs. While each different tumor type was characterized by it (i) LCVs affecting the loci reported in normal individuals (Ianfrate et all, own unique miRNA profile, it is interesting to note that several miRNAs 2004) but seen in the CML patients at much higher frequency (from appear to be up- or down-regulated in almost all tumor samples relative 38% to 56%) and in combinations (on average 3.1 LCVs per patient); to normal adjacent tissue. This suggests that specific miRNAs might (ii) Unique to CML patients LSVs affecting four loci in 23 - 42% of the play roles in tumor suppression. Putative mRNA targets for a number cases; of these miRNAs are known oncogenes providing a potential link with (iii) Segmental loss of the 8p13 and amplifications at 8q24.12 regions; oncogenesis. We have developed reagents for up- and down-regulating (iv) Novel features of the der (9) chromosome deletion map. specific miRNAs that have allowed us to identify genes (like RAS and These data not only support the notion that the newly established MYC) and cellular processes (like proliferation and apoptosis) that are heterogeneity underlines susceptibility to disease, but also provides regulated by miRNAs. Further analysis of miRNA expression profiles new insight into the genetic aberrations associated with disease in various disease states also suggests that these bioregulators play a progression in CML. role in disease progression.Concurrent Sessions 79 C72. Cloning and Characterization of the Novel Tumor upstream of the first exon, were screened by dHPLC in 40 individuals Suppressor Gene DEAR1 of African, Middle-Eastern, European, East-Asiatic and Amerindian S. T. Lott1, M. Rodriguez1, D. Chandler1, H. Xie1, S. Sen1, K. Chaung1, K. Keyo- descent. Polymorphisms were characterized by sequencing and marsi1, A. El-Naggar1, S. M. Hewitt2, A. M. Killary1; genotyped in an extended panel of 80 individuals representing the 1M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States, 2National Cancer same population groups. We found between 3 and 18 (average of 10) Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States. segregating sites in these 2kb segments. Nucleotide diversity estimates The development of biomarkers for human tumorigenesis remains one of 0.03 to 019 %, from both allele frequencies (average 0.08%) and of the most important goals of current cancer research. An exciting the number of segregating sites (0.1%) fit well the genomic average. candidate has been identified by our laboratory that maps into a region Haplotype worldwide diversity was 0.65 (0.27 to 0.84) and their highly implicated by LOH and cytogenetic studies in the development numbers from 4 to 21 (average 10) correlated well with the count of of numerous tumors, including breast, colon, prostate and lung. This segregating sites, as if recombination was negligible. Yet, in more than novel gene, DEAR1, is a member of the TRIM family of proteins, one third of these segments four-gametes test indicated the presence known for their involvement in cellular differentiation, proliferation, of recombinant haplotypes suggesting that some of these segments development and apoptosis. Expression of DEAR1 at high levels recombined more often than expected. Indeed, our estimates of the is limited to the ductal epithelium of numerous tissues; however, population recombination rate Rho exceed significantly the expected dramatic downregulation of DEAR1 expression has been documented genomic average of about 0.4 per kb. Further comparative analysis of by immunohistochemistry in tumors of the breast (40% of samples), the Rho estimates in 2kb segments and along the whole sequence of pancreas (62% of samples) and colon. Downregulation of DEAR1 100 genes (from the University of Washington) suggests the important has also been observed by Northern and RNase protection assays effect of gene conversion in the shaping of haplotype diversity. These in breast, renal, colon and lymphoma cell lines. Mutation analysis of haplotype characteristics may be of great importance in genetic linkage breast cancer was undertaken in both cell line and tumor samples. and association studies. Supported by Genome Quebec/Canada. Significantly, mutations were observed in 14% of samples examined (6/43). Complementation of a missense mutation in the breast 21MT C75. LD mapping in diagnostic marker and gene discovery in cell line reverted growth in SCID mice from an aggressive, poorly acute myocardial infarction, hypertension and type 2 diabetes in founder population differentiated tumor to a morphology reminiscent of ductal carcinoma in situ, suggestive that DEAR1 participates in the early differentiation J. T. Salonen1, R. Fuentes1, O. Kontkanen1, M. Pirskanen1, P. Uimari1, J. M. of ductal epithelium, the aberrant regulation of which could be critical Aalto1, J. Kaikkonen1, T. P. Tuomainen2; to breast tumorigenesis. Thus, based on its ubiquitous expression in 1Oy Jurilab Ltd, Kuopio, Finland, 2University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland. normal tissues, downregulation or loss of expression, specific mutation Traditional genome wide scans (GWS) using microsatellite markers with in breast cancer cell lines and tumors, and in vivo restoration of linkage analyses have not succeeded in finding many genes causing differentiation, DEAR1 is a strong candidate tumor suppressor gene. common polygenic diseases. With advancements in genotyping technology, the first dense enough marker maps have become available C73. The first genome wide linkage disequilibrium map for LD mapping the entire human genome in genetically homogenous W. J. Tapper, A. Collins, J. Gibson, M. Nikolas, S. Ennis, N. E. Morton; founder populations. We studied molecular etiology of acute myocardial Southampton University, Southampton, United Kingdom. infarction (AMI), hypertension (HT) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) in the East Finland population, one of the genetically and culturally most Genetic maps describe patterns of recombination and can be used homogenous founder populations. We used the Affymetrix early to identify genes affecting a particular phenotype. Recombination access 100k SNP typing assay in sets of rigidly defined familial cases is measured in Morgans over a single generation in a linkage map, and extremely healthy controls, which both were drawn from the same but may cover thousands of generations in a high resolution linkage extensively examined prospective cohort. We discovered associations disequilibrium map measured in LD units (LDU) (Maniatis et al, 2002). of 1875 SNP markers and 902 genes with AMI, 1154 SNP markers and The HapMap project (IHMC, 2003) has led to a huge increase in the 436 genes with HT and 1962 SNP markers and 838 genes with T2D genotyping of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are the main in either single-SNP or haplotype pattern mining analysis, with false source of LD information. We have used a subset of the September positive probability of 5-20%. Multivariate diagnostic models including 2004 Caucasian HapMap data, consisting of 493,408 SNPs, to create 8-24 SNPs and a few phenotypic measurements predicted about 95% the first genome-wide LD map which covers 99.7% (2,934 Mb) of of each disease. These preliminary findings include large numbers of the euchromatin. Recombination (Kong et al, 2004) accounts for novel disease-associated genes including potential drug targets and 96.8% of the variance in LD in chromosomal arms and 92.4% in their both non-coding regulatory and coding markers as well as several deciles. The Malecot model predicts that the ratio of corresponding new etiologic pathways. We are confirming our findings by re-testing distances in LDU and Morgans estimates the effective bottleneck them in over 1000 cases and 1000 controls in each disease from East time t in generations (Zhang et al, 2004) which is constant between Finland and other more heterogenous populations and by disease chromosomes. The LD maps estimate t as 1435 generations implying pathway analysis. We are happy to collaborate with research groups a bottleneck time of ~35,875 years, assuming 25 years per generation. that are interested in testing our findings in their study populations. Presumably, this low estimate reflects the partly cumulative effect of bottlenecks since the out-of-Africa migration. There are significant C76. Plasma lipids: heritabilities, apoE, and effects of inbreeding deviations in t between chromosome arms and deciles due to physical in a genetically isolated population size, marker density and holes in the LD map. These differences may reflect inflated Morgan length due to underestimates of interference A. Isaacs, F. A. Sayed-Tabatabaei, Y. S. Aulchenko, A. F. C. Schut, M. C. Zil- and the effects of selection, particularly on the X chromosome, and likens, W. P. F. Rutten, H. A. P. Pols, J. C. M. Witteman, B. A. Oostra, C. M. van stochastic variation shortening LDU maps. Duijn; Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. C74. Contribution of gene conversions to the genetic diversity of Despite progress in elucidating genetic determinants of dyslipidemia, DNA segments most findings are based on families with extreme phenotypes. To D. Labuda1, J. Lefebvre1, C. Moreau1, C. Labbé1, S. Langlois1, P. Beaulieu1, M. further dissect these complex traits, an extended pedigree not derived Théberge1, H. Bélanger1, D. Sinnett1, &. Genome Quebec Regulatory Genetics on the basis of phenotype was ascertained from the population of a Consortium2; recent genetic isolate in the Netherlands. Thus far, 938 individuals, 1Université de Montréal, Centre de recherche, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montreal, related within this single pedigree containing more than 60,000 people, PQ, Canada, 2McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Mon- have taken part in physical examinations and medical interviews in this treal, PQ, Canada. ongoing study (the Erasmus Rucphen Family Study, ERF). Laboratory analysis of these subjects included determination of fasting plasma Studies of human DNA diversity lead us to better understanding of lipids. Heritabilities for total plasma cholesterol (TC), HDL, LDL, and human origins, demographic history and population structure; critical TG, estimated using SOLAR and adjusted for multiple covariates, elements in genetic epidemiological quest of complex diseases. In 22 were found to be 0.35, 0.51, 0.29, and 0.21, respectively. Inclusion of genes, promoter regions, arbitrarily defined as 2kb segments directlyPosters 80 apoE genotype in the model decreased heritability estimates slightly Levant. Results obtained help to place the Caucasus populations yet significantly. A further analysis, which used regression to estimate into the scenario of the peopling of Eurasia with anatomically modern plasma lipid means by inbreeding quartile, showed that TC and LDL humans. Possible migration routs, peopling of steppe and mountain levels increased when the extent of inbreeding increased. These trends parts of the Caucasus and causes of high linguistic diversity presence were statistically significant (p = 0.006 for TC and p = 0.025 for in this region is analyzed in this study. trend trend LDL). In conclusion, our studies in an unselected pedigree show that genetic factors play an important role in the variation of plasma lipid levels. Common polymorphisms such as apoE account for only a small POSTERS portion of this variance, but suggest that this population would allow for the localization of lipid genes with comparatively small effects. P0001. Peculiar symptoms of respiratory oxalosis without C77. European distribution of cystic fibrosis (CFTR) gene progressive course as a genetic complex disease mutations: correlation with disease incidence and application to G. P. Pospekhova1, L. Aleshina1, V. G. Vakharlovsky2, O. Voronina3, T. Razore- screening nova1, M. Zorina1, M. O. Mkheidze1; M. Macek Jr.1, M. Macek Sr.1, A. Krebsova1, H. Cuppens2, E. Dequeker2, J. 1Medical Academy for postgraduate education, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- Cassiman2; tion, 2Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St.Petersburg, Russian 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Center for Federation, 3Institute of Experimantal Medicine RAMS, St.Petersburg, Russian Medical Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium. Federation. Although there have been many reports on population specific Authors have reported on a new form of COPD as a genetic complex distribution of CFTR gene mutations in the classical form of cystic disease (G. Pospekhova, 1989). 80 probands (70 females, 10 males, fibrosis (CF), little attention has been given to integrating these sex ratio 7:1) and their relatives (56) were under our observation. findings into a global understanding. Thus, a long-term collaborative The main diagnostic sings of this form were typical habitus, systemic effort was launched to determine the distribution of CFTR mutations oxalosis, hyperoxaluria and lack of progressive, progrediens, in the European populations in order to provide guidelines for routine inflammation course ((ROPC(-)). In 35 families we have observed screening, by the provision of detailed regional data. Final analyses ROPC(-) in 3 generations. Set of diagnostic laboratory features were based on genotypes from 15606 CF patients (31212 CF included intensive tolerance of peripheral blood mononuclears to the chromosomes), using data compiled from over 102 original papers polyclonal antigen FGA in RSML test. Using RSML test monocyte and from 82 collaborating European centres. The entire CFTR gene migration was found to be stimulated vs. be inhibited in patients with coding region was analysed in 73% of cohorts and altogether 729 ROPC(-) and their relatives independently of inflammation phase mutations were detected. We also examined CF incidence, including and age. Probands with ROPC(-) had low level of FGA sensitivity. regional mutational heterogeneity in a subset of populations via a Authors supposed immune cell alteration to be connected with family cascade “data filtering” strategy. 422 alleles occurred only once, food preference providing underdoses of natural agents like FGA and while in the remainder the 20 most common CF alleles comprise: be inherited.. Risk of ROPC(-) was found to correlate with genetic F508del (63.45%); G542X (2.73); N1303K (2.22); W1282X (1.60); relationship: all first degree relatives have had RTML test inverted vs. G551D (1.25); 1717-1 G->A (0.94); R553X (0.79); 621+1 G->T (0.59); 5% of the third degree relatives. Males with ROPC(-) have had some 3849+10kb C->T (0.57); CFTRdele2,3/21kb/ (0.55); 2183AA->G (0.48); sings of hypogonadism and have been childless. Ascorbic acid has 394delTT (0.45); R1162X, 2789+5 G->A (0.44 each); 3659delC, R117H provoked disease manifestation or worsened its course. Our diagnostic (0.43); I507del (0.36) and R347P, R334W (0.32). There are marked set allows 1) to create group with high risk of ROPC(-) using RSML differences in regional / ethnic distribution of particular mutations test, 2) make easier diagnostic process 3) put into practice predictive among various populations. Moreover, statistics revealed a significant counseling, 4) start preventive correct medicinal management positive correlation between F508del frequency and the incidence of CF. From comprehensive data assessment we offer recommendations P0002. Risk factors in abdominal wall defects for optimized mutation screening strategies. M. Roth, B. Dott, Y. Alembik, C. Stoll; Due to the space constraints all collaborators could not be Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France. acknowledged; supported by VZ00000064203. The aim of this study was to describe the prevalence at birth of two abdominal wall defects (AWD)and to identify possible etiologic factors. C78. Phylogeographic analysis of mtDNA and Y chromosome The AWD came from 320,984 consecutive births registered for the lineages in Caucasus populations period 1979 to 2002. Request information was obtained for cases I. Kutuev1,2, R. Khusainova1,2, M. Bermisheva1,2, B. Yunusbaev1, M. Reidla2, S. and for controls. Hundred twenty one cases with AWD were analysed, Rootsi2, E. Metspalu2, T. Kivisild2, R. Villems2, E. Khusnutdinova1; 55.4 % were omphalocele and 44.6 % were gastroschisis. The 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Estonian mean prevalence rate for omphalocele was 2.18 per 10000 and for Biocenter, Tartu, Estonia. gastroschisis 1.76 per 10000. Associated malformations were found The Greater Caucasus marks a traditional boundary between in 74.6 % of omphalocele compared with 53.7 % of gastroschisis; Europe and Asia. Linguistically, it is one of the most diverse areas 28.3 % of fetuses with omphalocele had an abnormal karyotype, of the continental Eurasia, while genetics of the people living there 44,7 % had a recognizable syndrome, association or an unspecified is poorly understood. Mitochondrial DNA and NRY variability was malformation pattern; 51.8 % of fetuses with gastroschisis had studied in 23 Caucasus populations speaking Caucasus, Turkic, and additional malformations that were not of chromosomal origin, but 1 Indo-European languages. Total sample comprised more than 1700 case. Antenatal ultrasound examination was able to detect 45 (67.2 %) individuals on Y chromosome and more than 2100 individuals on cases of omphaloceles and 31 (57.4 %) cases of gastroschisis. In 35 mtDNA. Genetic outliers among the studied populations are relatively (52.2 %) cases of omphalocele and in 8 (14.8 %) cases of gastroschisis recently arrived Turkic speaking Nogays. The indigenous Caucasus parents opted for termination of pregnancy. The overall survival rate was populations possess generally less than 5% of eastern Eurasian 16 (23.9 %) for omphalocele and 35 (64.8 %) for gastroschisis. Weight, mtDNA and Y-chromosomal haplotypes - in a profound contrast to the length and head circumference at birth of infants with AWD were less Turkic-speaking people at the other side of the Caspian, but not so than those of controls. The weight of placenta of infants with AWD was dissimilar compared to the Volga-Turkic Tatars and Chuvashis or to the not different from the weight of placenta of controls. Gastroschisis was Anatolian Turks. Haplogroup frequency variation within the Caucasus associated with significantly younger maternal age than omphalocele. populations, in some instances significant, appears to be caused Pregnancies with AWD were more often complicated by threatened primarily by specific aspects of the demographic history of populations. abortion, oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios. Phylogeographically, a particularly intriguing finding is the presence, though at low frequencies, of a predominantly northeastern African haplogroup M1 in many North Caucasus populations, though they lack sub-Saharan L lineages, relatively frequent in the Arab-speakingClinical genetics 81 P0003. Life adaptation in 8 women with Rokitansky Séquence P0006. Clinical Manifestations associated with Familial Partial S. Turyk; Trisomy 11 Hospital Británico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. T. Ben-Omran1, E. Kolomietz2, I. E. Teshima3, M. Mah4, D. Chitayat5; This report provides information about the adult life adaptation of 1Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, the Hospital for Sick Children, Uni- 8 women with Rokitansky Sequence (R.S.), ranging now from 23 versity of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Department of Laboratory Medicine - 34 years of ages. R.S. is a defect of development of the caudal and Pathology, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Can- paramesonephric ductus, with incomplete or atretic vagina, rudimentary ada, 3Department of Pediatric Laboratory Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, uterus, normal hormones and normal karyotipes. University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Department of Psychiatry, Toronto The R.S. propositus were identified throughout the clinical examinations, General Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Division of Clini- hormonal and ecographic studies and chromosomal analysis of cal and Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, The Prenatal Diagnosis peripheral blood cells between 1982 and 1997.The diagnosis in the and Medical Genetics Program, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. propositus was made between 11 and 18 years old. In order to obtain The etiology of mental retardation, often presenting in childhood, is information about the life progress of participants, the following specific unknown in approximately 50% of the cases. Cytogenetic analysis content areas were addressed: surgery made, educational progress, is regarded as the mainstay in the diagnostic process. Identifying relationships, employment, sexual identity and orientation and leisure a chromosomal abnormality in patients with mental retardation activity. provide necessary information for genetic counseling regarding Results: In 5 of 8 propositus, the corrective surgery was made. In prognosis, recurrence risk, and prenatal diagnosis options. In addition, education, 4 patients made the secondary school (12 years degree), determination of the clinical manifestations associated with abnormal 2 patients made the University ( 16 years degree ) and 2 patients did karyotypes is an important tool for the identification of genetic the master ( 18 years degree). 7 patients were employed full time disorders and the genes causing them. Here we report on a family and 5 propositis got married. All the patients present heterosexual with three members having mild to moderate mental retardation with identity. All propositis described a wide range of interests and choices. learning disabilities, microcephaly, subtle dysmorphic features and In conclusion, RS adults demonstrated good levels of cognitive and mood disorders . The finding of the same mood disorder in all affected psychosocial competence and their adaptation has been positive. members of this family is important in determining genes associated with these disorders which are thought to have multifactorial inheritance. P0004. Cytogenetic Evaluation of Infant Males with Mitral Valve Cytogenetic and genomic microarray analysis revealed an unbalanced Prolapse karyotype with duplication of a segment derived from the long arm S. Turyk1, M. Sakurai1, C. Croxatto2; of chromosome 11. This duplication was examined by genomic 1Hospital Británico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Hospital Nacio- microarray and confirmed by FISH. Within this duplicated region, nal Profesor Alejandro Posadas, Buenos Aires, Argentina. estimated to be 12 Mb region of DNA, four brain-expressed genes Mitral valve prolapse has been reported in patients with Klinefelter appear to be particularly promising based upon their likely functional Syndrome . Because the clinical features in K.S. are not present until roles: i) NAALAD2, N-acetylated alpha-linked acidic dipeptidase 2; ii) adolescence in boys with 47,XXY karyotype, we report here a detailed GRM5, glutamate receptor, metabotropic 5; iii) MTNR1B, melatonin clinical history and karyotypes of 26 male infants with mitral valve receptor 1B; iv) PANX1, pannexin 1. Possible role of these genes in prolapse. The ages of the studied children were 1-13 years, being the clinical manifestation in this family will be discussed. the mean 5,8 years. 24 patients (92,4%) presented 46,XX karyotipe and 2 patients (7,6%) presented 47,XXY karyotype. No phenotypic P0007. Cerebrofaciothoracic syndrome abnormalities ( small testes or gynecomastia) , no developmental K. Boduroglu, Y. Alanay, E. Tuncbilek; delays and no learning difficulties were observed in affected boys. Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. Because of the significant medical and psychological benefits of early Cerebro-facio-thoracic dysplasia is a rare congenital anomaly/mental diagnosis of Klinefelter Syndrome, we recommend cytogenetic study retardation syndrome described by Pascual - Castroviejo in 1975. for all cases of mitral valve prolapse among infant males, even without Autosomal recessive inheritance has been suggested because of dysmorphic features parental consanguinity in 2 of the three reported families. The features include facial dysmorphism, multiple malformations of the vertebrae P0005. Structural central nervous system (CNS) anomalies in and ribs, and mental retardation. Costovertebral abnormalities are Kabuki make-up syndrome similar to those of spondylocostal dysostosis, Robinow syndrome T. Ben-Omran, A. S. Teebi; and cerebrocostomandibular syndrome. Only a few cases have been Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. reported since first report. Kabuki make-up syndrome (KMS) [MIM147920] is a rare multiple We report on a 3 year old girl with cerebro-facio-thoracic dysplasia. congenital anomalies/mental retardation (MCA/MR) syndrome She was born at term from a 22 year old healthy mother. Birth weight originally described by Niikawa et al. [1981] and Kuroki et al. [1981]. It was 4,000 g, birth length 49 cm. She was the first child of first cousin is now well recognized worldwide with more than 350 cases reported parents. Cleft lip and palate was noticed on first physical examination in the literature. Most cases of KMS are sporadic, however several after birth. Before her referral to our department at age 3, she had had familial cases displayed autosomal dominant transmission. Duplication corrective operations for cleft lip and cleft palate at 8 and 18 months, of chromosome 8p22-8p23.1 was recently demonstrated in multiple respectively. On physical examination at age 3, weight was 13,500 cases of KMS from different races, suggesting a possible common g (50th centile), height 95 cm (50-75th centile) and OFC 49 cm (25- etiologic basis. KMS is characterized by a peculiar facial appearance, 50th centile). Brachycephaly, hypertelorism, epicanthic folds, low set mild to moderate mental retardation, short stature, skeletal anomalies, ears, and short neck were noticed. Radiographs showed cervical and and unusual dermatoglyphic patterns. The most striking feature is thoracic vertebrae anomalies and bifid and abnormal ribs. the peculiar face that consists of long palpebral fissures and long This is another case that suggests autosomal recessive mode of eyelashes, eversion of the lateral one-third of the lower eyelid, arched inheritance for cerebro-facio-thoracic dysplasia. and notched eyebrows with sparseness of their lateral one-third, and prominent and anteverted ears. Since the facial appearance P0008. Spinal Muscular Atrophy. Towards a mutational spectra often reflects the developing brain, it is not unexpected to observe a in Western Sweden. relatively higher frequency of CNS anomalies compared with disorders E. L. Arkblad1, K. Berg1, J. Wahlström1, N. Darin2, M. Tulinius2, M. Nordling1; with minimal facial dysmorphism. A number of reports have indicated 1Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska, Goteborg, Sweden, 2The Queen Silvia Chil- an apparent increased frequency of such anomalies. Here we report dren’s Hospital, Sahlgrenska, Goteborg, Sweden. on three unrelated patients with typical KMS and structural CNS Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder anomalies and, briefly review literature pertaining to these anomalies caused by degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord. in KMS patients. SMA is divided into type I, II and III on the basis of age at onset and the maximum motor function achieved. The incidence has been estimated to be 5x10-5, for SMA types I and II, in western Sweden. The disorder isClinical genetics 82 caused by the homozygous deletion/inactivation of the Survival Motor In this study we performed an association study between RsaI and AluI Neuron Gene (SMN1). The severity is in part related to the number of single nucleotide polymorphism in the ESRB gene of infertile patient in pseudogenes (SMN2) present and may be related to the size of the comparison with normal fertile male control. deletion. A higher number of SMN2-genes correlate with a milder or From 180 infertile male patients referred to our center after ruling out all even asymptomatc phenotype. the known causes of the infertility such as chromosomal abnormalities, A new molecular genetic technique, Multiplex Ligation-dependent Y-chromosome micro deletion and other pathologic disorders, 5 Probe Amplification (MLPA), makes it possible to simultaneously ml peripheral blood were obtained and DNA were extracted. PCR determine the gene-copy number for SMN1, SMN2 and the nearby amplification of the polymorphic region was carried out and after genes BIRC1 and GTF2H2. This is also a method suitable for carrier running the PCR products on 2% agarose gel, the frequency of the detection. Using this method in the clinical setting gives us a spectrum polymorphism were calculated. of SMA mutations in Western Sweden. During 2003-2004 we have A 2.7% times higher frequency of the heterozygous RsaI genotype analysed 110 individuals of whom 30 were patients with SMA, 34 were was found in men with oligospermia compared to controls (p=0.004). carriers and 46 had at least 2 copies of SMN1 and were therefore In the other hand, the proportion of homozygous AluI genotype was considered normal (33 diagnostic, 13 carrier tests). about 0.3% in comparison to our normal control (p=0.04). Our result In a few patients, with strongly suspected SMA and only 1 copy of could suggest that these SNP could play an important role in the SMN1, further analyses of the SMN1-gene have been made. So far spermatogenesis process in male. one point mutation and one partial deletion have been identified. Genotype / phenotype studies are being performed on this relatively P0012. Recurrence of anophthalmia within the same sibship: well-characterised cohort of patients. evidence for germline mosaicism for a heterozygous SOX2 mutation P0009. Molecular Study Of PKD1 & PKD2 Genes By Linkage L. Faivre1, J. Fantes2, V. Faber3, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, A. Bron4, F. Huet3, K. Analysis In Several Iranian Families With Autosomal Dominant Williamson2, V. van Heyningen2, D. R. FitzPatrick2; Polycystic Kidney 1Centre de Génétique, Dijon, France, 2MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western M. M. Haghighi1, R. Radpour1,2, M. Ohadi1, N. Nikzat1, H. Najmabadi1; General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3Service de Pédiatrie, Dijon, 1Genetic Res. Ctr. Of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, France, 4Service d'Ophtalmologie, Dijon, France. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Res. Ctr. of Health and Remedy, The etiology of anophthalmia is complex with environmental, syndromic, Faculty of Health and Remedy, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. genic and chromosomal origins reported. Heterozygous mutations Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is an within the SOX2 gene has been identified in anophthalmia with inherited disorder with genetic heterogeneity. Here we report the associated extraocular features including neurological abnormalities first molecular genetic study of ADPKD and the existence of locus (psychomotor delay, myopathy, spastic diplegia), external genitalia heterogeneity for ADPKD in Iranian population by performing linkage abnormalities and tracheo-esophageal fistula. Here we report the first analysis on 15 affected families. Eleven families showed linkage to recurrence of SOX2-associated eye malformation of the anophthalmia/ PKD1 and two families showed linkage to PKD2. In two families, PKD1 microphthalmia spectrum within the same sibship from unaffected markers are common in all affected members but PKD2 markers were unrelated parents. Severe bilateral microphthalmia and unilateral not informative. The results of this study demonstrate significant locus cryptophthalmia was associated with cerebral structural abnormalities, heterogeneity in autosomal dominant PKD in Iran. Analysis of clinical including corpus callosum agenesis, enlarged ventricles, hypoplastic data confirms a milder ADPKD phenotype for PKD2 families. Our inferior cerebellar vermis and hypoplastic white matter in case 1. results showed relatively high heterozygosity rates and PIC values Bilateral anophthalmia was associated with psychomotor retardation for some markers, while the most informative markers were KG8 and but normal cerebral MRI in case 2. A heterozygous SOX2 mutation 16AC2.5 for PKD1 gene and AFM224x6 for PKD2 gene. (N46K), located at the 5’end of the HMG box and presumed to result in loss of function, was found in case 2. The mother carried the same P0010. Aarskog Syndrome mutation but as a mosaic. A segregation analysis revealed that some B. Bozorgmehr; unaffected children carried the same maternal chromosome than our Shahid Beheshti Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. proband but did not carry the mutation. Those results explained both We have two families with this syndrome. The first family have two the eye malformation and the "pseudo-recessive" inheritance pattern affected son. The second one have an affected son and a daughter in the family. This is the first case of gonadal mosaicism for SOX2 with mild form of syndrome. and this has significant implications for genetic counseling in such eye Both families mothers have hypertelorism. The sons signs were malformation. hypertelorism, short stature, broad filtrom, round face, cleft lip and cleft palate, down slanted palpebral fissure, broad forehead, short P0013. A New Mitochondrial Disease in Bulgaria hands and feet, simian crease, clinodactyly, brachydactyly, interdigital B. I. Radeva; web, shawl scrotom, some degree of learning disabilities and mental High Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. retardation. Mitochondrial diseases affect 6-17/100 000 of many populations but It is a rare Xlinked semi dominant syndrome. Most cases have been the frequency of these disorders in our country is unknown yet. About males and transmission can occure through mild affected femals. Gen 15 cases have been registered up to now. We report a case with a map by linkage analysis is Xq1.3 and Xp11.2. new mitochondrial disease. Diagnosis was confirmed by investigating These families came to our clinic to know aboat the recurrense risk mtDNA with the PCR-SBT method. The patient was a 4year old boy, and born after a normal pregnancy and delivery. On the 3rd day after seeking advise. the birth his general condition worsened. He had hypotonia, clonic convulsions, tachypnea, hepatomegaly, clonus, missing reflexes of P0011. Is there any association between ESRB gene Moro and Robinson. Biochemical investigation showed metabolic polymorphism and male infertility in Iranian infertile men? alkalosis, hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, elevated transaminase M. D. Omrani, K. Yazadanpanah, S. Samadzadae, M. Jahandidae; and alkaline phosphatase. U/s of the brain showed oedema cerebri Uromieh Medical Science University, Uromieh, Islamic Republic of Iran. and hyperdensity. EEG showed paroxysmal activity. Despite a low It is clear that a significant proportion of infertile male with azoospermia protein diet and anticonvulsive therapy, he developed quadriparesis and severe oligospermia have a genetic etiology for reproductive spastica and West syndrome. MRI at 1 year of age showed apical and failure. Cytogenetic analysis and Y-chromosome micro deletion and occipital encephalomalacia.. PCR-SBT revealed mtDNA mutations: other conventional methods such FISH had major effects on finding A5315G, A89016G, G9300A. The last is in the gene for cytochrome the causes of infertility in last decade, but still after performing all C3 oxidase and causes an aminoacid change of alanine to threonine. these experiments in some cases we do not have clear answer for our All these mutations are novel. These data confirm a new mitochondrial patients. Therefore it would be advisable to find new clues for this old disorders. The investigation are continuing. but interesting problem.Clinical genetics 83 P0014. Nevus sebaceus of Jadassohn - a case with severe P0016. A child with Feingold syndrome (tracheo-oesophageal structural brain anomalies; clinical and pathological correlations fistula, oesophagus and duedenal atresia, and dysmorphic J. Behunova1, E. Zavadilikova1, N. Bobrov2, L. Podracka1, A. Vasilova3, M. features) with an interstitial deletion of 2(p24p25) Brozmanova4; K. Brondum-Nielsen1, J. M. D. Hahnemann1, L. A. Meza-Zepeda2, N. C. Chris- 1Safarik University Children Hospital, I. Pediatric Department, Kosice, Slovakia, tensen3, I. Jeppesen1, K. Nielsen1, S. H. Kresse2, O. Myklebost2; 2Safarik University Hospital, Department of Forensic Medicine, Kosice, Slo- 1The Kennedy Institute-National Eye Clinic, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Department of vakia, 3Safarik University Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Kosice, Tumor Biology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Pediatric Depart- Slovakia, 4Commenius University Children Hospital, Department of Pediatric ment, Soenderborg Hospital, Soenderborg, Denmark. Neurology, Bratislava, Slovakia. Feingold syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition with Nevus sebaceus of Jadassohn or linear/epidermal nevus syndrome is a microcephaly, limb abnormalities and oesophageal or duodenal rare condition that belongs to neurocutaneous hamartoses. Molecular atresia. The gene maps to 2p23-p24 but remains to be identified. base of disease is still unexplained. Here we report on a boy of gypsy We report a girl delivered by Cesarian section after 34 weeks gestation origin with severe neurologic involvement and early death. due to asphyxia , with a birth weight of 1560g. She was operated on The boy was from the first pregnancy of a healthy young 2 days old for oesophagus atresia and tracheo-oesophageal fistula. nonconsanguineous couple. The pregnancy was unremarkable until the An annular pancreas, duodenal atresia and Meckel´s divertickel 7th month, when the ventriculomegaly was found on ultrasound. Delivery were also found. Furthermore, a small muscular VSD and ASD was in the 38th week by C-section, the birth weight was 2940 g, length 49 were demonstrated. She had dysmorphic features with sandalgap cm, head circumference 38 cm. Clinical and imaging findings included and simian creases bilaterally. A conventional chromosome analysis right-sided facial hemihypertrophy, linear nevus sebaceus covering the in the neonatal period was normal. 12 months old she was below - right side of the face, right-sided dysplastic hemimegalencephaly with 4 Standard Deviations for height, weight and head circumference. schisencephaly, lissencephaly and hydrocephalus, and atrophy of left She had a dysmorphic facies with hypertelorism, epicanthus and fine hemisphere. Moderate clonic seizures started from the 3rd day of life arched eyebrows. There was clinodactyly of second and fifth fingers. and progressed to severe epilepsy. EEG record (epileptic discharges Development was retarded. with burst suppression) together with clinical neurological findings High resolution Comparative Genomic Hybridisation (CGH) and showed evidence of early infantile epileptic encephalopathy. There subsequent FISH analysis demonstrated a del(2)(p24p25) de novo. were no other system malformations; ophthalmologic examination did In order to generate a more detailed map of the deleted area, array not detect any abnormalities. Chromosomal analysis revealed normal based CGH was performed using a genomic microarray representing karyotype. Family history was negative for brain malformations, mental the human genome at approximately 1Mb resolution. The deleted area retardation, epilepsy and skin anomalies. was delimited to a region of approximately 10 Mb in 2p25-p24 and In the age of 4 month the patient suddenly died at crib at home. extended from RP11-542B5 to RP11-262D22. Forensic autopsy determined severe brain oedema as the cause of death. Macrosections of brain confirmed the structural anomalies listed P0017. A screening strategy based on the analysis of Beta- above. Unusual histological findings included distorsion of laminar Myosin Heavy Chain, Cardiac Myosin Binding Protein C and character of cortical cytoarchitectonics, primitive layers of cortical cardiac Troponin T for Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. neurocytes, spongioform changes of grey and white brain matter, and F. Girolami1, I. Passerini1, A. Mariottini1, I. Olivotto2, F. Cecchi2, F. Torricelli1; focal gliosis. 1Careggi Hospital-Cytogenetics and Genetics Unit, Florence, Italy, 2Careggi Hospital-Regional Referral Center for Myocardial Diseases, Florence, Italy. P0015. High resolution comparative genomic hybridisation Background. Mutations causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) analysis for detecting small constitutional chromosome have been described in ten different genes of the sarcomere. However, abnormalities three genes account for >50% of known mutations: Beta-Myosin V. Vranova1, P. Kuglik1, M. Pesakova2, I. Slamova2, D. Zezulkova2, M. Vile- Heavy Chain (MYH7), Cardiac Myosin Binding Protein C (MYBPC3), mova2, A. Oltova2, R. Gaillyova2; and Cardiac Troponin T (TNNT2). Thus, we prospectively assessed a 1Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk screening strategy based on the comprehensive evaluation of MYBPC3, University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University MYH7 and TNNT2 in a consecutive population with HCM. Methods. A Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic. total of 163 unrelated HCM patients were screened in MYBPC3, MYH7 Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) is a molecular cytogenetic and TNNT2 genes by DHPLC and automatic sequencing. Results. technique that allows geonome-wide analysis of DNA sequence copy We identified 54 mutations in 82 index patients (50% of the study number differences. Recently, modification of CGH with increased cohort); 37 were novel. The prevalence rates for MYBPC3, MYH7 and resolution down to 3-5 Mb has been reported. This high resolution TNNT2 were 34%, 12% and 4%, respectively. MYBPC3 mutations CGH (HR-CGH) allows characterization of redundant and missing were 35, including 7 frameshift, 7 splice-site and 3 nonsense. All were cytogenetic material often unrecognizable by G-banding, and enhances “private” except E542Q, IVS24-2 A>G, insC1065, R502Q, M555T, sensitivity and specificity in the detection of aberrations. and IVS12+1G>A, which were present in 2-5 unrelated patients. Although, the application of CGH is mainly in the field of cancer Moreover, E258K was found in 12% of the patients, suggesting a genetics, its use in clinical cytogenetics also increases. In clinical founder effect. One patient was homozygous for a MYBPC3 mutation. cytogenetics CGH has been particularly suited for simplification of MYH7 mutations were 13, all missense; 8 were novel. In TNNT2, only identification and characterization of intrachromosomal duplication, 6 mutations were found. Ten patients carried a double mutation within deletions, unbalanced translocations and maker chromosomes. the MYBPC3 gene (n=6), or were double heterozygous for a MYBPC3 In this work we are reporting about the application of the recently mutation associated with a mutation in MYH7(n=3) or TNNT2 (n=1). developed metod of HR-CGH for clarification of small terminal Conclusions. Mutations of MYH7, MYBPC3 and TNNT2 accounted for imbalances in 4 patients with abnormal karyotypes and dysmorphic 50% of patients in a consecutive HCM cohort. Thus, the combined features. The characterization of additional material on 1p, 4p, 6p analysis of these 3 genes represents a rational and cost-effective initial and 17p chromosomes was performed and der(1)t(1;11), inv(4p), approach to genetic screening of HCM. dup(6p) and der(17)t(11;17) were confirmed by using HR-CGH. The results were subsequently confirmed by FISH and spectral karyotyping P0018. VMD2 gene mutational screening in Italian families: (SKY). identification of a novel mutation associated with Best We conclude that HR-CGH can be used as an excellent diagnostic Maculopathy tool for clarification and identification of chromosomal imbalances not I. Passerini1, F. Girolami1, A. Mariottini1, A. Sodi2, U. Menchini1, F. Torricelli1; apparent from a routine cytogenetic analysis. 1Careggi Hospital -Cytogenetics and Genetics Unit, Florence, Italy, 2University of Florence-Eye Clinic, Florence, Italy. Background: Best's disease is an autosomal dominant, early-onset form of macular degeneration.VMD2 gene, considered responsibleClinical genetics 84 for the disease, codifies the protein Bestrophin: the function of this defined risk characteristics. The gene defect is associated with protein is not known. In the present study we screened for mutations increased risks of the treatable and preventable cancer melanoma and the VMD2 gene in Italian patients with Best maculopathy. with the non-treatable and non-preventable pancreatic cancer. Given Methods: Seven families with Best disease were recruited from central these disease characteristics, decision-making is thought to be even and southern Italy, and family members were evaluated by standard more difficult and therefore we aimed to evaluate uptake, motivation ophthalmologic examination. DNA samples were analyzed for and psychological implications of genetic testing. mutations in VMD2 gene by DHPLC approach and direct sequencing Of the 403 eligible subjects, 166 (41%) opted for counselling. Variables techniques. significantly predictive for counselling uptake were being a parent, Results: Some mutations of the VMD2 gene have been detected in higher prior risk and older age. A total of 127 (77%) counselees finally all the affected patients and in some unaffected relatives. Most of opted for genetic testing. Age was the only significant predictor for the mutations have already been described in the literature; a novel test acceptation. Of the counselees, 94 (57%) were included in the mutation (R218G) was detected. It is also interesting to remark that in psychological study. Counselees reported lower distress levels after this series the same mutation was associated with some differences the first counselling session than those reported in other oncogenetic in clinical phenotypes. In fact in one family the R218C mutation was testing settings like HBOC and FAP, despite being informed about associated with the onset of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in the pancreatic cancer. In addition, these levels were not clinically affected mother and her son, while no CNV was reported in another elevated. Test acceptors had more positive expectations of the test family sharing the same mutation. Another family with the R25W than decliners. mutation showed a multifocal location of the vitelliform deposits, while We report a relatively high uptake rate for p16-Leiden testing and another family with the samed mutation showed a typical isolated no clinically worrisome levels of distress after the first counselling vitelliform disc in the macular area. session. Conclusions: Some mutations of VMD2 gene have been detected in some Best's disease families; among them there is a novel missense P0021. New mutations in the Protein Kinase Cγ gene associated mutation. In spite of the small number of studied families it was possible with Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 14 (SCA14) to remark a certain phenotype heterogeneity. S. Klebe; INSERM U679, Paris, France. P0019. Stargardt Disease in Italian patients: identification of nine Objective To evaluate the frequency for PKCγ gene mutations and novel mutations in ABCR gene determination of the associated phenotype. I. Passerini1, F. Girolami1, A. Mariottini1, A. Sodi2, U. Menchini2, F. Torricelli1; Background Autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (ADCA) 1Careggi Hospital -Cytogenetics and Genetics Unit, Florence, Italy, 2University are a heterogeneous group of movement disorders characterized by of Florence-Eye Clinic, Florence, Italy. progressive ataxia that is variably associated with other neurological Purpose: Stargardt disease (STGD) is a progressive juvenile-to-young signs. In addition to the known expansions of repeated sequences, adult-onset macular degeneration with severe reduction of central six point mutations have been described in the gene encoding protein visual acuity and normal periheral vision..Mutations in ABCR gene are kinase Cγ (PKCγ) accounting spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) 14. responsible for autosomal recessive Stargardt disease (arSTGD). In Methods Direct sequencing of exons 1, 4, 10 and 18 of the PKCγ gene this study we determined the mutation spectrum in ABCR gene in a in 238 index cases from ADCA families that did not carried expansions group of Italian patients with arSTDG. in the SCA 1, 2, 3, 6, 12, 7, 17 and DRPLA genes. Methods: Thirthy-two families from central Italy, some members of Results Six missense mutations, including 5 newly reported, were which were affected by arSTGD, were clinically examined. DNA identified in exon 4, 10 and 18. The mutations segregated completely samples were analyzed for mutations in all 50 exons of the ABCR gene with the disease and were located in highly conserved regions of the by DHPLC approach and direct sequencing techniques. protein, except for a single mutation only conserved among mammals. Results: All the affected subjects showed bilateral central vision loss with The mutations were absent in 560 control chromosomes. macular atrophy and yellow-white flecks at the posterior pole, typical The phenotype of the affected individuals consisted in a slowly dark choroid in fluorescein angiography, normal electroretinogram, progressive pure cerebellar ataxia with few additional neurological normal caliber of retinal vessels, no pigmented bone spicules in the features (mild cognitive impairment, myoclonus, sphincter disturbances retinal periphery. In all these patients we reported some mutations of and decreased vibration sense) in some patients. The mean age of ABCR gene. Some of these mutations have been already described onset of was 33.5 ±14.2 years (range 15 to 60 years). and among them G1961E was the most frequent in our series. Nine Conclusion Although SCA 14 remains a rare form (6/238) of ADCA novel mutations were identified: five missense mutations (N96K, T970P, in families without the classical repeat expansions, mutations in the F1015I, P1484S and L2221P); one nonsense mutations (Q21X); PKCγ gene should be considered in patients with slowly progressive two small deletions (5109delG, 5903delG and 6750delA). These ADCA associated with myoclonus and/or mild cognitive impairment. mutations were not detected in 150 unaffected control individuals (300 chromosomes) of Italian origin. P0022. Bilateral upper extremity deficiency, unilateral absence of Conclusions: Some novel mutations in ABCR gene in STGD patients fibula with oligodactyly and zygodactyly:a new clinical entity? were reported. These data confirm the extensive allelic heterogeneity B. Eroglu Kesim, M. Tekkesin, U. Cetincelik; of the ABCR gene, in agreement with previous observations in patients Sisli Etfal Research and Traning Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey. with Stargardt disease from Italy. We report a boy with multiple congenital extremity anomalies. The propositus is four years old. His parents, are both from the same region P0020. Genetic testing in familial melanoma: uptake and of Turkey but not relatives. He has reduction deformity of forearms and psychological implications both hands. Especially, the distal part of the left leg was shorter than F. A. de Snoo1, S. R. Riedijk2, A. van Mil1, A. van Haeringen1, J. ter Huurne1, W. the right leg. He has oligodactyly on the left foot and zygodactyly on Bergman3, H. F. Vasen4, N. A. Gruis3, A. Tibben1, M. H. Breuning1; the right foot. Prominant radiologic findings include bilateral aplasia/ 1Dept of Human&Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Dept. of hypoplasia of radii and ulna, absent carpals, nearly complete absence Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, of metacarpals and phalanges. Both tibias were thickened and the left 3Dept of Dermatology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Dept of Gastro-enter- tibia was shorter than the right one. No fibula was observed on the left ology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands. side. He has four metatarsals, four toes on the left foot, whereas, he We have started offering genetic testing for p16-Leiden (a CDKN2A has four metatarsals, five toes on the right foot. This combination of founder mutation) and so far we have found no adverse effects. features has not been described previously, and may present a new Uncertainties regarding the risk estimates associated with melanoma clinical entity. gene defects have prompted the International Melanoma Genetics Consortium to consider genetic testing premature unless conducted within a strict protocol. Accordingly, we have started offering predictive genetic testing in the p16-Leiden families for which we have well-Clinical genetics 85 P0023. Outcome of a pregnancy of a couple with Noonan P0026. Mosaicism in genetic counselling procedure(Belarussian syndrome in both partners registry of chromosomal abnormalities) K. Becker1, H. Hughes1, K. Howard1, E. J. Lazda2, J. Short3, A. Shaw3, M. A. N. Rumyantseva, A. Polityko, O. Khurs; Patton3; Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus. 1North Wales Clinical Genetics Service, Bodelwyddan, Rhyl, Denbighshire, Mosaicism is cause of widespread spectrum of pathological features: United Kingdom, 2Fetal Malformation Unit, Institute of Medical Genetics, Univer- mental delay, growth retardation, malformations, dysmorphic signs, sity Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3SW Thames Regional Genet- hypogenitalism, decreased fertility, reproductive failure. Carriers need ics Centre, St. George's Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom. for exact cytogenetic status detection and prognoses. We report the outcome of the first pregnancy of an unrelated couple We studied cytogenetical and clinical characteristics of 175 affected with a clinical diagnosis of Noonan syndrome and a missense PTPN11 patients with mosaic chromosomal rearrangements (MChR) identified mutation in both partners. In addition to the 50% risk of having a baby using GTG-banding analysis (lymphocytes). Mosaic abnormalities with Noonan syndrome and one PTPN mutation, the couple also have amounted to 6.7% of all number of aberrant karyotypes registered a 25% risk of compound heterozygosity which has never been reported during 1983-2003 years (175/2619 cases). 48 different variants of in the literature before, and for which the phenotype is unknown. The MChR were detected. pregnancy resulted in an early fetal demise at 12 weeks. Hydrops and Cytogenetical data. Spectrum of MChR included: mosaic aberrations cystic hygroma were observed on a dating scan, and a subsequent fetal of gonosomes -79.4%; autosomes -18.9%; combinated mosaic cases medicine scan showed that the fetus was no longer viable. Cytogenetic -1.7%. Structural rearrangements amounted to 42.8% of all mosaic and molecular studies confirmed compound heterozygosity. Our case karyotypes (75/175 patients); sex chromosomes abnormalities suggests that homozygous Noonan syndrome is a severe condition prevailed among them -94.6% (71/75). Analyses demonstrated the presenting prenatally with severe hydrops and intrauterine death. presence of 2, 3 or 4 aberrant cell lines in single karyotype, including combinations of clones with normal and aberrant karyotype and P0024. Phenotypic variability in families with mesiodens abnormal clones only. Mosaic balanced karyotypes with inv(9) or E. Severin; inv(X) were registered in 4 cases (2%). 3 patients (1.7%) presented Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. multiple aberrations. Mesiodens is the most common supernumerary tooth also known as Clinical data. The frequent mosaic chromosomal syndromes were: an extra incisor located in the midline between the two permanent autosomal imbalance presented 24 cases (13.7%) of Down syndrome, central incisors. Mesiodens usually occurs singly and can be isolated 7 cases (4%) numerical, structural aberrations of autosomes 5; 8; or associated with other anomalies.Often does not erupt. The literature 9; 13; 18; 22; sex chromosomes abnormalities include 110 cases reports several theories, including the genetic one, concerning the (62.8%) of Turner syndrome, 5 cases (2.8%) - female with polysomy cause of mesiodens but subject is still debated. Objective: to identify X, including pentasomy X, 9 cases (5.1%) of Klainfelter syndrome. the genetic cause of clinical variability of mesiodens as observed in our Other cases showed rare combinations of numerical and/or structural cases. Subjects and Methods: investigation of mesiodens was carried MChR of gonosomes, autosomes and markers expressed by MCA/MR out on 17 Caucasian patients ranging in age from 8 to 23 years; based phenotype or hypogenitalism/reproductive failure features. on the phenotypic presentation of mesiodens (shape, size, location Spectrum of MChR and karyotype-phenotype correlations of rare and eruption) we classified the patients in four groups; the mesiodens variants will be presented. was diagnosed by oral and radiographic examinations; family study, cytogenetic and molecular analyses were performed. Results: 15 P0027. Prenatal and postnatal MRI findings in Gomez-Lopez- patients presented mesiondens as an isolated trait; the affected Hernandez syndrome. members within the same family often exhibited variability in clinical T. Tan1, G. McGillivray1, S. Goergen2, S. M. White1; presentation; 2 patients exhibited mesiodens in association with other 1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department of Diag- dental anomalies; family history of the patients suggested either the nostic Imaging, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia. mendelian pattern of inheritance (autosomal dominant with complete Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez syndrome, or cerebellotrigeminal dermal penetrance or X-linked dominant) or an unclear pattern of transmission; dysplasia (MIM#601853), is a rare neurocutaneous disorder comprising no cytogenetic aberration were found. Conclusions: mesiodens is cerebellar abnormalities, craniosynostosis, parietal alopecia, an inherited developmental anomaly; intrafamilial variability could be trigeminal nerve anesthesia, intellectual impairment and short stature. explained by variable expressivity of a single mutant gene or by the It has been reported in only ten patients, five of whom are Brazilian. effect of modifier gene; interfamilial variability could be well explained Rhombencephalosynapsis is a rare cerebellar anomaly defined as by locus heterogeneity rather than the molecular heterogeneity. Early fusion of the cerebellar hemispheres and agenesis of the vermis. It is diagnosis of familial mesiodens prevents the clinical complications. usually a sporadic isolated finding, but has been consistently reported in Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez syndrome. We present the clinical and P0025. Poikiloderma, Alopecia, Bilateral Optic Nerve Atrophy, radiographic features of a 35-week premature Caucasian Australian Cerebral Calcification, and Bone Marrow Suppression: Severe male who had rhombencephalosynapsis and other brain abnormalities Rothmund Thomson Syndrome? diagnosed on prenatal fetal MRI, initially identified on ultrasound. The N. A. Al-Sanna'a1, S. A. Al-Dhafiri1, A. S. Teebi2; diagnosis of Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez syndrome became apparent at 1Dhahran Health Center, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, 2The Hospital for Sick Chil- six week postnatal review when parietal alopecia and abnormal skull dren, Toronto, ON, Canada. shape was noted. Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez syndrome should be A Saudi Arab girl with poikilodermaous skin changes, generalized considered as a syndromic association of rhombencephalosynapsis. alopecia, bilateral optic nerve atrophy, cerebral calcification, and There may be a common pathogenetic mechanism. significant delay of growth and development is described. The girl developed bone marrow suppression requiring frequent blood and P0028. A 13-year old true hermaphrodite male with 46, XX/47, platelets transfusions. She had a normal karyotype study on the XXY karyotype, positive SRY and azoospermia factor genes, blood. The parents are first cousins and phenotypically normal. An diagnosed through a ruptured corpus luteum older brother died of the same condition suggesting an autosomal A. Mavrou1, A. Galani2, A. Kolialexi2, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, H. Fryssira1, E. Papan- recessive mode of inheritance. We think this constellation of clinical dreou2, K. Stefanaki2, K. Sophocleous1, C. Kanaka Gantenbein2; features is likely to represent a severe variant of Rothmund Thomson 1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 21st Department of Pediat- Syndrome. Other conditions including gerodermia osteodysplatica and rics University of Athens, ²Agia Sophia² Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece. the severe autosomal recessive form of dyskeratosis congenital were The vast majority of true hermaphrodite patients - characterized by also considered the presence of both ovarian and testicular tissue - show ambiguous genitalia or severe hypospadias and almost all have vagina. The most common karyotype is 46,XX. We report on a 13-year old boy, who presented with left inguinal hemorrhage after an accident while playing football. On clinicalClinical genetics 86 examination, he had a left inguinal hernia, a palpable testis in the disease and central nervous system malformations with wide inter- and right semi-scrotum, normal male external genitalia and significant intra-familial clinical variability. Mutations in the OFD1 gene are found in gynecomastia. During the operation for the left inguinal hernia, the 50% of cases by direct sequencing. Large rearrangements and genetic left gonad and the adjacent tissue were removed for histological heterogeneity could be postulated in order to explain this low mutation examination, which revealed the presence of a normal ovary, rich in rate. A French and Belgian collaborative study collected 25 cases from follicles and a ruptured corpus luteum and a normal ipsilateral adnexe 16 families and identified 11 novel mutations (9 frameshift, 1 nonsense with semi-uterus. Endocrinological assessment postoperatively and 1 missense mutation) by direct sequencing. We compared the depicted high FSH levels, testosterone levels at the pubertal range phenotype of the 11 families with a pathogenic mutation with the and low estradiol levels. Cytogenetic analysis in peripheral blood phenotype of the 5 families with absence of mutation within the OFD1 lymphocytes revealed a 46, XX (70%)/47, XXY (30%) karyotype. gene in order to investigate which clinical features could suggest the FISH analysis of left gonad showed a 46, XX (60%)/47, XXY (40%) presence or absence of an OFD1 mutation. There was no significant karyotype and molecular analysis verified the presence of SRY and difference for the presence or absence of hypertelorism, cleft lip and azoospermia factor genes. palate, buccal frenulae, tooth abnormalities, digital abnormalities, The importance of full histological, cytogenetic and molecular corpus callosum agenesis and mental retardation between both investigation in every single patient with sex differentiation disorders is groups. Conversely, we found that the presence of polycystic kidneys highlighted by the constellation of normal male external genitalia with a (Chi²: 0.035) and short stature and the absence of lingual hamartomas 46,XX/47,XXY karyotype in this rare case of true hermaphroditism. (Chi²: 0.041) could suggest the absence of an OFD1 gene mutation, although such data could not be useful at an individual level. It is P0029. Czech dysplasia metatarsal type interesting to note that short stature have been found only in the group I. A. Marik1,2, K. S. Kozlowski3, O. Marikova2, D. Zemkova1,4, M. Kuklik1,2; without OFD1 mutation (4/9 cases). 1Ambulant Centre for Defects of Locomotor Apparatus, Prague, Czech Repub- lic, 2Department of Anthropology and Human Genetics, The Faculty of Science, P0031. An unusual case of Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Imaging, with a mutation in the PTEN gene The Children´s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 4Second Paediatric L. Boccone1, V. Dessì2, S. Piga2, M. B. Piludu2, S. DeVirgiliis2, A. Cao3, G. Clinic Motol Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. Loudianos1; The authors report about four further patients of the recently described 1Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie, Cagliari, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze new bone dysplasia - dominantly inherited pseudorheumatoid arthritis Biomediche e Biotecnologie USC Italy, Cagliari, Italy, 3Istituto di Neurogenetica that was diagnosed in eight members of one family. The patients of this e Neurofarmacologia CNR cagliari Italy, Cagliari, Italy. report are not relative. They have a similar clinical history, the same Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS) is characterised by distinctive phenotype and almost identical radiographic findings. The macrocephaly, intestinal hamartomatous polyps, lipomas, speckled unique phenotypic hallmark is hypoplasia/dysplasia of the toes. The penis and mental retardation. Germline mutations in the tumor skeletal abnormalities are similar. They are localized predominantly in suppressor gene PTEN were described in patients with BRRS. Herein the spine, pelvis, hips and feet. They include a mild platyspondyly with we report a case of BRRS with unusual clinical features and a novel irregularity of vertebral plates, narrowing of the joint and intervertebral mutation in PTEN gene He was born after uncomplicated pregnancy disc spaces, rectangular shape of the lumbar spinal canal in the A-P with birth weight and length at the 90th centile, head circumference at projection, pelvic and proximal femoral dysplasia, and hypoplasia of the 75th centile. At the first observation (4.5 yrs) the patient has a height the 3rd and/or 4th metatarsals. The disease is dominantly inherited with at the 90th centile, weight at the 50th centile and head circumference > variable expressivity. The only major difference is absence of weather +2 SD. He exhibited mild mental retardation and autistic features, joint dependent articular pain that characterized the family of the previous hypermobility, macrocephaly, downward slanting palpebral fissures study. All patients are Caucasians and originate from different parts of and multiple hyperpigmented macules on the shaft and glans penis. the Czech Republic. We conclude that patients in the previous study Colonscopy revealed multiple intestinal lymphoid polyps, greater florid published under the name "Dominantly Inherited Pseudorheumatoid in the ileocecal region. The intestinal mucosa shows macroscopically Dysplasia with Hypoplastic Toes" and those described in this report numerous grey nodules and microscopically prominent large germinal have the same disorder that is probably a quite common constitutional follicules with polymorphous population of cells including B and T bone disorder in the Czech Republic. We propose this unique disease cell without any atypia. Mutation analysis revealed the presence as a new nosological unit. of a missense substitution I135R in heterozygosity flanking to the phosphatase core motif at a position in which a I135V has been P0030. A French and Belgian collaborative study of 25 cases already described. of Oral-Facial-Digital Syndrome Type 1: Clinical differences The peculiarity of our observation is related to the presence of between patients with or without OFD1 mutation intestinal lymphoid polyps, not yet described in BRRS, as well as the C. Thauvin-Robinet1, M. Cossée2, V. Cormier-Daire3, L. Van Maldergem4, A. autistic features which have been rarely described in BRRS. Further Toutain5, Y. Alembik6, E. Bieth7, V. Layet8, P. Parent9, A. David10, A. Golden- studies are necessary to clarify the relationship existing between these berg3, G. Mortier11, D. Héron12, A. Bouvier13, F. Huet14, V. Cusin15, A. Donzel15, D. features and the mutation described in our patient. Devys2, J. Teyssier15, L. Faivre1; 1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, P0032. Cleft lip and palate and syndactyly in a father and son: CHRU, Strasbourg, France, 3Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-En- new syndromic association? fants Malades, Paris, France, 4Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Loverval, L. E. Kim, R. Klatt, A. S. Teebi; Belgium, 5Service de Génétique, Tours, France, 6Service de Génétique Médi- Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. cale, Hôpital Hautepierre, CHRU, Strasbourg, France, 7Laboratoire de Géné- Cleft lip and palate is a common congenital malformation with an tique, CHU Purpan, Toulouse, France, 8Unité de Cytogénétique et Génétique incidence of approximately 1 in 700 live births. It usually has a médicale, CH, Le Havre, France, 9Département de Pédiatrie et de Génétique multifactorial etiology, with about 15% of cases being syndromic. This Médicale, CHU, Brest, France, 10Service de Génétique médicale, CHU, Nantes, latter group is made up by a variety of syndromes, including Van der France, 11Centre de Génétique Médicale, Ghent, Belgium, 12Département de Woude syndrome as well as various chromosomal causes. We report Génétique cytogénétique et embryologie, Hôpital La Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, on a father and son who were both born with bilateral cleft lip and palate France, 13Centre d’Investigation Clinique et d’Epidémiologie Clinique, Faculté and 3-4 syndactyly. The child was born at term after an unremarkable de Médecine, Dijon, France, 14Service de Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU, pregnancy and delivery to non-consanguineous parents. His father Dijon, France, 15Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Dijon, France. and mother were of Malaysian and East Indian descent, respectively. The oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1 or Papillon-Léage-Psaume Aside from his father, the family history was non-contributory. He was syndrome belongs to the heterogeneous group of oral-facial-digital noted at birth to have bilateral cleft lip and palate and was noted during syndromes and is characterised by X-linked dominant mode of our assessment to have partial 3-4 syndactyly of the left hand. There inheritance with lethality in males. Clinical features include facial was a midline lower lip crease but no lip pits or bumps. The remainder dysmorphism with oral, tooth and distal abnormalities, polycystic kidney of the medical examination was unremarkable. Development duringClinical genetics 87 the first few months of life was normal. Our examination of his father duplex right kidney with a dyplastic upper pole, a multicystic, dysplastic revealed a repaired bilateral cleft lip and palate. There were no lip pits left kidney and a small aortic isthmus. The karyotype was 46, XX. or bumps. There was bilateral partial 3-4 syndactyly. Chromosome Each case reported by us presented with oligohydramnios, dysplastic analysis on the son revealed a 46, XY karyotype and negative FISH for kidneys and aortic coarctation. This combination was reported only 22q11-. Hand X-rays on the father revealed no osseous abnormalities. once in the literature and may represent a new syndrome. We think that the association of these two findings may represent a previously unrecognized syndrome for which the inheritance pattern is P0035. Microphthalmia, sclerocornea, linear skin defect, likely autosomal dominant. abnormal cardiac conduction defect and no Xp22.31 deletion: are we dealing with a new syndrome ? P0033. An unusual type of mixed gonadal dysgenesis A. Raas-Rothschild1, I. Lerer1, J. Dagan1, E. Levy-Lahad2, A. J. J. T. Rein3, B. associated with Müllerian ducts persistence, polygonadia and a Franco.4; 45,X/46,X,idic(Y)(p) karyotype 1Department of Human Genetics,Hadassah Hebrew University Hospital, Jeru- S. Kofman-Alfaro1, K. Nieto2, P. Grether3, S. Frías4, I. Palma2, R. Alvárez2, L. salem, Israel, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Medical Genetics Unit,Shaare Zedek Medical Eraña5, G. Queipo2; Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Division of Pediatric Cardiology,Hadassah Hebrew 1Hospital General de Mexico-UNAM, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Hospital General de University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medi- Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico, 3American British Cowdray Hospital, Mexico City, cine, Naples, Italy. Mexico, 4Department of Cytogenetic, Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, Mexico Microphthalmia, sclerocornea and dermal aplasia syndrome is a rare City, Mexico, 5Department of Urology, Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gó- X linked dominant entity. We report on a family with three affected mez, Mexico City, Mexico. daughters: The first daughter had congenital glaucoma and central Mixed gonadal dysgenesis (MGD) is a developmental anomaly in which leukoma of the left eye and Peters' anomaly. A second daughter most of the patients have a dysgenetic testis, a contralateral streak had congenital diaphragmatic hernia, bilateral microphthalmia and and a 45,X/46,XY karyotype. This entity involves an heterogeneous died soon after birth. The third daughter was born with a linear facial group of gonadal and phenotypic abnormalities with a wide clinical skin defect, unilateral anophthalmia and sclerocornea. At the age of spectrum. Although the karyotype in these patients is 45,X/46,XY no 6 months, she presented with junctional ectopic tachycardia which genotype-phenotype correlation has been found to date. Müllerian was ablated by catheterization. The two live affected daughters had ducts persistence (MDP) in MGD is rare; however, four patients with a normal psychomotor development and no other malformation. The both entities and different karyotypes have been described. Here couple had 3 early spontaneous abortions, three healthy sons and one we present a newborn male assigned proband who was evaluated healthy daughter. for ambiguous genitalia, two left testes, a right gonadal streak The constellation of eye malformations, skin defect (third daughter), and Müllerian duct retention. The patient’s original karyotype was diaphragmatic hernia (second daughter) and conduction defect (third 45,X[6]/46,XY[94] while the father’s was 46,XY. Interestingly, the Y- daughter) fit the diagnosis of MIDAS or MLS syndrome. chromosome in the patient was smaller than his father’s Y, which had High resolution karyotype was normal. Molecular analysis using a very long Yq. PCR analysis identified all the Y-derived sequences polymorphic markers showed that marker DXS9985 was compatible tested in the father, while the patient had them all except the AZF b,c with linkage to Xp 22.31, marker DXS7108 was recombinant. regions. FISH analysis of the paternal Y chromosome documented Yq The typical microdeletion of the known critical region for MIDAS/MLS paracentric inversion while in the patient an isodicentric chromosome was excluded in this family. Mutation analysis by direct sequencing of with a Yp duplication was found, modifying the original karyotype candidate genes located in the MLS critical region was negative in one to 45,X/46,X,idic(Yp). No mutations were observed in MIS/MISRII of the member of the family genes. Testicular ish karyotype showed X/XY dysgenetic testes and With the association of the rare entity of congenital junctional ectopic a 45,X streak gonad. We propose that the presence of the mosaic tachycardia, the question is whether we are dealing with a new and the rearrangement of the Y chromosome in our patient could be syndrome. responsible for the dysgenetic gonads leading to an abnormal function of MIS and androgens during early development. P0036. Folate gene alteration is related to maternal cause of Down syndrome in meiosis II chromosome 21 nondisjunction P0034. Renal dysplasia and aortic coarctation: a report of four cases cases A. Aleyasin, M. Ghazanfari, S. Rezaei; L. S. Penney1, B. Lo1, C. R. Smith1, S. Keating2, R. Teitelbaum2, D. Chitayat2; National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Mount Sinai Hospital, Republic of Iran. Toronto, ON, Canada. The main origin of extra chromosome 21 in Down syndrome is usually Aortic coarctation is a narrowing of the aorta, usually distal to the origin maternal and occurs more frequently with advanced maternal age. In of the left subclavian artery. Renal dysplasia is defined as abnormal this study the parental origin, stage of meiotic error and folate gene metanephric differentiation. Although untreated aortic coarctation may alteration (C677T MTHFR) in 120 Iranian Down cases have been cause renal damage, most such cases detected prenatally are isolated studied. Previous reports in that C677T MTHFR mutation have been or associated with Turner syndrome. We report four cases with renal studied as maternal cause of Down syndromes did not categorize Down dysplasia and aortic coarctation. cases according to their parental origin resulted mostly to a negative Case 1- Parents were first cousins of Pakistani descent. Fetal ultrasound linkage. This is the first study to incorporate data of parental origin and showed severe oligohydramnios and bilateral multicystic, dysplastic timing of the chromosome 21 nondisjunction error into investigation of kidneys. The pregnancy was terminated at 24 weeks. Autopsy common mutations in methylentetra hydrofolate reductase (MTHFR confirmed the renal findings and identified an aortic coarctation. The C677T) as maternal cause of Down syndrome in 120 mother of karyotype was 46, XX. Iranian Down syndromes. The parental origin and stage of meiotic Case 2- Fetal ultrasound showed oligohydramnios, abnormal renal nondisjunction were determined in 100 Down children. Common tissue, and aortic coarctation. The child was delivered at 36 weeks mutation C677T of the MTHFR gene has been studied in mothers of gestation and lived 3 days. Autopsy revealed small, multicystic Down syndrome and in 145 normal control mothers. Significant linkage dysplastic kidneys, hypoplasia of the paraductal aorta and dysmorphic was obtained only for mothers with maternal MII origin (P<0.01, χ2>9.4). facial features. The karyotype was 46, XY and FISH for deletion All other categories showed negative linkage to the etiology of Down 22q11.2 was normal. syndrome. This initial categorization of cases removes the sampling Case 3- Fetal ultrasound showed oligohydramnios and poorly error and provides us with a better understanding of MTHFR gene visualized kidneys. Postnatal investigation revealed aortic coarctation mutation C677T as maternal cause of chromosome 21 nondisjunction. and bilateral hypodysplastic kidneys. The karyotype was 46, XY This finding shed light on etiology of Down syndrome and shows the inv(18)(q22.1q23)mat and FISH for deletion 22q11.2 was normal. importance of folate pathway gene alteration as a basic cellular failure Case 4- Fetal ultrasound revealed oligohydramnios, renal abnormalities to contribute significantly in the nondisjunction event of chromosome and a VSD. Postnatal studies revealed a dysmorphic child with a 21.Clinical genetics 88 P0037. A diagnosis of LCHAD deficiency made 8 years after a R555W, R555Q (exon 12) were analyzed using polymerase chain child’s death reaction followed by restriction digestion in 74 individuals from 30 L. Cimbalistiene1, I. Vasiliauskiene2, B. Tumiene1, V. Kucinskas1; unrelated families with different forms of corneal dystrophy from 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithu- different regions of Ukraine. The R555W mutation was detected ania, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clin- in patients from 5/10 families with suspected clinical diagnosis of ics, Vilnius, Lithuania. granular corneal dystrophy. The R124C mutation was detected in 1 We report a family with 2 children. The first one, a female, was born unaffected 10-year old individual and in patients from 11/18 families in 1996. Her mother reported severe vomiting during pregnancy. At 3 with lattice corneal dystrophy. The R555Q mutation was detected in 1 months of age the girl fell ill and was hospitalized with the diagnosis of patient with clinical diagnosed Reis-Bucklers corneal dystrophy. As far varicella encephalitis and myopericarditis. An inborn error of metabolism as R124C mutation was detected in 1 patient with clinical diagnosed was suspected because of hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia and failure to Reis-Bucklers corneal dystrophy we have concluded that this patient thrive. At 6 months of age she fell ill with an acute respiratory infection was misdiagnosed. These results show that TGFBI gene mutations and died suddenly of cardiorespiratory failure. The second child, analysis is important as well for early differential diagnosis of corneal a male, was born in 1997 after an uneventful pregnancy. The child dystrophies and genetic consulting in high risk families, as in future for developed well. At 6 years of age he fell ill with an acute respiratory development of effective preventive therapy. infection and died suddenly from respiratory failure. Postmortem biochemical analyses of both children were done on blood from P0040. Congenital aglossia with situs inversus totalis - A Case Guthrie cards. Acylcarnitine analysis suggested a diagnosis of LCHAD Report for the girl. The test was negative for the boy, but long sample storage Ö. Giray1, E. Bora1, A. Ulgenalp1, G. Pasaoglu2, D. Ercal1; may have resulted in degradation of acylcarnitines. It was decided to 1dokuz eylul university, Izmir, Turkey, 2Private Hospital Caria, Marmaris, Turkey. evaluate both parents’ carrier status for a common mutation E510Q. A 13 - month old girl with difficult swallowing, growth and developmental Molecular studies (Dr. J.Zschocke, Institute of Human Genetics, retardation was refered to DEUGDC. The patient had a 7 year-old Heidelberg, Germany) confirmed that both parents are heterozygous healthy sister and was the second child of non-consanguineous for this mutation. After these tests we could confirm the diagnosis of parents. Her birth weight was 3.300gr. and experienced aspiration LCHAD deficiency for the girl 8 years after her death, but for the boy it pneumonia four times during her first months of postnatal history. is still uncertain whether he had LCHAD deficiency. Conclusion: these Her physical examination revealed that, head circumference was cases underscore the importance of comprehensive laboratory studies 42cm. (<5p), height 60cm. (<5p) and weight 7.200gm (<5p). She has in patients with unclear deaths. aglossia, high palate, dextrocardia, pectus excavatum, sacral dimple and pes planus. With ultrasonographic and radiological investigations P0038. Analysis of Cx26 mutation: evidence for a Mediterranean situs inversus totalis was determined and her karyotype was 46,XX. ancestor for 35delG mutation The case was diagnosed as a rare syndrome named; Aglossia with H. Belguith1, S. Hajji2, N. Salem3, A. Tlili1, I. Charfeddine4, A. Mégarbané3, A. situs inversus totalis. Although various genes which are thought to Rebai5, A. Sefiani6, S. Masmoudi1, H. Ayadi1,5; be responsible for the right and left axial development and misplaced 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, body organs have been described previously, the etiology has been Tunisia, 2Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National d’Hygiène, remained unclear. Description of the cases, comparison of the features Rabat, Morocco, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Université Saint-Joseph, with others and further detailed molecular investigations may lighten Beyrouth, Lebanon, 4Service d'O.R.L, C.H.U. H. Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, this complex subject. 5Centre de Biotechnologie, Sfax, Tunisia, 6Département de Génétique Médi- cale, Institut National d’Hygiène de Rabat, Morocco. P0041. Fragile X syndrome and alteration in folic acid pathway Despite the fact that more than 22 genes have been identified in gene autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness (ARNSD), a single S. Rezaei, A. Aleyasin; gene, GJB2, accounts for a high proportion of the cases. One National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic particular mutation, 35delG, was shown to have a high allele frequency Republic of Iran. in Mediterranean population. Recent studies indicate that the high Fragile X syndrome happens due to the CGG repeat expansion and frequency of this mutation arises from a founder effect rather than methylation of FMR1 gene. Fragile X syndrome has an incomplete a mutational hotspot. We analyzed 70 Tunisian and 12 Moroccan penetrance approximately 70% in male and 30% in female. To date families affected with ARNSD. Sixteen (Tunisia) and 6 (Morocco) less attention was to study important genetic factors that may play families were homozygous for the 35delG mutation. One Tunisian role in neuropathology and severity of physical characteristic of fragile family was compound heterozygous 35delG/291insA. In order to bring X syndrome. Folic acid, has been prescribed in some fragile X cases further evidence that the 35delG mutation arose in the Mediterranean for reduction of hyperactivity and attention deficit in prepuberty. Folic population from a single mutational event on a founder chromosome, acid derivatives have important roles in DNA methylation and neural we analyzed the haplotype distribution in 31 unrelated individuals development and function as well as in synthesis of neurotransmitters homozygous for the 35delG mutation (16 Tunisian, 6 Moroccan, and 9 and influence divers process in the CNS. Our hypothesis was to Lebanese) and 116 unrelated normal hearing with no 35delG mutation study impaired folate metabolism in fragile X patients as the first (45 Tunisians, 41 Moroccan, and 30 Lebanese). Two microsatellite step to evaluate the linkage between folate metabolism dysfunction markers and one single nucleotide polymorphism were used for the and methylation of FMR1 gene. This is the first study to assess this haplotype analyses. Significant linkage disequilibrium (LD) between hypothesis by comparing the frequency of three common mutations in the 35delG mutation and the closet markers was observed. Our data C677T, A1298C methylentetra hydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene, suggest that the mutation is originated from one common ancestor in in 40 male fragile X patients and 100 normal control males. All cases the Mediterranean population. have been initially diagnosed with fragile X syndrome by molecular methods. The statistical analysis showed a significant linkage between P0039. Mutation analysis of the TGFBI gene in families with C677T mutation with fragile X syndrome supported with a P value of hereditary corneal dystrophies from Ukraine 0.021 and chi-square of 7.719. However, no significant correlations were V. Pampukha1, G. Drozhyna2, L. Livshits1; obtained for A1298C MTHFR mutation. Significantly high frequency of 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics National Academy of Science of C677T MTHFR mutation may suggest effect of folate derivatives on Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2The Filatov Institute of Eye Diseases and Tissue Ther- neuropathology and methylation process and more investigations to apy Academy of Medical Science of Ukraine, Odesa, Ukraine. perform on the role of folate metabolism in fragile X syndrome. Mutations in TGFBI gene encoding keratoepithelin are responsible for the group of autosomal dominant diseases of the cornea: granular (Groenouw type I), lattice type I, lattice type 3A, Reis-Bucklers and Avellino corneal dystrophies In our study five previously reported mutations of the TGFBI gene: R124C, R124H, R124L (exon 4),Clinical genetics 89 P0042. Screening of submicroscopic genomic aberrations in in many families of different ethnic backgrounds. patients with X-linked mental retardation by high resolution Since mitochondrial mutations have not been yet searched in Tunisian array-CGH deaf patients, we have attempt to explore the 12S ARNr and the G. Froyen1, H. Van Esch2, M. Bauters1, J. Vermeesch2, P. Vanhummelen3, J. ARNtSer(UCN) genes in our sample. Fryns2, K. Devriendt2, P. Marynen1; We have studied 125 patients affected with hearing loss and belonging 1Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB4), Leuven, Belgium, to 114 Tunisian families for whom no nuclear mutation responsible of 2University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Microarray Facility of the VIB, hearing loss have been identified. Leuven, Belgium. Searching for the A1555G mutation have been performed by PCR- Subtle gains or losses of genomic regions seem to account for a RFLP. The entire mitochondrial 12S ARNr gene have been explored substantial percentage (5-10%) of causes in patients with idiopathic by direct sequencing. mental retardation (MR). Therefore, we introduced the recently The A1555G mutation have been identified in one out of the 114 developed technology of array-CGH, which is able to detect families and not in 100 normal individuals. After direct sequencing of the cytogenetically undetectable microdeletions and -duplications, to mitochondrial 12S RNA gene, we have detected known polymorphisms identify novel genetic anomalies, and hence candidate genes, in X- at nucleotides 709, 710, 750, 769, 825, 930, 1018, 1048 and 1438 in linked MR patients. We have constructed an X chromosome-specific patients and normal individuals. We have also detected three novel array containing 1875 clones resulting in an X-array with a theoretical polymorphisms in the same gene. resolution of 80 kb. Target DNA was spotted in duplicate on 3-D CodeLink The mutational screening of the mitochondrial ARNtSer(UCN) gene shows slides. After extensive validation, differentially labeled genomic DNA the absence of A7445G, 7472insC, T7510C, T7511C and T7512C probes of XLMR patients were co-hybridized on the X-array. We mutations in this gene in the 125 patients and the 100 controls identified aberrations (0.3 - 1.5 Mb in size) in 10% of the patients. analysed. These were confirmed by real-time quantitation and 4 were not found We report here the first mutational screening of the mitochondrial 12S in a control population suggesting a link with the MR phenotype. As an ARNr gene in Tunisian population which describes the second family example, we report on a 1.5 Mb interstitial deletion at Xp22.3 that was harbouring the A1555G mutation in Africa and reveals three novel detected in 4 unrelated MR patients with ichthyosis (XLI). Molecular polymorphisms. analysis confirmed that this recurrent deletion occurred via non-allelic homologous recombination of the CRI-S232 repeat sequences, each P0045. Mutation 35delG in the gene GJB2 and hereditary pre- of which contains a VCX gene. Moreover, the recombination site in all lingual deafness among the russian population. 4 patients was fine-mapped to a 1 kb repeat region present at the 3' S. G. Zhuravskiy, A. E. Taraskina, T. Sathiyaseelan, Y. A. Degtyareva; end of the VCX-A and VCX-B genes, thereby deleting VCX-A but not S'Petersburg I.P.Pavlov State Medical University, St.Petersburg, Russian Fed- VCX-B, providing additional evidence that VCX-A is the MR gene at eration. Xp22.31. Additional data obtained with this X-array will be presented. GJB2 is the gene which encodes the gap junction protein connexin 26. A homozygotic carrier of the mutation 35delG in this gene is to be a cause P0043. Association of TNFα promoter polymorphisms and for recessive non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss or deafness cerebral palsy in the pre-lingual period of the Caucasoid population. Investigation H. Kapitanovic Vidak1, T. Cacev2, S. Kapitanovic2; conducted among 44 patients with pre-lingual sensorineural hearing 1Special hospital for children with neurodevelopmental and motor difficulties, loss or deafness in St-Petersburg, 35delG/35delG genotype was found Zagreb, Croatia, 2Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. in 21 patients (47.7%), 35delG/wt in 7 patients (16%). At the mean Cerebral palsy (CP) is a nonprogressive motor disorder caused by white time early childhood deafness associated with 35delG mutation was matter damage in the developing brain. It is often accompanied with found more frequently among the children with healthy (heterozygotic) neurocognitive and sensory disabilities. The cause and pathogenesis parents (43.8%) and less frequently among the children with deaf of CP is multifactorial and continues to be poorly understood. (homozygotic) parents (15%). Interestingly in the control group with Chorioamnionitis, clinical silent or manifest, has been reported to 238 healthy donors, 14 (5.9%) were heterozygotic mutation carriers. be a risk factor for CP both in term and preterm infants. TNFα is a This shows the highest level of heterozygosity among all Caucasoid cytokine produced by activated monocytes and macrophages, which populations. play a key role in the inflammatory response. TNFα gene is mapped to chromosome 6p21.3 and a large number of polymorphisms of P0046. Creating a Path for the Acceptance of Microarray-Based its promoter, called "high-production" polymorphisms, have been Genetic and Genomic Tests in the Clinical Laboratory described. Increased TNFα levels in peripheral blood in premature and J. A. Warrington; close-to-term birth have been found to associate with the development Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, United States. of CP. The aim of our study was to estimate allelic frequency for four Few inventions in the past fifteen years have had as much impact promoter region SNPs in TNFα gene, -238, -308, -857 and -1031 in the on genetic and genomic research as microarray technology. This children with the CP. technology has captured the imaginations of clinical and laboratory DNAs obtained from peripheral blood of 40 CP patients and 150 researchers and made possible studies heretofore unachievable. unrelated healthy volunteers were genotyped for the TNFα -238, -308, The scope and breadth of the studies enabled by this technology is -857 and -1031 SNPs using real-time PCR TaqMan® SNP genotyping changing the practice of laboratory and clinical research and has led to assays. There was statistically significant correlation (p<0.05) between the introduction of array-based diagnostic tests in the clinical laboratory. cerebral palsy and expression affecting allele variants of TNFα, - Whole genome analyses promise deeper insight into biological 308A and -857T. The association between these polymorphisms and processes, biological reporters and discovery of new biomarkers and cerebral palsy has to be investigated in the future studies. the volume of genetic and genomic data places pressure on scientists and clinicians to design experimental and analyses strategies that P0044. Analysis of the 12S ARNr gene : Detection of the A1555G leverage the integration of clinical and molecular information. This new mitochondrial mutation in a Tunisian family affected with non era of clinical genetics and genomics places increased emphasis on syndromic hearing loss and novel polymorphisms in Tunisian collaboration and teamwork including a significant focus on well-defined population tissue banks and clinical databases. At the center of this paradigm E. Mkaouar1, A. Tlili1, N. Louhichi1, I. Charfeddine2, M. Ben Amor2, S. Mas- shift is a requirement for the tools necessary for measuring technical moudi1, H. Ayadi1, F. Fakhfakh1; performance of the platforms used for data collection. Reporting reliable 1Laboratoire de genetique moleculaire humaine. Faculte de Medecine de Sfax, information of known quality is key to the emergence of microarrays Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service d'O.R.L., C.H.U. H. Bourguiba de Sfax., Sfax, Tunisia. in toxicogenomics, pharmacogenomics, and as diagnostic devices Mitochondrial mutations especially in the mitochondrial 12S rRNA and in clinical medicine. Success in moving microarray technology into the tRNA genes have been found to be associated with both syndromic clinical and diagnostic laboratories requires building a research and and nonsyndromic hearing loss. In particular, the A1555G mutation in development foundation in multiple areas including standardization the 12S rRNA gene has been associated with non-syndromic deafness across industry, development of clinical guidelines via accreditedClinical genetics 90 processes, generation of validation data, diagnostics-suitable platform P0049. Frameshift mutation in ZHFX1B gene in a Croatian girl delivery and achievement of regulatory approval. Examples of key with Hirschprung disease, mental retardation and epilepsy successful projects and partnerships will be shared. (Mowat Wilson syndrome) R. Gjergja1, L. Cvitanovic-Sojat1, Z. Gjergja2, T. Sojat1, M. Goosens3, F. Dastot- P0047. Clinical variability in a Noonan syndrome family with Le Moal3, D. Mowat4; PTNP11 gene A118G mutation 1University Hospital "Sestre milosrdnice", Department of Pediatrics, Zagreb, S. Kitsiou1, A. Xaidara2, E. Kanavakis1, A. Papadopoulou2, A. Fretzagias3, A. Croatia, 2Pediatric Outpatient Clinic "Dr Sabol", Zagreb, Croatia, 3INSERM Mayakou2, A. Kolialexi1, A. Mavrou1, P. Nikolaidou3; U468 et Service de Biochimie et Genetique, Hopital Henri Mondador, Creteil, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2First De- France, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, The Children's Hospital at West- partment of Pediatrics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 3Third Department of mead, Sydney, Australia. Pediatrics, Athens University, Athens, Greece. Background: Mowat Wilson syndrome (MWS) includes distinctive Noonan syndrome (NS) characterized by craniofacial anomalies, short facial appearance, intellectual impairment, seizures and other stature, congenital heart defects, cryptorchidism, skeletal and other malformations such as Hirschprung disease, congenital heart defects organ malformations, is an autosomal dominant disorder with different and agenesis of the corpus callosum. It is caused by heterozygous mutations of PTNP11 gene in 60% of cases. We report on a family deletions or truncating mutations of the ZFHX1B gene on chromosome with NS transmitted through 3 maternal generations. All five affected 2q22. members presented with the same morphological characteristics but Case report: We present a 13-years-old Croatian girl born to healthy different organ involvement. The index case a 5 years old girl with and unrelated parents. Because of short segment Hirschprung disease height in the 3rd percentile is the product of a twin IVF pregnancy. Her emergency colostomy was performed at 2nd day of life. Dysmorphia, phenotypic characteristics, common in all affected members, include: hypotonia and failure to thrive have also been observed. Since the 1st coarse and triangular - shaped face, hypertelorism, down- slanting, year of life the antiepileptic therapy was introduced because of seizures prominent eyes with epicanthus, low - set posteriorly angulated ears and pathologic changes on EEG. Brain MRI showed hypoplastic with thickened helices, nasal tip bulbous, big mouth with arched upper corpus callosum. At the age of 13 years she was normocephalic, but lip, short webbed neck, pectus excavatum and scoliosis. At the age with severe mental delay, happy disposition and distinctive dysmorphic of 1 year she was operated for pulmonary stenosis as was her twin features: sparse hair and eyebrows, sloping forehead, telecanthus, sister who died after the operation. The 39 years old mother started broad nasal bridge, large ears, pointed chin and long fingers and toes. menstruation at the age of 16 and has a history of bleeding diathesis. We suspected clinically to the possible mutation in ZHFXB1 gene and Maternal uncle 30 y.o. has a heart murmur. The grandmother died at the de novo frameshift mutation 1352delC (exon 8) in the heterozygous age of 30 years because of a heart attack. The molecular investigation state was found. It corresponds to the deletion of the nucleotide C revealed a maternally transmitted heterozygous missense mutation 1352 of the gene coding sequence and results in a frameshift creating A118G in exon 3 of PTPN11. The infrafamilial variability of NS makes a STOP codon at position 453 of the protein. it essential for proper genetic counseling, so that first degree relatives, Conclusion: All children with syndromic Hirschprung disease should even with atypical phenotype, should be screened for PTNP11 gene be tested for mutation or deletion in ZHFX gene. The early diagnosis of mutations. MWS enables adequate neuropediatric follow-up because in majority of children with MWS the epilepsy could appear during the first year P0048. The Neurofibromatosis Type 1 - Multisystem Disease of life or later. Requiring Multidisciplinary Approach T. Marikova1, B. Petrak2, A. Krepelova1, S. Bendova1, E. Kocarek1, Z. Musova1, P0050. OPD2/Melnick-Needles syndrome with occipital J. Kraus2; encephalocele. 1Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, Charles University-2nd Medical A. van Haeringen1, F. T. M. Lim2, F. Eulderink3, H. M. Zonderland4, S. Gal- School, Prague 5 - Motol, Czech Republic, 2Children Neurology Department, jaard5, S. P. Robertson6, M. H. Breuning1; University Hospital Motol, Prague 5 - Motol, Czech Republic. 1Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, The Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common 2Department of Gynaecology, HAGA Hospital, de Hague, The Netherlands, single gene diseases (the expected incidence is 1:3000). Around 50 3Department of Pathology, Diaconessen Hospital, Leiden, The Netherlands, % of cases represent fresh mutations, the carriers of this mutation 4Department of Radiology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 5Department of have 50 % risk for their offspring without possibility of prediction of Prenatal Diagnosis and Intra-Uterine Treatment, LUMC, Leiden, The Nether- the age of manifestation and disease progression. The NF1 disease lands, 6Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Otago, Dune- is characterized by extremely high interfamilial and intrafamilial din, New Zealand. variability. Oto-Palato-Digital syndrome type 2 and Melnick-Needles syndrome There was implemented a database of 200 records of patients suffering both are X-linked dominant conditions with lethality in males. We report from NF1 in the Neurogenetic Centre of the Institute of Biology and on a male patient with an additional feature. At 18 weeks of pregnancy, Medical Genetics, Child Neurologic Department and Neurologic multiple congenital malformations (sharply bowed femora, occipital Department of the 2nd Medical School, Charles University. encephalocele) were found on ultrasound. The parents refused any By the family history analysis, the 40% cases have been identified as further investigation and wished to carry on with the pregnancy. At fresh mutations, in the 1/3 of cases the serious degree of the disease 38 weeks of pregnancy, a stillborn macerated boy was born. Multiple has been detected. malformations were noted. The skull was large with a large occipital The haplotype analysis has been carried out in 29 families. The complex encephalocele. The face was dysmorphic (hypertelorism, flat nose, investigation methodology in the patients with a NF1 has been verified. large tongue). The palate was closed. There were elbow contractures Both the molecular cytogenetic (FISH) analysis and the efficient and with webbing, missing terminal phalanges of both thumbs, small reliable molecular genetic diagnostics (DHPLC) have been introduced middle phalanges of all fingers and small nails. There were sharply with the goal to detect causal mutations. bowed femora, completely absent halluces and syndactyly of toes 4 Several complicated cases which document the neccessity of the and 5 bilaterally. There was a small penis with hypoplastic scrotum multidiciplinary approach will be demonstrated. and absent testes. On X-rays the clinically noticed abnormalities were Supported by the Project IGA MZ CR NR/7926-3 confirmed. Moreover the boy had radiologically malformed claviculae and scapulae, high vertebral bodies and a markedly advanced bone age. Chromosomes were normal, 46XY. Internal organs were normal although the bladder was reported as large. The testes were not found. The combination of congenital malformations fits in the OPD2/Melnick- Needles spectrum. However, occipital encephalocele was never reported in these conditions. Sequencing of exon 22 of the FLNA gene did not reveal a mutation. Further mutation analysis is in progressClinical genetics 91 and will be reported. Whether occipital encephalocele is an additional showed only 47, XY,+3 karyotype while analysis of skin fibroblasts feature or a coincidental finding depends on further case reports. revealed mosaic karyotype - 47, XY, + 3 / 46, XY. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis using an alpha satellite chromosome P0051. Long-term follow-up of patients with Kabuki syndrome in 3 probe performed on skin fibroblasts demonstrated two signals in Taiwan 198 nuclei (46,XY) and three signals in 2 nuclei (47,XY, + 3). This J. Hou; result confirms the diagnosis of low level trisomy 3 mosaicism. The Chang Gung Children's Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan Republic of China. propositus was born after a full term pregnancy. Several dismorphic Kabuki syndrome (KS), also called Niikawa-Kuroki syndrome, is a facial features were noted: caratacts of both eyes, cleft upper right rare congenital disorder of unknown etiology. Most KS cases occur lip and complete cleft of the palate. Heart ultrasound showed ASD sporadically. Five major criteria delineate KS namely postnatal short secundum. Brain US and CT showed periventricular hypoxia with cystic stature, skeletal anomalies, moderate mental retardation, persistent leucomalatia. Genetic counselling in such a family can be difficult. fetal pads on the fingers, and a characteristic facial dysmorphism. As both parents in the present case had normal karyotypes, the risk Long-term follow-up of twelve individuals with KS in Taiwan indicates seems to be extremely small but it can also be further minimized if the a broad spectrum of neuro-psychiatric or metabolic dysfunction and next pregnancy is properly supervised. Additional cases of postnataly mental ability. The incidence of seizure (generalized, complex partial, diagnosed mosaicism for rare trisomies are necessary for more or atonic seizure) is 50% (6/12). Seizures were well controlled in 5 accurate assessment of the significance of our cytogenetic and clinical cases. Retarded mentality was noted in all child patients except for in a findings. 40-year-old man. Hearing impairment was found in 8 patients probably after recurrent otitis media or microtia. Growth hormone deficiency P0054. Quantitative analysis of SMN1 and SMN2 genes based on was detected in two KS girls. Recombinat human growth hormone DHPLC: A highly efficient and reliable carrier-screening test were administered with a favorable outcome in both cognition and Y. Su1, C. Hung2, W. Lin2; body height. Attention deficit disorder and hyperactivity occurred 1Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, in 9 patients. Among these patients, a boy developed depressive Taiwan Republic of China, 2Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National Taiwan psychosis after the age of 12 years. Obesity with relative short stature University, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China. were common especially after the age of 8 years. One 13-year-old girl Autosomal recessive spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common, had obstructive sleep and fatty liver. She developed type 2 diabetes fatal neuromuscular disease caused by homozygous deletion/ two years later. For KS patients, a long-term monitoring and evaluation conversion of the SMN1 gene in more than 95% of patients. However, of their neuro-psychiatric status, hearing function, and endocrinologic- a highly homologous SMN2 gene exists in the same chromosome, metabolic profile is recommended. interval, centromeric to SMN1, and hampers detection of SMN1. We present a new, rapid, simple, and highly reliable method for detecting P0052. Polymorphism of metabolic genes and susceptibility to the SMN1 deletion/ conversion and for determining the copy numbers occupational chronic toxic hepatitis of the SMN1 and SMN2 genes by denaturing high-performance liquid K. O. Olga1, T. V. Victorova1, L. K. Karimova2; chromatography (DHPLC). We analyzed SMN1/SMN2 gene exon 7 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Research deletion/ conversion by DHPLC. Eighty patients with spinal muscular institute of occupational health and human ecology, Ufa, Russian Federation. atrophy lacking the SMN1 gene in seventy-five families, 500 control In this study we investigated genetic polymorphisms of five metabolizing individuals from the general population and the family members were genes and their association with toxic hepatitis. PCR-RFLP was used analyzed. By DHPLC analysis, we could detect the SMA-affected cases to genotype the cytochromes P4501A1, 2D6, 2E1 (CYP1A1, CYP2D6, efficiently just by recognizing an SMN2-only peak. Furthermore, after CYP2E1), microsomal epoxide hydrolase and the N-acetyltransferase specific primer amplification and adjustment of the oven temperature, 2. We recruited 73 patients with toxic hepatitis, 163 workers "groups of all of the SMA carriers with an SMN1/SMN2 ratio not equal to one risk" on development of a toxic hepatitis, 94 healthy workers and 335 could be identified unambiguously by this simple and efficient unrelated healthy control subjects. The controls were matched to the detection system. To calculate the total SMN1/SMN2 gene dosages cases by sex, age as well as the hepthyle and ethylebenzene-styrene further, we developed a specific multiplex competitive PCR protocol by exposure duration. No significant association was found between simultaneously amplifying the CYBB gene (X-linked), the KRIT1 gene the control and petrochemical workers when CYP1A1, CYP2D6, (on chromosome arm 7q), and the SMN1/SMN2 gene ratio by DHPLC. CYP2E1, EPHX1 genotypes were included in the analyses. Among By applying this technique, we could successfully designate all of the workers was observed the increasing frequency of a combination genotypes with different SMN1/SMN2 gene copy numbers, including NAT2*4/*4 genes NAT2 compared with control group. Among the equal and unequal amounts of SMN1 and SMN2. We demonstrated patients with a toxic hepatitis are established genetic markers of that DHPLC is a fast and reliable tool for detection of carriers of SMA. predisposition to development the disease: Ile/Val gene CYP1A1, Tyr/ His gene EPHX1; combinations NAT2*4/*7 genes NAT2; and as slow P0055. Rapid detection of large deletions and duplications in phenotype microsomal epoxide hydrolase; combinations of genotypes Duchenne muscular dystrophy carriers by denaturing HPLC IleVal/C1C1 of genes CYP1A1 and CYP2E1; combinations of slow coupled with multiplex PCR phenotypes microsomal epoxide hydrolase and N-acetyltransferase C. Hung1, Y. Su2, W. Lin1; 2.Our results suggest that genotype Ile/Ile of gene CYP1A1; genotype 1Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan Tyr/Tyr of gene EPHX1; and as a normal phenotype microsomal Republic of China, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan Univer- epoxide hydrolase; a combination of normal genotypes of genes sity Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China. CYP1A1 and CYP2E1; a combination of normal genotypes of genes Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) with X-linked recessive CYP1A1, CYP2E1, CYP2D6 and a normal phenotype microsomal inheritance is the most common neuromuscular disease in children. epoxide hydrolase are protective variants. This study demonstrates a One-third of the affected patients come from de-novo mutations without significant combined effect of genes on the predisposition of pathology family histories. About 65% of the cases involve large intragenic at workers exposed to hepthyle and ethylebenzene-styrene. deletions, and about ~6% involve large intragenic duplcations of one or more exons in the dystrophin gene. We describe the first use of P0053. Case report: child with mosaic trisomy 3 denaturing HPLC (DHPLC) to identify the DMD carriers. We used K. Crkvenac Gornik, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, L. Letica, R. Lasan, S. Huljev, D. multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify nineteen exons Muzinic, D. Begovic; to analyze the dystrophin gene. We optimized multiplex PCR with Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University DHPLC for rapid diagnosis of eleven DMD affected males, 23 obligate Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. carriers and non-carrier from DMD families, and 50 individual controls We report a case of mosaic trisomy 3 in a one year old boy. He is the fifth with high sensitivity and resolution. By applying this technique, we child of normal, healthy parents with normal karyotypes. Cytogenetic could successfully calculate the ratio of test exon / reference exon in analysis of blood lymphocytes was done for evaluation of dysmorphic the dystrophin gene. Our study has analyzed several families for the features. Chromosome analysis of blood cells with G - banding dystrophin gene deletions and has shown that multiplex PCR/ DHPLCClinical genetics 92 analysis can be an effective and direct method for establishing the P0058. Is p53 gene polymorphism associated with multiple DMD carrier and noncarrier status of females. These results provide a sclerosis in Iran? strong support that DHPLC with multiplex genotyping is an efficient and M. Sanati, F. Biramijamal, B. Bayat, M. Banoei; reliable tool for high throughput diagnosis of DMD. We demonstrated National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic that DHPLC can be used to analyze the relative gene dosage from Republic of Iran. large deletions in the dystrophin gene. It is a fast, reliable and powerful To investigate the relationship between p53 codon 72 polymorphism tool for the identification of DMD carriers by DHPLC coupled with and risk for multiple sclerosis (MS), we collected samples from MS multiplex PCR. We believe the described method will be suitable for patients and healthy population from different region of Iran with routine clinical application in the future. different ethnicity groups (Fars, Mazandarani and Turk). The p53 Pro72Arg genotypes were determined by polymerase chain reaction- P0056. Study of CF Mutation in the CFTR Gene of Iranian restriction fragment length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) in 207 healthy patients controls and 60 MS patients. Among the patients and healthy subjects M. Amiri1, M. Jalalirad2, M. Houshmand2, R. Mirfakhraie2, G. Babamoham- with Fars, Mazandarani and Turk ethnicity, the genotype frequency of madi2, E. Talachian3, M. Rafiei4, F. Mirzajani2; p53 Pro72Arg were 23.3% and 34.8% for Arg/Arg, 76.7% and 45.9% 1Khatam Institute of Higher Education, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Na- for Arg/Pro, 0% and 19.3% for Pro/Pro, respectively. Significance tional Institute for Genetic Engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Re- differences were found for p53 allele distribution among patients public of Iran, 3Iran medical science University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, and healthy individuals. Our finding suggested that the frequency of 4Tabriz Medical science University, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. Arg/Pro genotype is more than healthy Iranian population and p53 Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the CF transmembrane genotype may play an important role in developing multiple sclerosis conductance regulator gene and characteristically leads to prominent among Iranian population. lung and pancreatic malfunctions. Cystic fibrosis is the most common This work was supported by NIGEB project number 119, melli 2 and autosomal recessive disease in the Caucasian population with 197. a prevalence estimate of 1 in 2500 to 3300 live births. About 1000 mutations have been detected so far. A few mutations are spread P0059. A counseling dilemma posed by a fetus with a split- worldwide, the majority are being“private” mutations. hand/-foot malformation and a father with a short 3rd toe In this study Seventy unrelated Iranian CF families were screened T. Prescott1, H. K. Blaas2, H. Scheffer3, R. Meijer3, K. Eiklid4; for the presence of five common mutations (F508, G542X, W1282X, 1Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 2National Center for Fetal Medicine, University G551D, N1303K) using ARMS PCR .Exons 4 ,7,10,11,13,20,21 of the Hospital Trondheim, Trondheim, Norway, 3Dept of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, CFTR gene were tested for the presence of any possible mutation by The Netherlands, 4Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. SSCP and sequencing method. This study resulted in the identification Split-hand / split-foot malformation (SHFM) occurs in isolation and as of 28 per cent of all CF alleles. DelF508 was detected in the 18 per a feature of many syndromes. After birth, the various conditions can cent of the tested alleles. usually be distinguished clinically. Our findings suggest heterogeneity in the Iranian population, stressing SHFM was detected in a male fetus on routine ultrasound at 18 weeks the need to draw attention to sequence analysis in order to find gestation. A central ray defect was noted in three extremities. One hand population-specific mutations. had only four metacarpals.The other had five metacarpals, but only four fingers. The two ulnar fingers were webbed bilaterally. One foot P0057. del5p/dup5q in a 'Cri-du-chat' patient without parental had webbing of the 1st and 2nd toes. There were no other abnormalities chromosomal rearrangement: reminding gonadal mosaicism noted and the fetus was appropriate in size for gestational age. I. Akalin1, K. Yararbas1, N. Akgul2, E. Babaoglu1, G. Gumus Akay3, S. Dyer4, N. Examination of the mother was normal. The father had a normal Yurur Kutlay1, H. Ilgin Ruhi1, G. Kog2, A. Tukun1; physical exam except for a short 3rd toe unilaterally. 1Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, An- The family history was considered unremarkable. The pregnancy was kara, Turkey, 2Social Security Women's Hospital, Neonatology Department, terminated because of the possiblity of a syndromal form of SHFM with Ankara, Turkey, 3Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical cognitive impairment. Biology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Birmingham Women's Hospital, Regional Genetics Subsequent mutation analysis of the p63 gene from leukocytes Laboratory, Birmingham, United Kingdom. obtained by cordocentesis revealed heterozygosity for a mutation We report a full term male infant born to nonconsanguinous parents in exon 5 (R204Q). This mutation has previously been described in who presented at birth with multiple congenital abnormalities and association with the EEC (Ectrodactyly-Ectodermal dysplasia-Clefting) distinctive high-pitched mewing cry. He was 2350g in weight (<3%), 46 syndrome. cm in height (<3%), and had 31.5 cm head circumferences (<3%) at Mutation analysis of peripheral leukocytes in the father revealed 11th day. The physical examination revealed round face, hypertelorism, heterozygosity for the same mutation (R204Q). No evidence supporting epicanthal folds, downward slanting of the palpebral fissures, mosaicism was found on analysis of DNA from a buccal smear. On micrognathy, retrognathy, bilateral incomplete helical architecture of reassessment, it surfaced that the father had weak dental enamel and horizontally asymmetric low set ears, preauricular skin tag anterior to recurrent eye infections as an adult due to stenotic tear ducts. the left auricular region, long philtrum, bilateral simian line, bilateral Our case underscores the heterogeneity of phenotypes associated with hallux-valgus deformity, small muscular ventricular septal defect and p63 mutations and the usefulness of mutation analysis in counseling secondary atrial septal defect. for SHFM . Chromosome study from the peripheral blood lymphocytes showed to be normal 46,XY karyotype. However, fluorescence in situ hybridization P0060. Delayed puberty and severe osteoporosis in (FISH) studies using a cri-du-chat probe (5p15.2 and 5p15.3, 5qter: genitopatellar syndrome CP5102-DC, Appligene) demonstrated loss of cri-du-chat critical H. Koillinen1, M. Penttinen1, H. Niinikoski2, O. Mäkitie3, H. Kääriäinen4; region. He also had terminal 5q region duplication. This finding was 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of Turku, Finland, 2Dept. of Pe- also verified using comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), which diatrics, University Hospital of Turku, Finland, 3Dept. of Pediatrics, University revealed a loss of 5p14 → pter and a gain of 5q33 → qter. Cytogenetic Hospital of Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, and FISH analysis were carried out for each parents to describe the Finland. derivative chromosome, but surprisingly, pericentric inversion or any Genitopatellar syndrome (OMIM 606170), first described by Goldblatt et other balanced rearrangement were not found. al. in 1988, is a rare disorder with characteristic facial features, genital In this report, we describe the first cri-du-chat case with partial anomalies, absent patellae, flexion contractures, microcephaly, renal monosomy of the short arm and partial trisomy of the long arm of anomalies, mental retardation, poor outcome and possible autosomal the chromosome 5, but without any parental balanced chromosomal recessive inheritance. At present, eleven cases have been reported. rearrangement. These results suggested a possibility of gonadal We describe an adolescent Finnish female with findings consistent mosaicism for pericentric inversion of chromosome 5 in one of his with genitopatellar syndrome. She is the second child of her healthy, parents. unconsanguineous parents. She has microcephaly, broad nasal bridge,Clinical genetics 93 midfacial hypoplasia, high palate, round cheeks, long chin, flexion and upper limbs which correlated with the muscular atrophy mainly contractures of the hips and knees, absent patellae, clubfeet, limited involving the lower limbs. All three patients had mild mental retardation. movement of shoulders, brachydactyly with prominent joints, scoliosis, We excluded mutations in the Norrin gene by direct sequence analysis hypertrophic clitoris, dysplastic kidneys with mild hydronephrosis, and propose that the disease in this family is a novel autosomal hypoplastic corpus callosum and severe mental retardation and motor recessive Norrie-like syndrome. delay. The karyotype is normal examined from peripheral blood and As a first attempt to identify the molecular basis of the disease, fibroblasts. Telomeric deletions and Smith-Magenis sdr have been we performed a genome-wide linkage analysis in the family using ruled out with FISH. polymorphic microsatellite markers and found a statistical significant At age 14 years and 9 months she has hypothyroidism (TSH 17 mU/ linkage to a chromosomal region that has been not yet described for eye l, free T4 7.1 pmol/l., TRH- and ACTH-tests consistent with intact disorders complicated with mental deficiency and muscle involvement. hypothalamus-hypophysis-thyroid and hypophysis-adrenal axes) Refinement of the critical region and testing of candidate genes located and no signs of puberty (Tanner stage 1). The gonadotrophin values in the region is currently performed and will be presented. are prepubertal (LH <0.1 U/l and FSH 1.6 U/l). The growth hormone secretion is normal based on appropriate S-IGF-1 concentration. She P0063. A family of ulnar-mammary syndrome with three affected also has abnormal bone structure and severe osteoporosis (gender members and bone age-adjusted lumbar bone mineral density is -4.8 SD) with a C. Ozkinay1, H. Onay1, S. Pehlivan2, D. Cogulu3, O. Cogulu4, H. Akin1, L. history of seven bone fractures. Midyat4, A. Vahabi1, F. Ozkinay4; Being the oldest reported patient with genitopatellar syndrome, our 1Ege University Medical School Hospital,Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, patient is the first one showing abnormal endocrine findings including Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Izmir, Tur- a lack of puberty and symptomatic osteoporosis key, 3Ege University Faculty of Dentistry, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University Medical School Hospital,Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey. P0061. A furher case of Costello syndrome Ulnar mammary syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder F. Ozkinay1, H. Akin2, O. Cogulu1, H. Onay2, L. Midyat1, F. Hazan2, C. Ozkinay2; characterized by post axial ray deficiency, dental abnormalities, 1Ege University, Medical School Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Tur- mammary and apocrine gland hypoplasia, genital developmental key, 2Ege University, Medical School Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, anomalies. Affected individuals may show variable phenotypic Izmir, Turkey. expression changing from full characteristics of the syndrome to only Costello syndrome is a rare genetic disorder of which underlying post axial ray defect. Recently mutations in the TBX3 gene have been molecular defect has not been defined. The patients with Costello demonstrated to cause ulnar mammary syndrome. syndrome (CS) have short stature, mental retardation, coarse facial We describe a family of ulnar mammary syndrome with three affected features suggestive of a storage disorder, loose soft skin with deep memebers. The proband was 2 year-old girl who had 6 fingers on the palmar and plantar creases, joint laxity, increased skin pigmentation, right hand, 7 fingers on the left hand. She also had syndactyly of the skeletal abnormalities, cardiac problems, increased predisposition to 4th,fifth and 6th fingers on the left hand. A skin appendage with a small solid tumors. underdeveloped nail was noted as the 7th finger. She had clinodactyly We describe an 8 year-old boy who had characteristic features of and absent distal flexion crease of the fifth finger and 6 toes on Costello syndrome and showed feeding problem in late childhood both feet. Canines of upper jaw were absent. She had scapula lata, period. absent nipples, truncal obesity, pes planus. She was operated due to The patient was born to noncansangineous parents at term after an hydrometacolpos in neonatal period. uneventful pregnancy. Birth weight was 1900 gm. He was brought to The son of matenal aunt had postaxial polydactyly on both hands. The hospital for the first time at 5 years of age because of redundant skin son of maternal grandfathers brother had postaxial polydactyly in both and developmental delay. He was diagnosed to have cutis laxa . At feet. 8 years old he was hospitalized due to anorexia and weight lost. He had mental retardation but he was quite social. He was noted to have P0064. Detection of subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangements coarse facial features with typical lips, blue sclera, high arched palate, by FISH analysis in cases with idiopathic mental retardation and dentalabnormalities, abnormal hair curve, redundant skin, deep palmar dysmorphic features and plantar creases, joint laxity, dark skin. Laboratory tests including M. Ozcan Caliskan1, S. Berker Karauzum1, E. Mihci2, S. Tacoy2, G. Luleci1; CBC, urinalysis, blood electrolytes and gloucose levels, VMA in urine 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Akdeniz University, Faculty of were normal. Medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatrics, Akdeniz University, Fac- He was reluctant to eat his normal daily diet. During hospitalization ulty of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey. period he was given special formula containing high protein and kalori. Mental retardation (MR) has a 2-3% frequency in general population. He started to gain weight in a short period. The etiology is remains unknown in more than half of the cases. In In Costello syndrome feeding can be aproblem even in older ages and recent years, technical improvement of molecular cytogenetics has special diet can be required. proved that cryptic chromosomal rearrangements are a significant cause of idiopathic MR. P0062. Clinical and molecular characterization of a novel Subtelomeric regions of the chromosomes are enriched with CpG autosomal recessive Norrie-like syndrome islands and are believed to have the highest gene density in the H. Kayserili1, C. Netzer2, A. Uzumcu1, B. Chung2, O. Uyguner1, H. Hennies3, P. genome. The cryptic subtelomeric rearrangements resulting in gene- Nurnberg3, C. Kubisch2,4, M. Yuksel-Apak1, B. Wollnik1,4; dosage imbalance might represent a significant cause of idiopathic MR 1Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey, and dysmorphic features with normal conventional karyotypes. 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Cologne As the telomere regions of the chromosomes are G-band negative Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Institute of and morphologically similar, the abnormalities in these regions are Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. thought to be particularly difficult to detect by using conventional Norrie syndrome is a rare X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder cytogenetic methods. The cryptic rearrangements of distal ends of the mainly characterized by blindness resulting from retinal malformations, chromosomes that can not be detected by conventional cytogenetic opacity of the lens and atrophy of the iris. In some cases, children may methods have been proved by Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization have varying degrees of mental retardation and hearing loss. (FISH) using chromosome-specific subtelomeric probes. We here report the clinical findings of two brothers and a female cousin In our study, 20 cases with idiopathic MR and dysmorphic features born from distant consanguineous marriages who had bulbophtisis, with normal conventional karyotypes were investigated by FISH using mental retardation, and a mild myopathy. The eye findings were subtelomeric probes. Subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangaments almost identical to those found in patients with Norrie syndrome were detected in 3 of 20 patients. One patient had a familial cryptic and characterized by corneal opacity, cataract, iris atrophy, retinal unbalanced translocation between subtelomeric regions of the detachment, microphthalmia. progressing to bulbophthysis. EMG chromosome 5p and 15q. Another patient had a de novo cryptic analysis revealed signs of slow progressive myopathy at the lower unbalanced translocation between subtelomeric regions of theClinical genetics 94 chromosome 18p and 22q. We observed a series of 13 children with pituitary dwarfism over a In conclusion, the detection of subtelomeric chromosomal 10-year period. All patients were diagnosed with pituitary dwarfism rearrangements are of great importance in offering genetic counseling based on clinical features (including somatometrie) and confirmed by and prenatal diagnosis in both familial and sporadic cases with dosage of serum growth hormone level. Of these, nine patients also idiopathic MR and dysmorphic features. had brain MRI done. Results: From the nine patients, eight had empty sella on the MRI. This very height percent (89 %) is most frequently P0065. A family of type I BPES with 5 affected members than found in literature (5-58%). MRI is the elective imagistic method, E. Karaca1, O. Cogulu1, A. Ekmekci2, H. Onay2, S. Pehlivan3, F. Ozkinay1, C. other methods like X-rays, head ultrasound or CT may not be relevant. Ozkinay2; One of these eight cases was selected for presentation: it showed 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, an association of empty sella syndrome, pituitary dwarfism and 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, polydactyly. The association of pituitary dwarfism and polydactyly has Turkey, 3Ege University Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Izmir, Tur- been communicated in only four cases in the literature. Conclusions: key. The association of the empty sella syndrome and pituitary dwarfism in Blephorophimosis-ptosis-epicantus (BPES) syndrome is a rare our series is most frequently that in literature; defining it will improve genetic condition characterized by short palpebral fissures, ptosis of the knowledge of the etiology and pathogenesis of pituitary dwarfism. eyelids, inverted inner canthal fold between upper and lower lids and The association with polydactyly is very rare and could be syndromic lateral displacement of the inner canthi. It is transmitted by autosomal or random. dominant inheritance and most cases are sporadic. More than 53 mutations in FOXL2 gene have been reported to be responsible fort he P0068. Investigations of hot spot regions in MYH7 genes in BPES. Type I in which the syndrome is transmitted only through males Iranian hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients due to the female premature ovarian failure, whereas type II can be A. Paydar, M. Montazeri, M. Houshmand, M. Shafa; transmitted by both affected females and males. Type I is associated National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic with menstrual irregularities and infertility. Here we present a family of Republic of Iran. BPES with 5 affected members. The proband who was a 15-year-old Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy occurs approximately 1 in 500 people. boy was referred to genetics outpatients clinic for genetic counseling. It is the most common cause of sudden cardiac death in young He showed all characteristic findings of the syndrome. Family history people. The disease is characterized by hypertrophy of left and/or right revealed 5 more affected cases of which 3 were operated due to ventricles and intrventricular septum. Mutations in at least 11 genes severe blephorophimosis. Karyotypes of all cases were normal. We (such as MYH7, MYBPC3 and TNNT2) encoding sarcomeric proteins also point out the importance of distinction between two types of BPES and possibly in one gene encoding a non-sarcomeric protein (PRKG2) in genetic counseling of female patients. have been associated with HCM so far. In this study we focused on exons 13-15 and 19-21 of MYH7 gene and introns located between P0066. Spondylocostal dysplasia in a three generation family them, which contain hotspots for so called “malignant mutations” with 4 affected members that increase sudden cardiac death risk. 52 Iranian patients with A. Ekmekci1, H. Onay1, O. Cogulu2, M. T. Arslan2, H. Akin1; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were selected . Exons 13-15 and 19-21 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, of MYH7 gene and their related introns were amplified by polymerase Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, chain reaction. Then PCR products were sequenced Mutations were Turkey. detected in fourteen (28%) of the patients. Three mutations were found Jarcho-Levin syndrome is an eponym that has been used to describe in exons. We have found a novel mutation, A10419C in exon 14, which a variety of clinical phenotypes consisting of short-trunk dwarfism was a missense mutation causing N444T substitution. Mutations in the associated with rib and vertebral anomalies. Molecular, clinical and MYH7 gene can be found in patients without a family history of HCM radiological data have allowed further characterization of these phenotypes. Based on these findings, Jarcho-Levin syndrome P0069. Mucopolysacharidosis II: Biochemical and Linkage Study has been divided into two types as spondylothoracic dysplasia and of the Iduronate-2-sulfatase Gene Defects in Taiwan spondylocostal dysplasia. S. P. Lin1, C. K. Chuang1, J. H. Chang2, G. J. Lee-Chen2; We report a 4.5-year-old boy showing typical features of 1Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 2National Taiwan spondylocostal Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China. dysplasia. He referred to us with short length, short neck and malformed Mucopolysacharidosis II (MPS II) is an X-linked recessive lysosomal trunk. storage disorder caused by a defect of the iduronate-2-sulfatase (IDS) The proband was a 4,5 year-old boy with typical features of gene. To investigate the molecular lesions underlying Taiwanese MPS spondylocostal dysplasia such as short stature,short neck, chest II, 14 probands and families were identified and screened for IDS deformty. There was no parental consanguinity. He has a healthy 8 mutations by DNA sequencing and restriction analysis.Three novel years old sister and his mother experienced 2 abortions at 10 weeks (IVS2+1G>C, 1055del12, and G489D) and 7 previously reported of gestation. Family history revealed three more affected members (N63K, P228L, K347E, R468Q, R468W, I485R, and 1241delAG) with variable expressivity in paternal side. Chest X-ray of the proband mutations were found. R468Q and R468W together account for showed fusion defects of the ribs, bifid costa and vertebral deformities. 42.8% of mutations detected in our patients. Haplotype analysis using He also had spina bifida, platyspondyly, scoliosis and vertebral fusions. flanking probes DXS1113 and DXS1123 revealed that the unrelated We present our case as an example of autosomal dominant inheritance R468Q alleles are independent in origin whereas the unrelated R468W of Spondylocostal Dysplasia. We also point out the importance of alleles are probably of the same origin. The R468Q mutation in one distinction between two types in genetic counseling of Jarcho-Levin patient and the I485R in another patient occurred de novo in male Syndrome patients. meiosis. Leukocyte IDS assaying showed significantly different ranges of activities in normals and the carriers (19.2~70.6 vs 8.4~26.6 nmol/ P0067. Is empty Sella Syndrome the main cause of pituitary h/mg cell protein). The mean IDS activity in female carriers was less dwarfism? than a half of the normal level. However, due to a small overlapping M. Bembea, C. Jurca, D. Bembea, R. Spineanu; range, the level of enzyme activity alone can not be used for carrier Clinical Children Hospital Oradea, Oradea, Romania. detection. Introduction: The empty sella syndrome is a relatively new entity, developed in parallel with improved imaging techniques (CT and MRI). Empty sella refers to the absence of the pituitary gland on CT or MRI. The turcic sella is partially or completely filled with CSF. Empty sella syndrome is the pathologic variant of the imaging-described empty sella. Objectives: A review of current knowledge in empty sella syndrome and its association with pituitary dwarfism. Material and methods:Clinical genetics 95 P0070. Report ot Cockayne Syndrome from Iranian Families autosomic recessive genetic disorder Nijmegen breakage syndrome F. Afroozan, N. Almadani, Y. Shafeghati, R. Kariminejad, O. Van Diggelen, W. (NBS). J. Kleijer, M. H. Kariminejad; Lymphoblastoid cells (LCLs) derived from five Italian NBS - like patients Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, selected in relation to their clinical aspects were studied from a cellular Islamic Republic of Iran. and molecular point of view to determine defects in factors involved in Cocakyne Syndrome is an autosomal recessive multisystemic DSBs repair. condition,characterized by usually senile-like changes beginning in PCR amplification of exon 6 showed the presence of both copies of the infancy. Nbs1 gene in all the investigated individuals. Normal levels of proteins Retinal degeneration,Impaired hearing and photosensitivity of thin involved in the repair of DSBs and in cellular response to DNA damage skin. (NBS1, Mre11, Rad50,etc.) were detected. The disease is known to be genetically heterogeneous for which 3 Radiosensitivity of some of the LCLs analysed was shown by the different Loci have been identified on chromosomes 10,12,13. induction of chromosome aberrations in a G2-phase assay. Rejoin of We have studied five Iranian families,each with one affected child(three DSBs was evaluated by PFGE. male,two female).three of these cases are results of cansanguineous LCLs have been irradiated with 2-10 Gy of X-rays and proteins marrige and the parents of the two cases are offspring of unrelated subjected to immunoblot with a p53 antibody , NBS1 and SMC1. couples.Their features and radiology were compatible with Cockayne Histone γ-H2AX focus formation after irradiation was also evaluated. Syndrome. Dissection of the clinical and cellular phenotype of NBS-like patients will The opthalmologist showed salt&pepper retinal pigmentation for two of help to identify a subset of individuals with the NBS clinical phenotype, the affected children and optic atrophy for other three cases. whose analysis will allow for more clear-cut research of new genes Assayes of DNA repair are performed on skin fibroblasts.The most involved in the maintenance of genome integrity. consistent finding in Cockayne Syndrome,fibroblasts,marked Supported by “ Test Genetici: dalla Ricerca alla Clinica”, ISS. sensitivity to UV radiation,deficient recovery or RNA syntesis following UV damage(and impaired repair of) activity transcribed genes,or P0073. Elejalde Syndrome, a Case Report & Branchio-Oculo- Facial Syndrome, a Case Report transcription couple repair. PND of CS has been reported by analysis of UV light sensitivity and E. Silhanova, S. Siruckova, I. Kaspercik, R. Curik; DNA repair in fetal cells obtained by CV or Amniocentesis. University Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic. Acrocephalopolysyndactylous dysplasia, Elejalde syndrome (MIM P0071. Chromosomal disorders in patients with azoospermia 200995) and branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOF, MIM113620) are O. Bellovits1, A. Rusz2, I. Romics2, E. Csonka3, G. Hadlaczky3, P. Sótonyi1, G. rare genetic disorders. Bujdosó1; Elejalde syndrome includes macrosomia, craniosynostosis, facial 1Hungarian Academy of Sciences - Semmelweis University, Insitute of Forensic anomalies, short limbs, lung hypoplasia, organomegaly, excess Medicine, Budapest, Hungary, 2Semmelweis University, Department of Urology, subcutanous tissue of neck and trunc. Excessive amounts of Budapest, Hungary, 3Institute of Genetics, Biologycal Research Center, Hun- connective tissue and perivacular proliferation of nerve fibres is found garian Academy of Sciences ,, Szeged, Hungary. in many organs. The mode of inheritance is autosomal recessive, the appropriate gene has not been identified yet. The aim of this study was to analyse chromosomal alterations in We present a patient with Elejalde syndrome born at 36 weeks of patients with azoospermia, candidates for testicular sperm retrieval gestation. The infant died 11 hours after birth. This is the 7th described (TESE) and intracytoplasmatic sperm injection (ICSI). The last three case of Elejalde syndrome. years 66 biopsies were performed in 64 patients for TESE. Mean age Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome includes somatic changes, such as of the patients was 35 years (range 24-53). bilateral postauricular haemangiomatous skin defects, low set ears, According to estimations, in 15% of infertile males it is a genetical preauricular fistulas, cleft lip or cleft lip and palate, nasolacrimal duct disorder that stands in the background of seminal weakness. Male obstruction, eye changes, malformed nose, hearing loss, growth infertility can be traced back to numerical or structural chromosomal retardation and renal dysplasia, aplasia or agenesis. Intelligence is causes in 5% of the cases. Approximately 70% of these causes are mostly normal. Inheritance appears to be autosomal dominant, sporadic due to sexual chromosome abnormalities, the most frequent being the cases probably carry new mutations, however, the corresponding XXY syndrome. Microdeletion of the Y chromosome is around 10%. gene has not been identified so far. The situation is complicated by the In our study the most characteristic cases were numerical deviations, clinical overlap with branchio-oto-renal syndrome (BOR, MIM 113650). such as XXY, XYY and mosaic XO syndromes. In order to obtain This observation led to a suggestion that BOF and BOR are allelic an exact diagnosis, the traditional cytogenetic methods (Q-, G- variants of the same gene. However, new studies have shown, that band and FISH analysis with probes X painting, Y painting, X cen, Y they are distinct entities. heterochromatin, Y euchromatin) were complemented in combination A girl with a full manifestation of branchio-oculo-facial syndrome is with molecular genetic techniques (AzFa, AzFb, AzFc region). Patients presented. were included in the assisted reproduction programme on the base of their genetic results. P0074. Evolutive possibilities of Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I Non obstructive azoospermia was diagnosed in 51 patients (79%). in two siblings Spermatozoa adequate for ICSI were found in 36 cases (54%), fertilisation rate was 57% and pregnancy rate 27%. Preoperative G. Sur1, O. Maftei2, L. Burac2, T. Pop1, G. Domnariu2, C. Barsan2; evaluation included routine andrological investigation with 2 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2Pediatric Clinic semen analysis, ultrasound, hormonal and genetic examination. II, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. Cryopreservation of retrieved testicular tissue was also done. Introduction: Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome is a very rare genetic disease with autosomal recessive inheritance. The disease begins in P0072. Genetic and cellular analysis of Italian patients with a the first days of life with the occurrence of an intense jaundice, with Nijmegen breakage-like phenotype values of indirect seric bilirubin higher than 20mg/dl, in the absence of A. Antoccia1, A. di Masi1, M. Salvatore2, F. Berardinelli1, A. Silini3, C. Losi3, A. hemolytic manifestations or liver function alteration. The cause is the Plebani3, D. Taruscio2, C. Tanzarella1; absence of hepatic UGT 1A1 (uridine diphosfo glucuronyl transferase) 1Dept. Biology, 'Università Roma Tre', Rome, Italy, 2Istituto Superiore di Sanità, activity. Early diagnosis in Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome is very Rome, Italy, 3Clinica Pediatrica e Istituto Angelo Novicelli, Brescia, Italy. important for preventing kernicterus in newborn. Normal development of the immune system requires the introduction Methods: We followed two siblings having Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome who were admitted in our service. The first one (R.G., male, of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) during antigen receptor gene now 12 years of age) was admitted in our service right after birth with assembly; defect in the repair of these damage can lead to profound intense jaundice. The suspicion of a Crigler-Najjar syndrome or an immunodeficiency. hemolytic jaundice was raised. The second one (R.F., female, now 10 The Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 (M/R/N) complex plays a critical role in the years of age), the fourth child of the family, was admitted at the age of repair of DSBs; in humans, mutations in the Nbs1 gene lead to theClinical genetics 96 3 months with intense jaundice, spastic palsy, opistotonus. Diagnosis CGG repeats and the age at onset or the clinical presentation. of Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome was almost certain because the Based on a network of geneticists, neurologists and neuroradiologists, kernicterus was present and she had a brother with this disease. a concerted effort was initiated in order to recruit a large sample of Results: R.G.: bilirubin (total) = 22mg/dl; bilirubin (indirect) = 21,9mg/ male subjects from extended families in which the presence of FMR1 dl; Hb=15g/dl; phenobarbital stimulation did not influence the serum premutation was ascertained, and to investigate the occurrence of level of bilirubin. Genetic tests showed a defect of 2q3.7. R.F.: bilirubin FXTAS. Premutation carriers, as well as a matched series of control (total) = 20mg/dl; bilirubin (indirect) = 20mg/dl; Hb=14,9g/dl individuals, will be examined for the presence of movement disorders Conclusion: Because in the second case no therapeutical measures and other neurological disturbances, through an extensive protocol were taken (phototherapy) kernicterus occurred. Molecular tests can which includes neuroimaging. Number of repeats, FMR1 mRNA and prove the severity of the syndrome. Genetic advice is important for FMRP levels will be evaluated and their possible correlation with future births. clinical features will be tested. Furthermore, the knock-in mouse model will be used to investigate the effects of the premutation at the cellular P0075. HLA DRB1*04 alleles in autoimmune hepatitis patients- and molecular levels. We have already identified, in 266 families, 93 frequency and relationship with response to treatment premutation carriers and 239 possible carriers. A telephone survey was F. Esteghamat, M. Rezvani, M. Agah, H. Sendi, T. Ghaziani, M. Zali; carried out in a subgroup of families, in collaboration with the Italian Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Tehran, Islamic patients’ association: 19 out of 51 male premutation carriers (37%) Republic of Iran. were referred to as showing symptoms suggestive of FXTAS. Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a rare frequent, multiplex disorder with undefined etiology. HLA DRB1*04 has been identified as independent P0077. Presentation of one case with Larsen syndrome determinant of susceptibility to AIH, and HLA DRB1*04 positives are recessive more likely to develop extrahepatic manifestation of their disease. We N. Almadani, F. Afroozan, V. Hadavi, M. H. Kariminejad; analyzed the association of HLA DR4 in Iranian patients with AIH . Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, METHODS: HLA DRB1*04 genotyping was done for 70 patients (47 Islamic Republic of Iran. female) with AIH type I (defined by international criteria IAHG, 1999 This syndrome is characterized by joint hypermobility, multiple joint and fulfilled informed consent) referred to Taleghani hospital (Iran) dislocation, characteristic facies (Prominent forehead, depressed and 95 healthy blood donors (61 female) matched by sex and age, nasal bridge, wide-spaced eyes, Club foot, bilateral dislocation of respectively. PCR-SSP (PCR-Sequence Specific Primers) was used elbows, hips and knee (most characteristically, Anterior dislocation of to detect HLA DRB1*04 allele. RESULTS: Mean age ± SD and the the tibia on the femur). Mutant gene is locat on 3p14-3p21. Our case results of evaluation of AST (Aspartate aminotransferase) and ALT is a 4.5 years old boy from first cousin parents that he had bilateral (Alanine aminotransferase) are shown in table 1. The frequency of dislocation of elbows and hip, prominent forehead, depressed nasal HLA DRB1*04 allele are shown in table 2. There was no significant bridge, scoliosis, short and hypoplastic carps and joints laxity. Two difference in HLA DR4 allele frequency between cases and controls children of his uncle with consanguineous parents are suffering from (p>0.05). HLA DRB1*04 positive AIH patients had higher AST and ALT. similar signs and symptoms. Radiologic studies for the parents of CONCLUSION: Our results do not confirm the association between affected children were normal. HLA DR4 allele and autoimmune hepatitis in Iranian population but there is association between HLA DR4 allele and response to treatment P0078. Extremely severe microlissencephaly associated with in Iranian patients with autoimmune hepatitis. microgenitalism: a new syndrome distinct from XLAG? Table 1 F. M. Petit, O. Boute-Bénéjean, L. Devisme, A. Valat, M. Holder-Espinasse, A. Dieux-Coeslier, A. Moerman, S. Manouvrier-Hanu; Controls Cases Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France. Mean age ± SD 35.4 ± 13.4 35.3 ± 11.5 We report on a non consanguineous family with a severe form of AST 22.85 ± 10 381 ± 593 microlissencephaly associated with microgenitalism, consistent with ALT 29.53 ± 16 347 ± 573 an X-linked pattern of inheritance. There are two affected sib ships of five males, born of two different fathers and sharing the same mother. Table 2 Prenatal diagnosis of severe brain malformation and underdeveloped genitalia was made on ultrasound in all cases. Four pregnancies were Cases Cases Controls Controls terminated and pathological examination was performed in three Male Female Total Male Female Total foetuses, reporting identical anomalies in each of them. Extremely severe microlissencephaly was associated with absent corpus HLA callosum, but cerebellar development was normal. Hemispheres were DRB1*04 4 14 18 8 18 26 positive completely sideways divided with opened ventricular cavities in the cranium and excess of cephalo-rachidian fluid. Major disturbance HLA of early cortical organization and neuronal migration with nodular DRB1*04 19 33 52 26 43 69 heterotopias of the white matter was noted. One twin pregnancy negative was followed since only one foetus was affected. The affected child P0076. Fragile X premutation Tremor/Ataxia Syndrome (FXTAS): lived until the age of 4 and presented with neonatal onset intractable an Italian Collaborative Study epilepsy, poor temperature regulation and chronic diarrhoea. To our knowledge, this particularly severe type of X-linked E. Di Maria1, F. Faravelli2, M. Grasso2, F. Forzano2, V. Viassolo2, M. Melis3, N. microlissencephaly associated with microgenitalism has never been Migone4, A. Murgia5, G. Neri6, S. Russo7, G. Abbruzzese1, C. Bagni8, P. Man- reported in the literature and could be linked with mutations in an dich1, F. Dagna Bricarelli2, on behalf of the Italian Collaborative Study Group_on unknown gene involved in early cortical organization. Although the FXTAS; cerebral disorder in these cases differs in some respect with the X- 1University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 2Ospedale Galliera, Genova, Italy, 3Uni- linked lissencephaly with ambiguous genitalia (XLAG), molecular versity of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 4University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 5University analysis of ARX gene was performed. The results are still pending. of Padova, Padova, Italy, 6Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 7IRCSS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 8Università Tor Vergata, P0079. Intraparietal sulcus anatomical abnormalities in children Roma, Italy. with Williams syndrome FXTAS has recently been described in carriers of the premutation in the FMR1 gene. The clinical presentation includes gait ataxia or intention F. Mochel; tremor at onset, associated with a wide spectrum of neurological Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Paris, France. symptoms. A first study showed that the prevalence is age-dependent, Williams syndrome (WS) is a well defined syndrome on both clinical ranging up to 75% in subjects older than 80 years (Jacquemont 2004). and molecular levels. Indeed, owing to the size of the hemideletion of No data are available about the relationship between the number of the WS critical region in 7q11.23, the syndrome encompasses more orClinical genetics 97 less of clinical features among supravalvular aortic stenosis, severe containing 1, plays a key role in the uptake of glutamate in retina. infantile hypercalcemia, growth retardation, dysmorphic features RIM1, encoding a presynaptic protein involved in the glutamate and neurobehavioral disabilities. While language and auditory short- neurotransmission, constituted as well a good functional candidate for term memory seem to be relatively spared, visuo-spatial constructive a RP causing gene. Two polymorphisms were identified in the GLULD1 cognition disabilities are a constant hallmark of the WSCP. In order to gene, one of them changed the encoded amino acid (F246L) while the search for putative structural abnormalities underlying such a specific other one did not result in any substitution (E430E). The third change, neurodevelopmental disorder, we performed an anatomical magnetic silent as well (L222L), was found in RIM1. Genotyping of the SNPs resonance imaging (MRI) in 9 children (12 +/ 2.5 years) using optimized was undertaken using Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer voxel-based morphometry (VBM). VBM is a fully automated whole- (FRET). These changes, however, were also present in Spanish brain technique that delivers a voxel-wise assessment of regional grey controls. Although TFAP2β, GLULD1 and RIM1 were excluded as the and white matter concentration. The control group was composed causative genes for these RP families, we could not rule them out as by normal age-matched children. A significant bilateral decrease of good candidates for other retinal degenerations mapping to the same grey matter concentration was detected in the intraparietal sulcus of chromosomal region. WS children (P < 0.05 corrected height threshold). The location of the present abnormalities coincides with the location of the structural P0082. Trisomy 10 mosaicism in 2-years-old normally developed abnormality with the same method in 13 WS adults. These intra-parietal girl abnormalities are consistent with cognitive profile of WS; the dorsal I. Stefanova1, Y. Anastassov2, T. Krastev1; stream dysfunction is probably involved in the visuospatial construction 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital St.George, Plovdiv, Bul- deficit of WS patients. A better neuroimaging caracteristisation in WS garia, 2Department of Pediatric Surgery,University Hospital St.George, Plovdiv, should contribute to better define phenotype-genotype correlations in Bulgaria. this syndrome. Total trisomy 10 has been detected in spontaneous abortions and stillborn. In the literature there were only four reported live born cases P0080. Molecular screening of C6orf57 as a candidate gene in with trisomy 10, all of them mosaic. Although the trisomic clone have autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa linked to RP25 locus. not exceed 30% in none of the cases all have demonstrated prenatal I. Marcos1, I. Barragán1, S. Borrego1, M. Abd El-Aziz2,3, R. J. Patel2, M. F. El- growth retardation and early death before the age of six months. Ashry2,4, S. Bhattacharya2, G. Antiñolo1; Here we report on a 2-month-old female followed until the age of 1Unidad Clínica de Genética y Reproducción, HHUU Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, 2 years with total trisomy 10 mosaicism. Pathological vs. normal Spain, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, London, karyotype has been found in peripheral lymphocytes and in cultured United Kingdom, 3Department of Clinical Pathology, Tanta University Hospital, fibroblasts, respectively in 54% and 22%. Interphase FISH confirmed Tanta, Egypt, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Coventry and Warwickshire Uni- these cytogenetical results finding respectively 51% and 26% trisomic versity Hospital, Coventry, United Kingdom. cells. The affected girl shows physical and mental development in the RP25 locus was identified as a novel locus for autosomal recessive normal range. Her dysmorphic features include left-sided cleft lip and retinitis pigmentosa (arRP) responsible for a considerable (14%) median cleft palate (found prenatally by US screening), high prominent proportion of the arRP families of Southern Spain. It lies in the forehead, delayed closure of the fontanels (35/35mm at the age of pericentromeric region of chromosome 6, between D6S257 and 11 months), epicanthus, hypertelorism, delayed teeth eruption, both- D6S1644 microsatellite markers. Here we report the mutation sided single palmar crease, deep palmar and plantar creases. No inner screening of the chromosome 6 open reading frame 57 gene (C6orf57) anomalies have been found. Our case is the longest survival of a total in 7 families of the South of Spain linked to RP25 locus. trisomy 10 mosaicism reported so far and the only one with normal C6orf57 was selected according to its location within RP25 region development, although it demonstrates comparable cytogenetical data and its tissue expression, since it appears to be highly expressed in with other literature reports. peripheral retina. A molecular genetic study was performed on DNA extracted from one parent and one affected member of each studied P0083. Association of multiple supernumerary teeth with family. The genomic structure was determined using bioinformatic tools. cleidocranial dysplasia The molecular analysis revealed four single nucleotide polymorphisms R. Purcarea, E. Severin, C. Albu, D. Albu; (SNPs) and a 3’-UTR AT- repeat polymorphism (IVS1-38T>C, IVS2- Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. 122G>A, Q46R, STOP+106A>G and (AT)n). The genotyping of 3’-UTR Dental anomalies, including failure of eruption of permanent dentition AT- repeat polymorphism in all the members of the affected families or supernumerary teeth, are the major diagnosis criteria in cleidocranial linked to RP25 and in 100 Spanish controls showed that the highly dysplasia (CCD). Two cases with multiple supernumerary teeth as part repetitive and homozygous alleles are significantly over represented in of a genetic syndrome are presented. Objective: the aim of the study the RP patients. The well-known role of the 3’-UTR AU-rich elements was to investigate the phenotype-genotype correlation. Subjects and in the stability of mRNA makes it plausible the hypothesis that C6orf57 Methods: the two patients with supernumerary teeth in association with could be implicated in the etiology or severity of RP in some of the CCD were investigated. The diagnosis of dental anomalies has been RP25 families. Therefore, further functional studies are required for made by oral examination and evaluation of orthopantomographs. the assessment of the influence of this AT-repeat polymorphism on Physical and X-ray examinations had a valuable role in supporting C6orf57 mRNA. clinical diagnosis of CCD. Family study, cytogenetic and molecular analyses were performed too. Results: Case 1: a 16-year-old female P0081. Mutation screening of three candidate genes, TFAP2β, expressed failure of exfoliation of the primary dentition and failure of GLULD1 and RIM1, in autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa. eruption of permanent teeth. She also presented the classical signs G. Antiñolo, I. Barragán, I. Marcos, B. Salud; of CCD - complete absence of the clavicles and frontal bossing. Her Hospitales Universitarios Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain. family history shows no other affected members. Because CCD is Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is the most common form of retinal dystrophy. usually inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder and about one- It is featured by a great clinical and genetic heterogeneity. There can third of the cases appear to represent sporadic mutation, we suspected be found different patterns of inheritance, such as autosomal dominant a new mutation has arisen. The results of cytogenetic and molecular and recessive, X-linked and digenic, exceeding 36 the number of analyses validate the occurrence of a new mutation in exon 2 of identified RP loci. Here we report the identification and exclusion RUNX2 gene. Case 2: a 14-years-old female showed major problems of 3 candidate genes for autosomal recessive RP (arRP), the most in the eruption of permanent teeth. The girl presented partial absence frequently inherited form of RP, in 7 Spanish families with arRP linked of the clavicles. Her family history revealed an autosomal dominant to the pericentromeric region of chromosome 6. TFAP2β, GLULD1 and pattern of inheritance. Conclusions: the two cases of CCD presented RIM1 were selected on the basis of their location, function and tissue variability in clinical features and etiology. The phenotype cannot be expression. TFAP2β, transcription factor AP-2 beta, is selectively predicted based on the genotype. expressed during early differentiation of amacrin and horizontal cells. GLULD1, glutamate-ammonia ligase (glutamine synthase) domainClinical genetics 98 P0084. Intracranial hypertension in two children with Marfan In 22 of the 82 tested patients (27%) we have detected genomic syndrome imbalances from which 7 were de novo, 10 were inherited and 5 cases Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee, J. P. P. van Vugt, L. J. M. Kroft, W. C. G. Overweg-Plandsoen; the origin could not be determined. Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. A major limitation for the use array-CGH in genetic counselling is the Two unrelated children are presented with recurrent intracranial identification of those inherited imbalances that contributes to the hypertension. One child was known to have Marfan syndrome. In the abnormal phenotype. other child the diagnosis Marfan syndrome was made during evaluation Although the introduction of array-CGH as a diagnostic tool for clinical for the intracranial hypertension. genetics seems expensive and technically demanding, the resulting Both children presented with complaints of headache, nausea and efficiency favours its implementation: for each 100 arrays performed, vomiting and one of them had papiledema. Both had increased genetic counselling, and eventually pre-natal diagnosis, of 12-28 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure (50-80 cmHO) and the complaints families will be improved. 2 disappeared after a lumbar puncture. One child was treated with a ventricular peritoneal drain because of the frequent relapses of P0088. Severe neonatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by intracranial hypertension. The other child has episodes of intracranial compound heterozygous mutations in the MYBPC3 gene hypertension with intervals of about a year and is treated with lumbar M. J. H. Baars1, J. J. Muurling-Vlietman1, J. Hruda1, J. M. van Hagen1, M. A. punctiures so far. Alders2, R. H. Lekanne dit Deprez2; Although severe headache has been reported in Marfan syndrome 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Academic Medi- due to intracranial hypotension, this is to our knowledge the first report cal Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. of intracranial hypertension in Marfan patients. Our hypothesis is that Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an autosomal dominant disease our patients may have reduced dural resistance as a consequence characterised by unexplained left ventricular hypertrophy and by a of decreased plasticity of collagen due to the fibrillin defect leading characteristic histopathological appearance, myofibrillar disarray. The to cerebral venous compression impairing the cerebrospinal fluid disease is mainly caused by mutations in genes encoding sarcomeric resorption. proteins. One of the most frequently mutated HCM genes is the myosin binding protein C (MYBPC3) gene, (MIM 115197). Mutations P0085. Multiple basal-cell carcinomata of the skin, jaw in this gene generally cause a relatively mild phenotype with a late keratocysts, skeletal and other malformations age of onset. HCM in neonates is rare and often associated to another M. Kuklík1, J. Handzel2, I. Mařík3, I. Žofková4, D. Zemková5; underlying condition. 1Genet. Dept., 2nd Med.Fac., Charles Univ., Prague, Czech Republic, 2Dept. A full-term girl was born after an uneventful pregnancy and delivery. of Stomatology, 1st Med.Fac., Charles Univ., Prague, Czech Republic, 3Amb. She was the second child of healthy non-consanguineous parents. Centre for Locomotor Disease, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Endo- On the third day of her life she was admitted because of poor crinology, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Anthropol. Dept., 2nd Med.Fac., Charles drinking, cyanosis and difficult breathing. Further investigation Univ., Prague, Czech Republic. showed pulmonary oedema and cardiomegaly. ECG registration was Basal cell carcinoma syndrome (BCNS) has been described by Gorlin abnormal. Echocardiography revealed hypertrophic non-obstructive and Goltz in 1960 as an autosomal dominant condition. The main cardiomyopathy with a poor left and right ventriclar systolic function. symptoms are multiple basal-cell carcinomata of the skin and jaw There was no structural congenital heart defect present. The heart keratocysts and skeletal malformations. failure was progressive leading to death at the age of 5 weeks. Autopsy We report here about 8 families with BCNS. The condition is located confirmed marked hypertrophy of both ventricles, myofibrillar disarray at 9q233 and shows high degree of penetrance. A number of loci and and interstitial fibrosis were demonstrated by electron microscopy. possible candidate regions were in the past excluded. DNA-studies showed two mutations in the MYBPC3-gene: maternally 50 % our patients had the initial symptomatology in the orofacial area. inherited mutation c.2373 2374 insG and paternally inherited splice- Recurrent jaw keratocysts are the major symptoms - 50% patients). donor mutation c.1624+1G>A. Further cardiologic examination The pits - small palmar or plantar dyskeratoses, in the previously part confirmed HCM in the father. Mutation c.2373 2374 insG is a founder of the suffered are present. Constant the numerous skeletal anomalies mutation originating from the Netherlands. clinically and/or radiographic examinations were observed. These findings suggest the need for mutation analysis of genes We mentioned increased incidence of malignancies. In one case we encoding sarcomeric proteins in childhood HCM and the possibility of noted ovarial carcinomas and the second patient had meningioma. The compound heterozygosity. benign conditions we registered - in one case the cutaneous fibromas of the trunk and in one female myomatosis uteri. P0089. Identification of NBS1 gene mutation carriers by PCR Family members were classified as affected if they exhibited at A. di Masi; least two of following criteria by the age of 18: two ore more basal University "Roma Tre", Rome, Italy. cell carcinomata,odontogenic keratocysts,palmar pits or skeletal Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome (NBS) is an autosomal recessive malformations. We noted unusual case of primary hyperparathyreoidism disorder characterised by microcephaly, immunodeficiency, in a women with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. The adenoma hypersensitivity to X-irradiation and increased predisposition to of parathyreoid gland has not yet been described in patients with lymphoid malignancies. BCNS. The product of the underlying gene, NBS1, is a 95 kDa protein called All patients from our 8 families had macrocrania,wide bicristal diameter nibrin, a member of the hMRE11/hRad50 protein complex, involved in and small distantia biacromilalis, 6 from 8 families indicated autosomal the repair of DNA double-strand breaks. genetic transmission, 2 are presented as fresh mutations or gonadal Over 90% of all NBS patients are of Central and Eastern European mosaicism. origin and are homozygous for the 657del5 mutation in exon 6. Nine further mutations have been found in families of different ethnic origin. P0087. Array CGH detection of genomic imbalances in mentally These rarer mutations are located between nucleotides 657 and 1142 retarded individulas with normal G banded karyotypes. and are also predicted to truncate the nibrin protein downstream of the K. Szuhai1, J. Knijnenburg1, B. Bakker1, M. Kriek1, A. van Haeringen1, E. Bi- N-terminal domain, as observed for the classical 657del5. jlsma1, K. Hansson1, H. J. Tanke1, C. Rosenberg1,2; A PCR method to rapidly detect the private mutations 742insGG and 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2University of São 835del4 in exon 7 and 900del25 mutation in exon 9 of NBS1 gene Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. was developed. In particular, NBS1 specific primers for wild-type and Mental retardation affects about 3% of the general population. Causative mutated alleles were designed and for each mutation a specific PCR relationship for the underlying genetic alterations could be established protocol was optimized. This method was applied to analyse three in less than half of the cases. In order improve the diagnosis we have unrelated NBS1 families, two from Italy and one from Morocco. used array comparative genomic hybridization to detect genomic The rapid and inexpensive screening technique, that we introduced imbalances in cases mental retardation with dysmorphic features and in this study, could be used for larger population screening in order normal karyotypes after G banding. to estimate NBS heterozygotes frequency. Since NBS heterozygotesClinical genetics 99 might be expected to have increased risk of cancer and high sensitivity the Western Siberia in Russia mainly young boys, was performed. Two to irradiation, the identification of carriers of mutant NBS1 alleles groups of patients were examined: a group of 205 unrelated patients will results helpful in cancer therapy, possibly optimising treatment with mental retardation and minimal clinical features of SMB and 21 protocols for malignant disease. patients with Prader-Willi syndrome-like phenotype of SMB without muscular hypotonia and abnormality of chromosome 15. Molecular P0090. Ehlers Danlos syndrome type VI in a girl diagnosis included PCR analysis of the length CGG-repeats and K. Salavoura1, M. Valari2, S. Giounta3, A. Kolialexi4, A. Mavrou4, S. Kitsiou4, B. assay of the methylation status CpG islands of the gene FMR1. The Steinmann3; fragile site on distal part of the long arm chromosome X was detected 1Aghia Sofia Childrens Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Dept Dermatology, Aghia in 14.6% cases. It was shown that the disease frequency in these Sofia Childrens Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Dept Medical Genetics, Zurich, patients confirmed by molecular assays was only 66.7%. On the other Switzerland, 4Dept Medical Genetics, Athens University School of Medicine, hand, the frequency of SMB in males with mental retardation without Athens, Greece. fragile X-chromosome was 2.8%. We have found, that the minimal Ehlers Danlos syndrome (EDS) type VI is a rare autosomal recessive level of fragile site expression for correct diagnosis SMB is 4%. On the connective tissue disease, involving primarily skin and joints. The main whole, the frequency of the SMB in patients with mental retardation, features of the condition are neonatal hypotonia, scoliosis and as rare long face, hyperactivity, emotional disinhibition and joint hypermobility complications, ruptures of arteries and the eye globe. We present a in patients from the Western Siberia in Russia was 10.2%. The value 4 year old girl born to consanguineous parents with multiple skeletal of this index in patients with Prader-Willi syndrome-like phenotype of anomalies at birth: torticollis, bilateral dislocation of shoulders and SMB without muscular hypotonia was 4.8%. hips, scoliosis and bilateral talipes equinovarus. At the age of 4, she presented with thin, bruisable, hyperelastic and easily stretchable skin P0093. The molar tooth sign phenotypes: evaluation of clinical with multiple petechiae, visible subcutaneous vasculature, without features in 65 patients scarring, omphalocele and significant hypotonia, joint laxity and F. Brancati1, E. Valente2, E. Bertini3, E. Boltshauser4, M. Castori1, E. Fazzi5, L. scoliosis. Intelligence was normal for her age. The ratio of urinary lysyl Giordano6, F. Emma7, C. D. Salpietro8, R. Battini9, V. Leuzzi10, R. Cilio3, M. Gen- / hydroxylysyl pyridinolines was increased. Sequencing of the PLOD1 tile11, R. Fischetto12, L. Boccone13, M. A. Donati14, P. Parisi15, B. Dallapiccola1; gene revealed a homozygous deletion in exon 13 (c.1362delC) leading 1University of Rome "La Sapienza" and IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, to a frameshift and premature truncation of the lysyl hydroxylase San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel, Rome, Italy, 2IRCCS Casa Sollievo (p.lle454llefsX2) and thus confirmed the clinical diagnosis of EDS type della Sofferenza and CSS-Mendel, Rome, Italy, 3Div. of Pediatric Neurology, VI. As our patient was diagnosed at a young age, a therapeutic trial with Bambino Gesù Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4Dep. of Pediatric Neurology, University ascorbic acid 2gr/kg was initiated 1 year ago. No major complications Childrens’ Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 5Dep. of Pediatric Neurology and from the cardiovascular system or the eyes have been noted so far. Psychiatry, IRCCS Mondino, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 6Div. of Child In this family, prenatal testing was performed and a normal fetus was Neuropsychiatry, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy, 7Div. of Nephrology and Dialysis, predicted. Bambino Gesù Hospital, Rome, Italy, 8Dep. of Pediatric Sciences, U.O. Pedi- atric Genetics and Immunology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 9Div. of P0091. Mutation screening for atypical and adult onset Spinal Pediatric Neurology and Psychiatry, IRCCS Stella Maris, University of Pisa, Muscular Atrophy Pisa, Italy, 10Dep. of Child Neurologic and Psychiatric Sciences, University "La P. A. James1, D. Stroud1, D. Hilton Jones2, F. Muntoni3, M. Donaghy2, K. Da- Sapienza", Rome, Italy, 11IRCCS Saverio De Bellis, Castellana Grotte, Bari, vies1, K. Talbot1; Italy, 12Div. of Metabolic and Genetic Diseases, Az. Ospedaliera di Venere- 1Dept Human Anatomy and Genetics, Oxford University, Oxford, United King- Giovanni XXIII, Bari, Italy, 13Ospedale Microcitemico, Cagliari, Italy, 14Dep. of dom, 2Dept Clinical Neurology, Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, United Kingdom, Pediatrics, Meyer Pediatric Hospital, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 15S. 3Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, Imperial College of Science Teachnology Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy. and Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom. The Molar Tooth Sign (MTS) is a radiological finding that reflects a The Spinal Muscular Atrophies (SMAs) are a group of genetically complex midbrain and hindbrain malformation. Although the MTS is determined conditions characterised by the congenital or progressive the cardinal diagnostic sign in Joubert syndrome (JS), it has been also loss of lower motor neurons with the subsequent weakness and atrophy found in several other conditions named Joubert Syndrome Related of skeletal muscles. The majority of cases present in childhood and are Disorders (JSRD) in which the JS phenotype is associated with the due to recessive mutations affecting the gene SMN1. A less common variable involvement of other organs, mainly the eye, kidney and liver. presentation involving slowly progressive SMA, often predominantly The clinical classification of JSRD is still complex, as incomplete and affecting distal muscle groups and presenting for the first time in overlapping phenotypes exist and the complete spectrum of associated adulthood is also well described. In this study we investigated the role features still needs to be elucidated. We recruited 65 patients with in the aetiology of adult onset SMA of mutations in 5 recently described proven MTS and evaluated their features. All patients presented genes; Glycyl tRNA synthetase (GARS), the small heat shock proteins psychomotor delay associated with hypotonia/ataxia (92%), mental HSPB1 and HSPB8, the Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy retardation (87%), oculomotor apraxia (86%), breathing abnormalities gene (BSCL2) and the vesicle trafficking protein VAPB. The role of (40%) and epilepsy (15%). Up to 25% of cases presented additional these genes was investigated in 74 individuals affected by SMA with central nervous system malformations, including hydrocephalus a variety of clinical phenotypes. A pathogenic mutation was detected and corpus callosum anomalies (11% each), encephalocele (6%), in each of the GARS, HSP27, HSP22 and BSCL2 genes. In the first neuronal migration defects and Dandy-Walker/variant malformation 3 families the affected individuals had a pure motor neuropathy with (4% each). Overall, 67% of patients showed ocular involvement, lower motor neuron involvement only. In the family affected by a mostly a retinopathy (46%), optical nerve atrophy (15%), ocular BSCL2 mutation a mixture of upper and lower motor neuron signs were motility abnormalities (14%) and colobomas (9%). Kidney involvement present, consistent with the previously described Silver Syndrome was observed in 35% of patients, of which 27% had nephronophthisis/ phenotype. Sequence variants were detected in a further 10 families. urinary concentration defects (evaluated with DDAVP test) and 6% The mutations found in this group demonstrate that while the GARS, had cystic dysplastic kidneys. Liver abnormalities and polydactyly HSP27, HSP22 and BSCL2 genes each make a contribution to the were found in 17% and 15% respectively. Rarer associated features incidence of adult onset SMA it remains a genetically heterogeneous included congenital heart defects, cleft palate, intraoral frenula or condition with further contributing genes yet to be discovered. lingual hamartomas, pituitary hamartomas and Hirschprung disease. The characterisation of the MTS associated features is relevant to P0092. Effectiveness of the diagnosis of fragile X syndrome in delineate a diagnostic algorithm to timely manage multisystemic mentally retarded patients from the West Siberia of Russia complications of JSRD. E. N. Tolmacheva, L. P. Nazarenko, S. A. Nazarenko; Research Institute of Medical Genetics,, Tomsk, Russian Federation. A comparison of the results both cytogenetic and molecular diagnosis of the syndrome Martin-Bell (SMB) in mentally retarded patients fromClinical genetics 100 P0094. The Frequency and Structure of Congenital medially placed, erupted on each side at about 2-3 weeks. Patient Malformations in Infants of Rostov Region Rostov-on-Don 3 had a small chin and somewhat cupped ears, 1 nevus on the left Scientific Research Institute Of Obstetrics and Pediatrics. foot. There were symmetrical lesions on both cheeks at birth which Ministry of Public Health of Russian Federation have persisted and have a collar of lanugo-like hair. This condition K. I. Lazareva, S. S. Amelina; has been reported in the dermatological literature as focal facial State Health Institution, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. dermal hypoplasia with preauricular localisation. Familial occurrence, Monitoring of congenital malformations (CM) in infants of Rostov compatible with dominaint as well as recessive inheritance have been Region started in 2000 as a part of a State Public Health Programme. reported. The pathogenesis probably involves fusion defects of the It provided 3,256 medical infant which became available thanks to the mandibular and maxillary prominences of the developing embryonic data of various Public Health Institutions of Rostov Region ( Maternity face, which suggests that the cleft lip and palate seen in patient 1 are Hospitals, Children hospitals and Out-patients clinics, Prosection not coincidental. service).The total number of newborns in Rostov Region comprised 110,741 for the period mentioned, while the total number of infants with P0097. 22q11.2 deletion in a series of paediatric at risk patients congenital malformations was 1,614. I. Barisic1, I. Petkovic1, L. Morozin-Pohovski1, Z. Cvetko1, G. Stipancic2, M. The frequency of the occurrence of CM in infants of Rostov Region Bagatin3; comprised 14,5 %. 1Childrens University Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2University Hospital All congenital malformations were subdivided into several groups "Sestre milosrdnice", Zagreb, Croatia, 3University Hospital Dubrava, Zagreb, according to the systems affected, as follows: 1.cardiovascular system Croatia. abnormalities - 22,06%, 2. central nervous system abnormalities Background: 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is a common disorder typically - 11,76%, 3. bone and muscular system abnormalities - 10,76%, consisting of dysmorphic facies, congenital heart defects (CHD), 4.genitourinary malformations - 9,23%. hypoparathyroidism, immunodeficiency and palate abnormalities. The Basic frequences of CM determined by monitoring were as follows: associated phenotypic manifestations are extensive, highly variable Unencephalia - 0,21%; spinabifida 0,60%; encephalocele - 0,07%; from patient to patient and age-dependent. Patients with mild clinical congenital hydrocephaly - 0,54%; microtia, anotia - 0,09%; cleft palate manifestations presenting with apparently isolated malformation or - 0.35%; cleft lip and/or cleft palate - 0,82%; transposition of the great dysmorphic traits can be easily overlooked. Objecitve: to find out if vessels - 0,017%; hypoplasia of left heart - 0,06%; esophagoatre-sia - the 22q11.2 deletion studies should become a part of a standardized 0,18%; anal atresia -0,08%; renal agenesis or renal dysgenesis - 0,14%; diagnostic workup for patients presenting with isolated defects or with hypospadiasis - 1,23%; exstrophy of the bladder - 0,02%; reduction dysmorphic traits alone. Methods and patients: We prospectively malformations of extremities- 0,19%; congenital diaphragmatic hernia studied the frequency of 22q11.2 deletion in an unselected population - 0,14%;omphalocele - 0,14%; gastroschisis -0,26%; Down`s syndrom of 171 patients aged 4 days to 18 years referred because of: 1. CHD - 1,40%; multiple congenital malformations 2,15%. (64) 2. cleft palate (58) 3. hypocalcemia (18) 4. dysmorphic features The monitoring results obtained show that the spreading of certain suggestive of del22q11.2 (31). Detailed clinical evaluation, high- nosologic forms of CM in a population of Rostov Region is similar to resolution chromosome and FISH analysis were performed. Results: that in other populations. FISH analysis revealed 22q11.2 deletion in 9.4% (6/64) patients with CHD. In the subgroup of patients with conotruncal anomalies del22. P0095. An unstable intermediate allele in a family with the q11.2 was present in 17,8% (5/28) patients. From 18 patients referred Fragile X syndrome because of the hypocalcaemia, 6 had 22q11.2 deletion (33,3%). In D. Marcus-Soekarman1, A. v.d. Wijngaard1, J. Herbergs1, L. A. Bok2, L. Curfs1, the group of 31 patients with dysmorphic features, the diagnosis N. van Slobbe-Knoers3, J. P. Fryns4, C. Schrander-Stumpel1; was confirmed in two patients (6.4%). Conclusions: Testing for 1University Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Maxima Medisch Centrum, the 22q11.2 microdeletion can be recommended in all patients with Veldhoven, The Netherlands, 3Universitair Medisch Centrum St Radboud, conotruncal heart defects and in patients with hypocalcaemia. It could Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Centrum voor Menselijke Erfelijkheid, Leuven, be considered in patients presenting with at least 3 dysmorphic traits Belgium. suggestive of 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome. A routine screening for A 1 year and 4 months old toddler presented with a developmental the 22q11 deletion patients with an isolated palatal defect may not be delay. He showed mildly dysmorphic features with length and head warranted. circumference above p80. A maternal cousin had a developmental delay that had never been analysed. Investigation of the FMR-gene P0098. Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Genetic and as part of the work-up for mental retardation showed a full mutation Clinical studies of eighteen cases in a Spanish family as found in persons with classic Fragile X syndrome. Further analysis J. Rueda1,2, C. Martín-Estefanía3, A. Pampliega3, M. Pérez-Arroyo1,4, A. Gar- in this family showed that female carriers of the syndrome showed cía2, K. Huoponen5; so-called intermediate alleles in the FMR-gene. In this family, a 1Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Miguel Hernández, San Juan de Alicante, normal/intermediate allele became a full mutation in two generations. Spain, 2Unidad de Genética, Hospital Clínica Vistahermosa, Alicante, Spain, A review of the literature is given regarding the significance of the size 3Servicio de Neurología, Hospital General Universitario, Alicante, Spain, 4Uni- of premutations and their risk to be transmitted to next generations as dad del Sueño, Hospital Clínica Vistahermosa, Alicante, Spain, 5Department of full blown mutations. Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative P0096. Focal facial dermal dysplasia : congenital, bilateral disorder affecting motor neurons. Up to 20% of the patients have a vesicular facial lesions with a linear and symmetric distribution. family history of ALS (FALS), most commonly inherited as an autosomal K. Devriendt1, T. Prescott2, B. Hamel3; dominant trait. Mutations in the SOD1 gene have been identified in 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Medical Genet- about 20% of FALS individuals. ics, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of Human Genetics, University We have identified a large Spanish family with 18 cases of FALS in six Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. generations. In three of the cases, the coding region (exons 1-5) of the We present three unrelated children with distinct congenital facial skin SOD1 gene was amplified with PCR and sequencing was carried out lesions. using ABI Prism 377 DNA sequencer. The identified mutation, affecting Patient 1 had a unilateral right cleft lip and cleft palate with late closure the 21st codon in exon 1 (Glu21Gly), is already known in ALSorg of the left lip. She presented congenital symmetrical skin lesions in database, although with few clinical data, and it is the sixth mutation of an arc across each cheek starting preauricularly. These appeared as the SOD1 gen described in Spain. vesicles, with absent underlying skin, and contained a limited amount The mean age of onset was 47.2 years old, and the mean time of of fluid. Follow-up revealed normal development. Patient 2 sustained duration was 16.11 years, with a range 5-21. Symptoms in most of the an unexplained large left-sided intracerebral haemorrhage perinatally cases (88,25%) started in the lower extremities and the remaining in and developed seizures. Two symmetric, vesicular lesions, ½ to 1 cm the upper extremities. Neither bulbar symptoms nor dementia were in diameter were noted on each cheek at birth. One new lesion, more observed. Electromyogram demonstrated electrophysiologic evidenceClinical genetics 101 of lower motor neuron involvement in the control case (in which The hypothesis that mitocondrial genes may implicate susceptibility to mutation was positive). multiple sclerosis (MS) is supported by an increasing number of case In conclusion, the Glu21Gly mutation showed long time of evolution with reports on Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) - associated intrafamilial variability and homogeneous phenotype. The existence of mithocondrial DNA (mtDNA) point mutations in patients with MS. A two unaffected obligate carrier demonstrate that penetrance could be number of mtDNA mutations with primary pathogenic significance for incomplete. LHON, a maternally inherited disease causing severe bilateral visual loss predominantly in young men, have been detected in patients P0099. Amelogenesis Imperfecta (AI) and Nephrocalcinosis : a with an MS-like phenotipe. To evaluate the link between MS and rare or unrecognized syndrome ? Lhon primary point mutations, we investigated a cohort of non-related G. Zanni1, I. Bailleul-Forestier2, D. Griffiths3, S. Whalen1, C. Vilain1, B. Lanas3, clinically definite MS Calabrian patients with optic nerve involvement, M. Molla2, C. Loirat4, D. Lacombe3, A. Verloes1,5; as well as a cohort of patients without involvement of the optic nerve 1Unité de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Faculté de Médecine Paris as controls. Each subject recruited to the study was fully informed 7, Paris, France, 2Service de Stomatologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Robert Debré, and gave his/her consent.We searched for the presence of Lhon Faculté de Médecine Paris 7, Paris, France, 3Service de Génétique Médicale, mitochondrial mutations at nucleotide positions (np) 11778, 3460 and Hôpital Pellegrin-Enfants, C.H.U Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 4Service de Né- 14484 by mutation-specific polymerase chain reaction and restriction phrologie, Hôpital Robert Debré, Faculté de Médecine Paris 7, Paris, France, fragment length polymorphism. Our results suggest that there is no 5INSERM E676, Paris, France. association between Calabrian patients with typical MS and mtDNA Amelogenesis Imperfecta (AI) is a clinically and genetically point mutations at np 11778, 3460 and 14484. However, the presence heterogeneous group of disorders of enamel development. Enamel of further mitochondrial mutations cannot be excluded in MS. defects can occur in isolated or syndromic forms. Mutations in genes encoding for enamel matrix proteins (Amelogenin X, Enamelin) have P0102. Novel CACNA1A gene mutations in Spanish patients been identified respectively in X-linked and autosomal dominant with episodic ataxia, familial hemiplegic migraine and infantile families with apparently non syndromic AI. paroxysmal vertigo. The AI-Nephrocalcinosis (AIN) or renal-enamel syndrome is an E. Cuenca-León1, I. Banchs2, R. Corominas1,3, N. Fernández-Castillo3, J. Arti- autosomal recessive condition with only few reported cases in the gas4, V. Volpini5, A. Macaya1, B. Cormand3; literature. Renal symptoms include progressive nephrocalcinosis 1Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Recerca without any apparent abnormality in calcium metabolism that could lead Oncològica (IRO), Barcelona, Spain, 3Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, some patients to renal failure in the adulthood. Mutations of Kallikrein Spain, 4Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 5Institut de Recerca 4(KLK4), a gene encoding for a enamel matrix proteinase have been Oncològica (IRO), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. recently identified in an autosomal recessive AI family. The kallikrein- Mutations in the CACNA1A gene, encoding the α1A subunit of the kinin system has been implicated in glomerulotubular development P/Q-type calcium neuronal channel, have been associated with the and KLK4 could be a good candidate gene for this syndrome. We allelic disorders familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM), episodic ataxia report two consanguineous families and three sporadic cases of type 2 (EA-2) and spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6). AIN. Generalized enamel hypoplasia of both primary and permanent We have performed extensive mutational analysis of the CACNA1A dentition was present in all affected patients. In two families delayed gene in 41 unrelated patients with one or more of the following or absent molar eruption and microdontia were noted. None of the diagnoses: FHM, migraine with hemiparesthesic aura (MA), a childhood patients had impaired renal function. In one sibship, nephrocalcinosis periodic syndrome, EA-2 and progressive ataxia (PA). was only present in 1/3 patients. As nephrological screening is not For each proband, the whole coding region of the gene and the systematically done in AI patients, the incidence of this syndrome exon-intron boundaries were PCR-amplified from genomic DNA and could be underestimated, and the risk of renal failure overestimated. sequenced, allowing the identification of five new and one previously As early diagnosis may lead to a better renal prognosis, all children reported missense mutations in 6 patients. with AI should at least have a renal ultrasonography performed to Two of the novel mutations, p.G638D and p.P1011A, were found in EA- exclude nephrocalcinosis. 2 patients. The novel mutation p.A454T was detected in a patient with MA and panic attacks. The other two new mutations were associated P0100. New cardiac findings in a case of Kabuki Syndrome with FHM; p.V581M was carried by a pure FHM patient and p.Y1245C M. A. Soylemez, B. Geckinli, C. Sayar, A. Giray, G. Toksoy; by a patient with FHM and antecedent of paroxysmal torticollis. The Zeynep Kamil Woman Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey. previously described p.R583Q mutation was present in a patient with Kabuki syndrome is a rare multipl congenital anomaly/mental PA and FHM and was found to co-segregate with EA-2/FHM/PA in 5 retardation syndrome with an estimated frequency of 1/32.000 in other affected relatives. No mutations were found in the CACNA1A Japan. The Kabuki syndrome characterized by mental retardation gene in the remaining 35 probands, confirming genetic heterogeneity (mild to moderate), skeletal abnormalities, postnatal growth deficiency, in this group of channelopathies. typical facial appearance and congenital heart defects. The incidence of The clinical spectrum of CACNA1A mutations should be expanded to congenital heart defects in patients with kabuki syndrome is estimated include some childhood periodic syndromes. Further clinical, genetic to be about 30%. To date, no specific type of heart malformation is and functional studies are needed to elucidate the molecular bases of known to be associated with the syndrome. this group of related paroxysmal disorders. We report a girl Who shows postnatal growth deficiency, a mild microcephaly with moderate mental retardation and skeletal P0103. Frequency of the GAG deletion of the DYT1 gene in a group of Polish patients with primary dystonia abnormalities (hip dislocation, pectus excavatum, scoliosis, end plate abnormalities of vertabral body) and dysmorphic facies (arched K. Szczaluba1, J. Bal1, B. Kadziolka2, A. Szolna3, A. Friedman4, T. Mazurczak1; eyebrows, long palpebral fissures, large and protruding ears) and 1National Research Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgradu- congenital cardiac defects. Cardiac echo revealed perforation of mitral ate Medical Center, Warsaw, Poland, 3Army Clinical Hospital, Bydgoszcz, Po- valve, mitral insufficiency and anomalous pulmonary venous return. land, 4Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. We propose to investigate these cardiac findings Kabuki syndrome Dystonia is a heterogenous movement disorder characterized by patients survey in attempt to determine their real frequency and in sustained muscle contractions, frequently causing twisting movements order to improve clinical management. or abnormal postures. To date, fifteen well-defined types of inherited dystonia syndromes or primary torsion dystonias (PTD) are known. P0101. Lack of association between Leber's hereditary optic Most cases of early-onset primary generalized dystonia cases are neuropathy primary point mutations and multiple sclerosis in caused by a 3-base-pair GAG deletion in DYT1 gene (9q34). the region of Calabria ( Italy). The aim of our study is to investigate the prevalence of the GAG R. Cittadella1, V. Andreoli1, I. Manna1, A. La Russa1, M. Liguori1, A. Clodomiro2, deletion in the DYT1 gene in Polish patients with primary dystonia. The P. Valentino2; preliminary analysis was carried out in a group of 50 patients (aged 11- 1Istituto di Scienze Neurologiche C.N.R., Cosenza, Italy, 2Istituto di Neurologia- 68 yrs) with primary dystonia (28 with generalized type; 22 with focal/ Università "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy. segmental of various localization), unreactive to L-Dopa treatment.Clinical genetics 102 Detailed clinical characteristics of all the patients is provided. weight 6.3 kg (-3.0 SDS), head circumference 39.7 cm (-6.1 SDS). Four patients (8%) in the analyzed group carried the GAG deletion in Plasma IGF1, IGF2 and IGFBP3 were normal. An arginine stimulation the DYT1 gene. They all had generalized-type dystonia starting in the test showed an elevated response (max GH 67 mU/L). lower limb, with age of onset ranging from 7 to 14 yrs. Progression of A heterozygous missense mutation in exon 16 of the IGF1R gene symptoms followed the pattern: foot → entire lower limb → trunk → (G3193A) was found, changing a negatively charged glutamic acid upper limb/s. for a positively charged lysine. We conclude that heterozygosity for In patients’ families, additional 7 carriers of that deletion, of whom an inactivating mutation in the IGF1R leads to a variable degree of 5 were asymptomatic, were identified. Generalized, early-onset intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, suggesting that maternal symptoms were observed in one of symptomatic carriers. In the other, IGF1R is involved in intrauterine growth. writer’s cramp was the only manifestation. Our data confirms that: generalized phenotype, early onset, primary P0106. Three children with structural chromosomal aberrations foot involvement and presence of one additional affected member in and clinical features of overgrowth syndromes the family can be predictors of type 1 dystonia. Recognition of DYT1- I. M. Bradinova, E. Simeonov; positive patients allows consideration of deep brain stimulation (DBS) Department of Pediatrics, Medical Faculty, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. as a method of effective treatment Chromosome abnormalities are reported in a substantial part (4% - 28%) of the individuals with mental retardation. They are the single P0104. Clinical and molecular studies in 15 patients with Noonan most common known cause found in series of unselected patients syndrome with mental retardation. Some of the chromosomal disorders usually J. Klapecki, M. Laniewski-Wollk, E. Obersztyn, A. Szpecht-Potocka, J. Bal, T. have highly recognizable physical characteristics. In other cases the Mazurczak; abnormality may be presented by small rearrangement of a particular National Research Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. chromosome that is rarely reported and the phenotype is nonspecific Noonan syndrome (NS, OMIM 163950) is an autosomal dominant or still undetermined. Overgrowth syndromes include infants who genetic disorder characterized by following clinical symptoms: short are large for gestational age with or without excessive postnatal stature, congenital heart defects, pectus deformities, pterygium growth. The definition also includes increased weight, length, or colli, mild mental retardation and facial dysmorphism: hypertelorism, head circumference, and/or asymmetric enlargement, singly or in epicantic folds, low-set, prominent ears. Recently discovered PTPN11 combination. mutations (gene located on 12 chromosome p24.1) are responsible We present three unrelated mentally retarded children with structural for NS in almost half the cases. Results of preliminary clinical and chromosomal abnormalities and clinical features suggestive of molecular studies carried out in selected group of 15 patients with overgrowth syndromes. Patient 1 is a 2 years old girl with karyotype clinical diagnosis of NS are reported. The following inclusion criteria 46,XX,der(10)add(10)(q26) for molecular testing were used: dysmorphic features, short stature, where the FISH analysis showed that the additional material probably congenital heart defects, pectus deformities or pterygium colli and origins from chromosome 10. Patient 2 is a 16 months old girl with cryptorchidism. Detailed clinical evaluation, including family history, 22q13 deletion, detected on conventional karyotyping and confirmed dysmorphic features, pre- and postnatal development and congenital by FISH analysis. Patient 3 is a 14 years old boy with karyotype 46,XY, malformations, was performed. add(5)(q35) where the additional material The most frequent symptoms in our group of patients were: dysmorphic was shown to origine from the distal part of the 10p, i.e. this patient features (hypertelorism (100%), low-set ears (79%), short neck (93%)), has partial trisomy 10p. In all patients the chromosomal abnormalities congenital heart defects (93%), short stature (79%) and pectus were de novo. malformations (57%). These cases confirm the necessity of chromosomal analysis in patients To determine the character of mutation in PTPN11 gene, we performed with mental retardation and somatic overgrowth. a direct sequencing analysis of the exons 2-15. Mutation in PTPN11 gene was identified in 4 of 15 investigated patients. One mutation P0107. DLL3-mutations in spondylocostal dysostosis type1 c.846C>G in exon 7 is novel; two others were previously reported - (SCDO1)- report of 2 patients c.188A>G (exon 3) and c.1510A>G (mutation inherited from mother). E. Steichen-Gersdorf1, G. Reiter1, B. Fiebig2; All patients with PTPN11 mutation demostrated typical symptoms 1Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute for Medical Ge- of NS, such as: short stature, congenital heart defects, widespaced netics, Berlin, Germany. nipples, pterygium colli and thick ear helix. The pulmonary stenosis The spondylocostal dysostosis (SCD) are a heterogenous group of (typical for NS) was found only in one patient, whereas the other three disorders with severe axial skeletal malformations, characterised had different type of cardiac malformations. radiologically by multiple vertebral segmentation defects and rib anomalies, mainly reduction in number and dorsal fusion. P0105. Intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation due to a An autosomal recessive form, designated SCD type1 (OMIM #277300) familial heterozygous missense mutation in the IGF-I receptor is linked to 19q13, which harbours the DLL3-gene (delta like 3). DLL3 S. G. Kant1, H. J. van der Kamp2, A. M. Pereira3, M. J. E. Walenkamp2, H. A. encodes a ligand for the Notch signalling pathway. van Duyvenvoorde3, M. F. Kruithof2, M. H. Breuning1, J. A. Romijn3, M. Kar- Clinically the patients present with an extremely short neck, low set perien2,3, J. M. Wit2; nuchal hairline, a short chest, abdominal protrusion and an increased 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, abdominal pressure. Therefore, inguinal hernia occurs frequently in 2Department of Pediatrics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Department of male patients. Interestingly, despite of severe vertebral malformations, Endocrinology and Metabolism, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands. neurological complications are uncommon. Scoliosis is fixed and Intra-uterine and postnatal growth retardation with elevated plasma not progressive. The two male patients were born to consanguinous IGF1 has been reported in 2 children with mutations in the IGF1 turkish parents. receptor (IGF1R) gene. We now report a mother and daughter with Patient 1: born at term, c-section, BW 3380g, L 48cm, HC 36cm, no growth failure due to a novel heterozygous IGF1R mutation. respiratory problems at birth, mild symptoms, slightly dysproportionate Mother had a birth weight of 2.6 kg (-1.9 SDS) and a length of 49 cm (- stature. Homozygous missense mutation in the DLL3-gene C209R 0.34 SDS). She had unexplained growth failure. GH provocation tests within the delta-serrate-lag2 region (DSL) at 6 and 12 years showed elevated responses. At present (34 yrs), Patient 2: born at term, BW 2960g, L 43 cm, HC 34cm, developed height is 144.6 cm (-4.0 SDS) and head circumference is 50.2 cm (-3.0 a respiratory distress syndrome and was ventilated for 24h hours. SDS). IGF1, IGF2 and IGFBP3 are all in the high-normal range. Reduced compliance of the chest was noticed. An right sided inguinal After a pregnancy complicated by oligohydramnion the daughter was hernia was operated in the neonatal period. Homozygous insertion of born with weight 2.1 kg (-3.3 SDS), length 42 cm (-4.2 SDS), OFC cDNA 603_604 ins GCGGT in exon 5 of DLL3 leading to a stop codon (at 2 months) 33.3 cm (-5.6 SDS). She has a triangular face, mild and protein truncation . hypotelorism, a small mouth with thin lips and prominent ears. She had We stress, that an essential prerequesite for genetic testing of DLL3 ist poor appetite, and at 13 months of age length was 69.2 cm (-2.6 SDS), that there is irregular formation of all vertebrae (not segmental) usuallyClinical genetics 103 in association with abnormally aligned ribs, showing points of fusion. deletion size have been noticed to be associated with variability in the clinical manifestations. We report a 13-year-old patient with severe P0108. Investigation of mtDNA Deletions and D-Loop mental retardation, dysmorphic facial features, seizures and other Polymorphism in Iranian hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients characteristic findings of 3p deletion phenotype. This is the first reported M. Montazeri, M. Houshmand, G. Dorraj, E. V.Zaklyazminskaya; patient reported with deletion of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene, National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic included in the deletion at the 3p25 segment. Von Hippel-Lindau gene Republic of Iran. deletion is known to be associated with a risk of developing the VHL Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a genetic disorder. It has disease including cerebellar hemangioblastoma, renal cell carcinoma variable presentations with a high incidence of sudden death in and retinal angiomata. These features have not been reported yet as young. The disease occurrance is %0.05-0.2. As mitochondria are part of the 3p telomeric deletion syndrome. The clinical manifestations, the major sites of energy production in the cell, it is not surprising, genetic counselling and findings on follow up are reported. therefore, that an energy dependant tissue such as heart is affected by mitochondrial dysfunction. The aims of this study were investigating P0111. Hereditary multiple exostoses disease- clinical and mitochondrial DNA deletions, identifying polymorphic sites In D-loop genetical aspects region of mtDNA and potential genetic background accounting for C. Skrypnyk1, M. Bembea1, O. Vancsik2, M. Barbu2, C. Barbu2; HCM in the Iranian population. In this study 52 unrelated HCM patients 1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine, Oradea, Romania, 2Clinical Children underwent genetic test on blood sample by DNA Extraction, PCR, and Hospital, Oradea, Romania. complete length sequencing of mtDNA. D-loop was sequencesed Hereditary multiple exostoses (HME) is characterized by growth of for 31 patients. The presence of mtDNA deletions was analyzed by multiple exostoses, which are benign cartilage-capped bone tumors multiplex PCR method and deletions break point were confirmed that grow outward from the metaphyses of long bones. HME has a by sequencing. The sequences were aligned upon the Cambridge prevalence of 1 in 100 000 and is inherited in an autosomal dominant Reference Sequence. Common deletion in 18 patients (15.3%), a 7.3 manner, with 95% penetrance. We report 15 cases of HME over a kb deletion in 7 patients (13.4%) and a 9kb deletion in 12 patients 20 years period. The diagnosis was established by clinical findings (23%) were detected. Deletions were locolized to an area including and comprehensive skeletal radiographs in individuals with exostoses genes for COX I, II, III, ATPase, ND3 to ND6, and cyt b. In D-loop, arising in the juxtaphyseal region of long bones, exostoses grow in the majority of mutations were nucleotide substitutions. Transitions size and gradually ossify during skeletal development and bowing of (91%) were significantly higher than transversions (8.3%). Thirty four the forearm or lower leg as associated deformity. The median age at polymorphisms were newly identified in this study, not published in the diagnosis was 2 years and a half. 2 cases associated multiple exostoses MITOMAP database. PCT changes at positions 303-309 were detected with a cardiac malformation and with talipes respectively. The number in 83% of our samples. Our results suggest that an increased level of of exostoses, number and location of involved bones, and degree of HVS-I and HVS-II substitutions may be an indicator of mitochondrial deformity varied. Most commonly involved bones were the tibia, the DNA instability. femur and the humerus.Males tended to be much frequent affected and more severely affected than females.The family history appeared P0109. Case report of Usher syndrome in mother and daughter to be negative in 40% of affected individuals, and we suposed a new C. Albu, D. F. Albu, E. Severin, R. Purcarea; gene mutation. Solitary exostosis have been found in 4 female cases. "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. Symptoms arised secondary to mass effect were pain, motor deficits, Usher syndrome is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder mechanical blocks to motion. The height of affected individuals falled characterized by congenital hearing loss and later development of within the normal range. We found no sarcomatous degeneration of an progressive retinitis pigmentosa. It is one of the most frequent causes exostosis. None patients with hereditary multiple exostoses needed of deafness-blindness in humans. The present report is the case of a surgery. We could not study the causal genes EXT1, EXT2 and EXT3 Caucasian mother and her daughter both born with Usher syndrome. and we consider the cases open for molecular studies. Both had hearing impairment since birth and onset of visual impairment due to pigmentary retinopathy in late teens. Objective: to describe the P0112. Two siblings with postaxial polydactyly, a congenital clinical manifestation of Usher syndrome in this family and to study heart defect, ectopic pituitary gland and distinct facial features. A new entity? the phenotype-genotype correlation. Methods: Tests as visual acuity, refraction, biomicropsy, ophtalmoscopy, visual field, electroretinography H. Peeters1, L. Goossens2, S. Janssens2, H. Devlieger3, K. Devriendt1; and audiometry were helpful in diagnosis of Usher syndrome. Results: 1Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, both mother and daughter were diagnosed with Usher syndrome Belgium, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, type IIa with different clinical manifestation (sensorineural hearing Belgium, 3Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, loss and visual acuity varied in severity; neurological abnormalities Belgium. and posterior sublenticular cataract as a later complications of the We present two female siblings with a previously unreported mother); family history revealed maternal greatgrandmother suffered syndrome. The parents are unrelated and family history is negative from Usher syndrome and a familial predisposition for open-angle with regard to congenital malformations or mental handicap. Both glaucoma; the family pedigree suggested an autosomal recessive siblings presented with unexplained intrauterine growth retardation mode of transmission for the disorder; no consanguineous marriage (birth weight respectively 2640g (at term) and 1200 g (at a gestational was noticed ; cytogenetic analysis showed no abnormalities in age of 32 weeks)). Both had bilateral postaxial polydactyly of the 1q41. Conclusion: because of inevitable blindness as part of Usher hands, a congenital heart defect (a perimembranous ventricular syndrome phenotype the children who inherited the mutant gene from septal defect (VSD) in the first child, a VSD, pulmonary stenosis and their parents should be tested for early diagnosis. Electroretinogram an atrial septal defect secundum type A in the second child). Brain testing is recommended in children with bilateral sensorineural hearing MRI revealed the presence of an ectopic neuropituitary gland in both loss. children and additionally a hypoplastic adenopituitary gland in the youngest sibling. Developmental delay was severe in the first child, P0110. A terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome 3 [46, the second child died at the age of 4 months. Both children had a XY, del(3)(p25-pter)]: Report of a Case marked facial dysmorphism, sparse coarse hair and temporal balding. M. Rohrbach, R. Babul-Hirji, D. Chitayat; Metabolic testing was normal. High resolution karyotype was normal. Departement of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The To the best of our knowledge, this constellation of features has never Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. been described before. Autosomal recessive inheritance is likely. Hemizygous deletion of the short arm of chromosome 3: [46 XY,del(3) (p25-pter)] was reported to be associated with failure to thrive, microcephaly, characteristic craniofacial anomalies, mental retardation and musculoskeletal anomalies. Only 35 cases with a small deletion of the distal segment of 3p have been reported. Differences in theClinical genetics 104 P0113. Short stature of prenatal onset in a girl with terminal Delayed mental development is noted in 34% of the cohort (30% in the deletion 15q including the IGF1R-locus mutated group vs 36% in the non-mutated group) A. Kuechler1,2, B. Albrecht2, D. Wieczorek2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach2; 1Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany, 2Institut für P0115. Hyperphosphatasia with cognitive deficit and seizures: Humangenetik, Essen, Germany. further syndrome delineation We report on a girl that was referred to our department because of short M. M. Nezarati1,2, M. D. Thompson3, L. Dupuis1, A. E. Killoran4, P. A. Hwang5, stature. She is the first child of a healthy, non consanguineous German D. E. C. Cole1,3; couple. The pregnancy was complicated by growth retardation, first 1Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of Toronto, Toron- recognized during 25th week of gestation. Normal birth took place in to, ON, Canada, 3Depts of Pathobiology & Laboratory Medicine, U of Toronto, the 37th week with reduced birth measurements: weight 1630g (-3.6 Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Faculty of Medicine, U of Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 5North SD), length 37 cm (-4 SD), OFC 30.5 cm (-2.8 SD). After birth, a heart York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. defect (ASD) and clubfeet were diagnosed. Because of an occipital Hyperphosphatasia is a persistent elevation of serum alkaline swelling with overlying haemangioma, an MRI scan was performed phosphatase activity seen in many disorders, particularly those that showed an atretic cephalocele. X-rays revealed a hemivertebra affecting bone turnover. There have been occasional reports of the lumbar spine and fused ribs 1 and 2 on the right. Bone age was of hyperphosphatasia associated with progressive postnatal retarded by one year at the age of 18 months. neurodevelopmental disease and seizures (MIM#239300). Affected Clinical examinations at the age of 1 and 3 years showed microcephaly children exhibit consistently elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALPL) of (-4.2 SD/-3.5 SD), short stature (-5.6 SD/-5.6 SD), dystrophy, facial uncertain origin. There are no other laboratory findings of note and no dysmorphic signs (high forehead, short nose, small mouth) and evidence of any abnormality of bone or liver metabolism, or altered clinodactyly of fifth fingers. Developmental delay was only mild, except skeletal architecture. Affected siblings and/or consanguinity suggest for walking with 25 months (2 months after correction of clubfeet). autosomal recessive inheritance, but the underlying pathogenesis is Cytogenetic investigations showed normal results, as well as UPD unknown. analyses for chromosomes 7, 14, 16, and 20. Subtelomeric screening We describe a new case and review the clinical features in the showed a subtelomeric deletion 15q which occurred de novo (normal context of 16 previously reported children. Our proband is a 5½ yr- results in the parents). Further investigations to define the breakpoint old girl born to consanguineous parents, who presented with marked revealed that the IGF1R-locus is also deleted. developmental delay and dysmorphic features (brachycephaly, coarse In the literature, most patients with terminal deletions 15q have a more facies, hypertelorism, bulbous nose with prominent nasal bridge, and severe phenotype with mental retardation, but patients with ring 15 downturned corners of the mouth) at five months of age. Subsequently, show similarity with our patient. failure to thrive, acquired microcephaly, and autistic behaviours were observed. Seizures and an abnormal EEG were also seen. The P0114. Phenotype/Genotype in 349 patients with Noonan hyperphosphatasia (867±72 IU/L, n=7) is associated with decreased syndrome (NS): ongoing French collaborative study pyridoxal 5’-phosphate (B), and the question of aberrant vitamin 6 Y. J. M. Sznajer1,2, B. Keren3,4, S. Fereira5, S. Saba5, C. Baumann6, J. Elion7, H. B 6 metabolism has been raised in this condition before. Pyridoxine Cavé7, A. Verloes6,8, E. for the French Collaborative Noonan Study Group9; challenge (100 mg bolus) resulted in normalized EEG activity. The 1Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 2Dept patient’s tonic-clonic and absence seizures have not been evident of Clinical Genetics - Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Dept of Clinical since phenobarbital withdrawal and treatment with 100 mg pyridoxine Genetics - Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, Belgium, 4Laboratory of Biochemistry daily. Our case illustrates two points: 1) alkaline phosphatase should and Genetics, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 5Dept of Biochemistry and be assayed in children presenting with similar findings; 2) pyridoxine- Genetics - Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 6Dept of Clinical Genetics - EEG challenge should be attempted to determine whether other Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 7Laboratory of Biochemistry and Genetics affected children show pyridoxine-responsiveness. - Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 8Inserm U676, Paris, France, 9Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France. P0116. Rare coexistence of Saethre-Chotzen phenotype with 46,X,add(X),(p21) karyotype Introduction NS represents a multiple congenital anomaly entity characterised by E. L. Katsanda1, T. I. Kadurina2, S. K. Shandlorenko2, J. B. Perevesenceva1, M. dysmorphism (triangular face, hypertelorism, ptosis, downslanting O. Mkheidze3; palpebral fissures, thick helix, low set, posteriorly rotated ears; deep 1Child’s consultative-diagnostic center, Sant-Petersburg, Russian Federation, philtrum, pterygium colli), cardiac defect, short stature, cryptorchidism 2Center of human genetics, Sant-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Medical in male, mental retardation. Mutation in PTPN11 gene was identified Academy for Postgraduate Education, Sant-Petersburg, Russian Federation. in ~= 40% of patients Classic Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS, acrocephalosyndactyly Objective type III, MIM#101400) is characterized by coronal synostosis, facial Delineate phenotype/genotype correlation in a large cohort and provide asymmetry, ptosis, and characteristic appearance of the ear. Mutations clinical tools to optimize genotype screening in the TWIST1 gene, chromosomal locus 7p21, are associated with Methods this syndrome. Occasionally, affected individuals have chromosome Geneticist (France, Belgium, Switzerland) recruited patient with clinical translocations involving 7p21 or ring chromosome 7. Some patients diagnosis of NS and for each, completed a booklet with antenatal, with an overlapping phenotype have a mutation in the FGFR3 gene perinatal, growth parameters, cardiopathy, dysmorphic features, (4p16.3) and in the FGFR2 gene (10q26). Our proband, one-and-a- dermatologic anomaly, psychomotor milestones, pictures over time. half-year-old female, with SCS phenotype is under our observation. Patients were included if they presented dysmorphic features and She was born after the third pregnancy to a 34-yr-old female and 40- one additional anomaly. Informed consent, DNA sample and booklet yr-old male by spontaneous vaginal delivery. Proband parents are not were sent at Hôpital Robert Debré - reference center for NS in France. consanguineous. Her mother is healthy, her father, father’s mother have Patients with LEOPARD, Costello, CFC, Baraitser-Winter syndrome mild hearing loss. Proband birth weight was 2100g (25th centile), length were excluded for this study. Mutation analysis performed by bi- was 49cm (< 3rd centile). She had some distinctive features that were directional direct sequencing on exons 2,3,4,7,8,12 and 13 on PTPN11 typical for CSC: at the age of one-and a half year her length was 76cm gene (> 98% of reported mutation) (5th centile); her weight was 8.2kg (<3rd centile); acrocephaly, open Results fontanelle, flat face, high forehead, mild facial asymmetry, maxillary 349 patients were included. The mutation rate was 36% (126/349): hypoplasia, shallow orbits, hypertelorism, ptosis, beaked nose, narrow 41.15% males (79/192) and 29.90% females (47/157). Among the palate, broad chest, mild syndactyly of the 2nd-3rd fingers, syndactyly studied parameters (see Methods), there were not statistically different of the 3rd-4th toes, hallux valgus, sacral sinus. Moderate sensorineural between mutated and non mutated groups but for a positive correlation deafness was revealed with otologic examination. Proband’s karyotype for cardiac defect: pulmonic stenosis 53.2% vs 26.5% -(p<0.001) and was found to be 46,X,add(X),(p21). Having used routine chromosome atrial defect: 25.4% vs 11.2% -(p<0.001). Inability to identify a mutation analysis we had no chance to identify the character of this additional was associated with presence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. piece of X chromosome. Her parents karyotype was normal.Clinical genetics 105 presence of additional alleles absent in both parents were found. In P0117. Phenotypic characterization of two patients with Rett the group of medical abortuses we observed no mutational events syndrome carrying mutations in exon 1 of the human MECP2 for investigated loci what allow to exclude hypermutability of these gene markers as a reason of increased mutation rates in the spontaneous D. Bartholdi1, A. Schinzel1, E. Boltshauser2, M. Weissert3, W. Berger1, G. Má- abortuses sample. The difference between two groups is statistically tyás1; significant (p<0.05). Appearance of the “new” alleles which is absent in 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zürich, Schwerzenbach, Switzer- both parents serve as consequence of the somatic mutation occurred land, 2Department of Neurology, Childrens Hospital, University of Zürich, Swit- during embryogenesis. In spontaneous abortuses, the mean mutation zerland, 3Childrens Hospital, Kantonsspital St. Gallen, Switzerland. rate in the tetranucleotide repeat complexes analyzed was 0.88õ10-2. Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder inherited in This value was higher than the mean spontaneous mutation rate of an X-linked dominant manner. The clinical course is characterized these human STR loci. It can be suggested that genome instability by near-normal development during the first months, followed by a detected at the level of repeated DNA sequences can involve not decline of acquired functions, progressive microcephaly and severe only genetically neutral loci but also active genomic regions crucial developmental delay. The gene responsible for RTT, MECP2, functions for embryonic viability. This results in cell death and termination as a general repressor of transcription. About 70-80% of RTT cases of embryonic development. Our findings indicate that the death of are attributed to de novo mutations detected by sequence analysis, embryos with normal karyotypes in most cases is associated with an in 16% of patients with a classical RTT phenotype large deletions of increased frequency of somatic microsatellite mutations. MECP2 are present. The human MECP2 gene comprises 4 exons whereof the first exon has P0120. Does Xp22.3 deletion cause mental retardation? The been considered as non-coding. Very recently, however, an alternative contribution of VCX-A and NLGN-4 to cognitive development splice variant composed of exons 1, 3 and 4 has been identified, M. Macarov1, J. P. Newman2, D. Strich3, V. Sury1, M. Zeigler1, V. Meiner1; utilizing exon 1 as protein-coding sequence. This new isoform appears 1Department of Human Genetics, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School to be the predominant MECP2 transcript in the brain. and Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Department of Neurol- So far, no details have been reported on the clinical picture of patients ogy and the Agnes Ginges Center for Human Neurogenetics, Hebrew Univer- with mutations of the new MECP2 isoform. We have therefore screened sity-Hadassah Medical School and Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, patients with suspected RTT in whom sequencing of exons 2, 3 and 4 Israel, 3Pediatric Specialty Clinics, Endocrinology and Diabetes, Clalit Health did not reveal MECP2 mutations for the presence of large deletions and Services, Jerusalem, Israel. point mutations in exon 1 by DNA sequencing and multiplex ligation- Patients with Xp22.3 interstitial and terminal deletions have been dependent probe amplification (MLPA). We identified one girl with a shown to be affected by mental retardation or autism. Previously, VCX- large deletion and one girl with a nonsense mutation in exon 1, most A (variably charged protein X-A), located at Xp22.3, was introduced likely affecting the new MECP2 isoform. A detailed clinical description as a gene for mental retardation and its presence was suggested to of these patients will be given. be sufficient to maintain normal mental development. Recent reports suggest that mutations in NLGN4 (neuroligin 4), located at that same P0118. Deletion of chromosome 13 in a child with bilateral region, are involved in autistic disorders and mental retardation. retinoblastoma, dysmorphic features and developmental delay In the current study we describe a pedigree of 3 generations affected due to a maternal insertional translocation by contiguous gene syndrome that includes the clinical features of X- E. Lopez-Rangel1,2, M. Hrynchak3,2, K. Paton4,2, S. L. Yong1,2; linked ichthyosis and Kallmann syndrome. Molecular analysis revealed 1Children's & Women's Health Centre of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, the presence of an interstitial deletion spanning approximately 3.5Mb Canada, 2University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Department at Xp22.3. The centromeric breakpoint was localized between markers of Pathology, Royal Columbian Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4Department DXS1467 and DXS8051, proximal to KAL-1. The telomeric breakpoint of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Vancouver, BC, Canada. was localized within the coding region of NLGN4. The deletion of VCX- Retinoblastoma (RB) is the most common pediatric intraocular tumor A and the truncation of NLGN4 in this family prompted us to examine with an incidence of 1/20,000 liveborns. The majority of cases are the cognitive functions of our two adult patients using comprehensive sporadic. RB is caused by a loss or inactivation of both alleles of the intellectual and neurocognitive assessment. Normal intellectual RB1 gene located at 13q14.1-14.2. In 5% of cases RB is the result function was found in one patient and only mild mental retardation of a constitutional chromosomal deletion involving 13q14. There have was revealed in the other. Neither patient met any DSM-IV criteria for been five families (15 patients; 10 patients from one family) reported in a pervasive developmental disorder such as autism. These results the literature where individuals with RB had 13q14 deletions resulting suggest that normal mental development can be achieved despite the from malsegregation of a familial insertional translocation involving deletion of VCX-A and the partial deletion of NLGN4, emphasizing 13q14 and various other chromosomes. the importance of environmental factors and suggesting the possible We report a 21 month old dysmorphic female with bilateral RB, contribution of modifying genes. congenital heart disease and developmental delay. The family history was positive for a maternal uncle who had RB and died at age two P0121. Cytogenetic profile on cataract patients in and arround years. Chromosome analysis of the proband revealed a 13q14 Coimbatore city deletion [46,XX,del(13)(q14.11q21.2)] due to the malsegregation of C. Praveen Rajneesh1, K. Sasikala2, B. Lakshman Kumar1, V. Balachandar1; a maternal insertional translocation [46,XX,ins(8;13)(q23.3;q14.1q2 1Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India, 2Bharathiar university, Coimbatore, India. 1.2)]. The child’s mother was 11 weeks pregnant at diagnosis. CVS An experiment was conducted on 50 Cataract patients with different revealed a fetus with the same 13q14 deletion as seen in the proband. morphological categories. Among the total cataract patients, only A literature review of previously described cases of familial insertional 7 patients exhibited chromosomal abnormalities, in that 3 of senile translocations with deletions of 13q14 and RB reported developmental cataract patients, 2 of Posterior sub capsular, 1 of Hyper mature and delay in all cases and dysmorphic features and/or congenital anomalies Anterior subcapsular. In the Senile cataract type 2 Female grouped in 13 of 15. Cytogenetic analysis is indicated in all cases of RB as 5% under group I and II and a male grouped under I exhibited 46 XX or have a chromosomal deletion or structural rearrangement. A karyotype XY, (5;10) (p 11;q23) of a translocation between chromosome 5 and is necessary for precise genetic and prenatal counseling. 10. The similar kind was detected in a female grouped under I with anterior subcapsular cataract. IN the hyper mature type a single male P0119. Somatic microsatellite mutations in spontaneous displayed 46 XY, t (4; 9) a translocation between chromosome 4 and 9. abortuses Two cases of male observed with a translocation of chromosome 5 and T. V. Nikitina, A. G. Tokareva, S. A. Nazarenko; 10 (46 XY, t (5; 10) (p11; q24) in posterior subcapsular cataract. All the Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. chromosomal abnormalities formed in patients were having O+ blood In the mutation rate analysis of 10 microsatellite tetranucleotide DNA group (except one experimental male A+ blood group). In the present repeats in 95 spontaneous abortuses with normal karyotype and 51 study showed that there is a close relationship between cataract and control group of medical abortuses, 4 embryos (4,2%) demonstrating group "O" being recognized.Clinical genetics 106 P0122. Interleukin-1β and its receptor antagonist gene fontanels. The grandmother additionally has got cutaneous syndactily polymorphism and the risk of respiratory distress syndrome in of the 4th and 5th toes, a feature often associated with this syndrome. neonates from Russia Meanwhile, a second child was born also showing mild signs of K. Danilko1, T. Victorova1, R. Bogdanova2, A. Fatyihova2, B. Viktorov2; SCS. The phenotypic variability in our family is in accordance to the 1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State literature underlining the necessity for a careful clinical examination of Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. the parents as diagnostic clue. Molecular analysis of the TWIST gene Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) develops in an infant within revealed a mutation (409 A>G) not previously described which leads the first few hours after birth and manifests as respiratory failure and to an amino acid exchange in position 137 (T137A). The mutation is deficient gas exchange. It is caused by a deficiency of pulmonary located in the functional bHLH-domain, a highly conserved sequence surfactant due to immaturity of the lung. There are a number of area, where a clustering of missense mutations associated with SCS is potential interactions between surfactant and cytokine effects on the observed. Therefore, it is very likely that the mutation leads to a loss of preterm lung. Cytokines may be regulators of surfactant metabolism in function of the protein and can be regarded as disease causing. the preterm infant. So genes that encode cytokines would be plausible candidate genes for RDS, such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) or receptors P0125. Prenatal diagnosis of femoral-facial syndrome antagonist interleukin-1 (IL-1RN). K. Haug, R. Stressig, R. Hammer, J. Bewermeyer, P. Kozlowski; Biallelic C/T polymorphisms at positions IL-1β -511 and IL-1β +3953 Praenatal-Medizin und Genetik, Duesseldorf, Germany. and 86-bp VNTR polymorphism in intron 2 of IL-1RN have been We describe a case of femoral-facial syndrome (FFS) detected described. These polymorphisms are located within the regulatory prenatally on second-trimester sonography. Fetal abnormalities shown regions of the genes and are of potential functional importance by by sonography included microgenia, bilateral hypoplastic femurs and modulating IL-1 protein production. bilateral talipes. The diagnosis was confirmed after birth. FFS is a rare Objective of this pilot study are to determine whether these sporadic syndrome with femoral hypoplasia and unusual facies. The polymorphisms is related to RDS. We determined genotypes and facial features include upslanting palpebral fissures, short nose with alleles frequencies of IL-1β and IL-1RN genes in infants with RDS broad tip, long philtrum, thin upper lip, microgenia, and cleft palate. The from Russia (n=76) and healthy control group of neonates (n=36) femora are mostly bilaterally affected and they are short with lateral using PCR. The obtained results showed, that the distribution of CT bowing. Upper limb involvement is possible. In one third of cases the genotype of IL-1β (C-511T polymorphism) among RDS group and mother has diabetes mellitus. Mental development in FFS is normal. control group was 51,6% versus 38,8% (χ2 =1,01, p=0,31, OR=1,68). Stature is short due to short legs. There are therapeutic options for The frequencies of other genotypes, alleles and gaplotypes in RDS microgenia and short femurs. If microgenia and short, bowed femora group were not differing from control group. are found on prenatal sonography FFS should be suspected. We concluded that polymorphic variants of IL-1β gene may play role in pathogenesis of RDS. There are no association between P0126. Osteocalcin Gene Hind III Polymorphism and bone C+3953T polymorphic variants of IL-1β and IL-1RN genes and RDS mineral density in children with insulin-dependent diabetes predisposition. mellitus. P. B. Glazkov, L. V. Tirtova, L. V. Erman, V. I. Larionova; P0123. Familial Cases of Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome (AIS) Medical Pediatrics Academy, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. M. Chipashvili, J. Kristesashvili; Insulin-dependent diabetic mellitus (IDDM) individuals are known Zhordania Institute of Human Reproduction, Tbilisi, Georgia. to develop disorders of bone metabolism resulting in osteopenia. 30 patients 16 and 27 years of age with the diagnosis androgen The osteocalcin gene (OG) allelic variant HH was found to be insensitivity syndrome (AIS) have been studied in the Zhordania overrepresented in women with osteopenia. The purpose of the present institute of Human Reproduction for 10 years. There were 3 familial study is to determine the relationship between the OG polymorphism AIS cases, where two sibs were affected with AIS. All patients and BMD in children with IDDM. have undergone chromosomal, clinical, ultrasound and hormonal 120 IDDM children (62 girls, 58 boys) were examined. The mean patient examination, pedigrees of families have been studied as well. In two was 12.1 ±3.7 years. Testing was done on all patients to determine the families both sibs have complete androgen insensitivity syndrome Hind III polymorphisms in the promotor region and serum levels of (CAIS) and in the third family one patient has CAIS and the other- intact osteocalcin, calcitonin, Ca2+, phosphate, parathyroid hormone, partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS). In all cases kariotype 25-OH-vitamin D levels, haemoglobin A(Ic), insulin measurement as was 46,XY. Phenotype includes, normally developed breast, scanty well as radiographs and forearm osteodensitometry. or absent pubic and axillary hair, blind ending vagina, normal male Using the data of BMC we selected the children in two groups levels of testosterone. In the history of patients inguinal hernias and (with and without osteopenia). The distribution in the group with existence of testes in the hernial sac was frequent in 16 patients (without) osteopenia was: HH 4.5% (6.7%), Hh 25.4% (33.3%) and (53,3%). In the third family intrafamilial genotypic and phenotypic hh 70.1% (60%). There were no significant differences between variation was observed. 21 years old one sib with CAIS had gonads OG polymorphism and BMD in those groups. However, when IDDM located in abdomen. 20 years old sib had PAIS, mild hirsitusm, one children were controlled for sex and BMD we found some statistical testicle located in pubic area and at the age of 13 with the diagnoses of significance (χ2 =4.5, P=0.1). abdominal hernia unilateral gonadectomy was made. This case shows, No significant correlation was found between plasma osteocalcin that in the same family there can be observed different types of AIS. levels and osteocalcin polymorphism. In summary, our preliminary study shows some relationship between P0124. Saethre-Chotzen Syndrome due to a novel TWIST the polymorphism of the osteocalcin gene, sex and BMD in children mutation: phenotypic variability in a three generation family with IDDM, further research on this issue is needed. U. Siebers-Renelt1, J. Kunz2, B. Behre1, I. Kennerknecht1, J. Horst1; 1Institut für Humangenetik, Muenster, Germany, 2Zentrum für Humangenetik, P0127. Familial complex 10p;12p rearrangement unravelled by Philipps University, Marburg, Germany. subtelomeric FISH analysis. We report on a German family in which Saethre-Chotzen syndrome A. Battaglia1,2, C. Chines1, A. Novelli3, C. Ceccarini3, L. Bernardini3; (SCS) was diagnosed after the birth of a girl with highly asymmetric 1Stella Maris Clinical Research Institute, Calambrone (Pisa), Italy, 2Dept. of frontal bone, very wide fontanels, hypertelorism, asymmetric orbits Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 3IRCCS-CSS and flat mid face. X-ray showed asymmetry of the skull basis and the Mendel Institute, Roma, Italy. orbits, an anterior fontanel reaching up to the root of the nose and Subtelomeric analysis has been performed in over 2,500 MR individuals, asymmetry of the mandibula. Neurosurgical correction was performed with a 6% yield. Therefore, it is indicated as a second tier test after at the age of 2 years. At present the girl is 5 years old and shows HRB in unexplained DD/MR-MCA. We describe a female patient and normal development. Retrospectively, SCS was also found in the father her maternal aunt, both showing an undiagnosed MCA/MR syndrome, and his mother who both have hypertelorism without a marked facial associated with the same subtelomeric rearrangement. Subtelomeric asymmetry. Both also report on a delayed closure of unusually wide analysis, performed respectively at age 2 9/12 and 28 years, showed, inClinical genetics 107 both, distal monosomy 10p and distal trisomy 12p as follows: 46,XX,ish testing. The overall frequency of chromosomal aberrations was 4,7%. der(10)t(10;12)(p15;p13.2)mat(496A11+,306F7-,137E24+). Parental Reciprocal translocation t(12,22) was found in normoasthenozoospermic subtelomeric analysis revealed the proband's mother and the maternal man (1,2%), and Klinefelter syndrome was determined in three patients grandmother to have a cryptic balanced 10:12 telomere translocation. (3,5%) with azoospermia. The frequency of Y chromosome microdeletions Both subjects had IUGR, DD/MR, no speech, hypotonia, lax ligaments. is within values reported by other authors. Proband (3 years) showed sparse, curly hair; frontal bossing; sparse eyebrows; blepharophimosis; bilateral ptosis/epicanthus; broad, P0130. The influence of three Endothelin-1 (ET-1) depressed nasal bridge; low-set, overfolded ears; micrognathia; sacral/ polymorphisms on the progression of IGA nephropathy ( IGAN ) coccigeal dimples; puffy hands/feet; long hallux; height at 10°, weight D. Maixnerova1, J. Reiterova1, M. Merta1, J. Stekrova2, S. Bloudickova3, O. 3°, OFC 2°-50°. Aunt (28 years) showed bilateral epicanthus; beaked Viklicky3, R. Rysava1; nose; short philtrum; thin upper lip; hypoplastic left helix; micrognathia; 1Clinic of Nephrology, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech high palate; crowded teeth; proximally implantated thumbs; concave Republic, 2Dept. of Biology and Genetics of General Teaching Hospital, Prague, nails; long hallux; toes/metatarsus valgism bilaterally; puffy feet; sacral Czech Republic, 3Institute of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, dimple; height/weight <3°, OFC <2°. Both show overlapping features Czech Republic. with Ohdo syndrome. The phenotypic differences among them appear Background:The clinical course of chronic renal diseases and their to be age-related. Such subtelomeric rearrangement has never been progression to end stage renal failure (ESRF)is highly variable.Different reported. 10p- has been described isolated (never as subtelomeric) candidate gene polymorphisms, affecting mainly the onset/development or as part of different rearrangements. Subtelomeric 12p+ has been of arterial hypertension, have been advocated as possible modulators reported twice, isolated or as part of a different rearrangement. Our of the progression. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) has been suggested to be a patients show features of partial 10p- rather than partial 12p+. Our major disease promoting factor in renal disease. We investigated a observation raises questions about the etiology of Ohdo syndrome. possible association of three single-nucleotide polymorphisms of ET- 1 K198N, T-1370G and 3A/4A with the progression of IGAN towards P0128. Molecular analysis of Stickler syndrome with great end stage renal disease, as well as the clinical and histological interfamilial heterogeneity. manifestations of IGAN. H. Frysira1, S. Psoni1, F. Psychou2, P. Paikos3, E. Kanavakis1; Methods:We examined a group of 173 patients (pts.) with histologically 1Medical Genetics University of Athens "Aghia Sophia" Child. Hospital, Athens, proven IGAN (99 pts. with normal renal function,74 pts. with ESRF), Greece, 2Rheumatologic Department, "Aghia Sophia" Child. Hospital, Athens, as a control group we used 200 genetically unrelated healthy subjects. Greece, 3Opthlmologic Department, "Aghia Sophia" Child. Hospital, Athens, DNA samples from collected blood were genotyped for three single- Greece. nucleotide polymorphisms of ET-1 K198N, T-1370G and 3A/4A by Stickler syndrome is an inherited connective tissue disorder with means of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with defined primers, ocular, facial and skeletal abnormalities. We report a case of a 4- electrophoresis on 2 % agarose gel and UV light visualisation. We year-old male. He presented with high myopia, which was first noticed compared the frequencies of different genotypes between the IGAN at the age of 12 months, a mild sensorineural hearing loss, midface groups with normal renal function and ESRF. hypoplasia and arthralgias. He had mild developmental delay. The Results: The ET-1 genotype distribution showed no differences family history revealed that: 1) the patient's mother had unilateral retinal among the groups of IGAN with normal renal function (1.K198N- detachment due to high myopia, 2) The other two patient's siblings had 64,6%KK,31,3%KN,4,0%NN;2.TT-69,1%TT,27,8%TG,3,1%GG;3.3A/ high myopia, 3) The mother's brother also had high myopia, arthritis 4A-45,6%3A/3A,45,6%3A/4A,8,9%4A/4A),IGAN with ESRF(1.K198N- and slight mental retardation 4) The patient's grandmother and great 64,9%KK,33,8%KN,1,4%NN;2.TT-76,1%TT,22,5%TG,1,4%GG,3.3A/ grandmother (from the mother's side) also suffered from the same 4A-51,6%3A/3A,35,5%3A/4A,12,9%4A/4A)and control high myopia. The patient's x-rays showed mild platyspondyly. The slit group(1. K198N-62,5%KK,34,5%KN,3%NN,2.TT- lamp biomicroscopy revealed primary membranous vitreous anomaly. 76%TT,22,5%TG,1,5%GG,3.3A/4A-51,5%3A/3A,45%3A/4A,3,5%4A/ The karyotype was normal (46, XY). All the clinical and laboratory 4A).The distribution of ET-1 genotypes did not differ among IGAN with tests showed that our patient had Stickler syndrome. To confirm the normal renal function, IGAN with ESRF and control group. diagnosis we proceeded to DNA molecular analysis by dHPLC (WAVE). Conclusion:We excluded the effect of K198N, T-1370G and 3A/4A A heterozygous C >T missense mutation c.1486C>T was identified in polymorphisms of ET-1 gene on the progression of IGAN to ESRF. exon 24 of the COL2A1 gene in all affected members of the family Supported by the grant project NK 7733-3, VZ MŠMT 00216 208 06 (p.Arg365Cys). Conclusions: Our study showed a high penetrance but great variability in the severity of the symptoms of the affeced P0131. SIX3 and ZIC2 mutations in a series of members of the family. The prompt detection of the mutation at an holoprosencephaly patients. early age is important for the continuous follow up in order to prevent J. Herbergs1, S. Spierts1, D. Tserpelis1, A. Van Haeringen2, M. Kerstjens3, G. any of the severe complications that may appear at a later age. It is Mancini4, M. Kwee5, J. Hoogeboom4, I. Stolte-Dijkstra3, H. Smeets1; also necessary for the correct genetic counseling of the family. 1Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Leiden Univer- sity Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Academic Hospital Groningen, P0129. Cytogenetic and chromosome Y microdeletion analysis Groningen, The Netherlands, 4Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Neth- of infertile men from North-Adriatic region of Croatia erlands, 5VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. A. Buretic-Tomljanovic1, I. Vlastelic2, S. Ostojic1, J. Vranekovic1, L. Randic2, Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a common severe malformation of M. Kapovic1, A. Radojcic Badovinac1; the brain that involves abnormal formation and septation of the 1Dept.of Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia, developing central nervous system. The prevalence is 1:250 during 2Dept.of Human Reproduction, Clinical Hospital Centre, Rijeka, Croatia. early embryogenesis, but the live born prevalence is only 1:16000. Microdeletions of the long arm of the chromosome Y and major The etiology of HPE is extremely heterogeneous and can include both chromosomal aberrations are common cause of male infertility. One a teratogenic and/or genetic basis. We studied four genes known to hundred and twenty four infertile and fourty control fertile men from be involved in HPE, namely SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF by sequence North-Adriatic part of Croatia were screened according to the Laboratory analysis. A series of in total 31 sporadic and familial HPE cases guidelines for molecular diagnosis of Y chromosome microdeletions. with a variable clinical spectrum has been analysed. We detected 7 Microdeletions were determined in two patients in the nonobstructive pathogenic mutations (23%), 5 out of 28 sporadic cases (18%) and azoospermia group (27 patients) making the frequency of 7,4%. In the 2 out of 3 familial cases (67%). Three mutations were detected in other investigated groups of patients: severe oligoasthenozoospermia the SIX3 gene and four mutations in the ZIC2 gene. A ZIC2 mutation (19), oligoasthenozoospermia (44) and normoasthenozoospermia (34) in a sporadic case appeared not to be a de novo mutation, but was or in the control group, no microdeletions of the long arm of chromosome also found in a healthy mother with no clinical features of the HPE Y were found. Microdeletion found in one patient was spanning AZFb spectrum. This was also seen in a carrier of the mutation in a familial and AZFc regions, while in the other one was restricted to AZFc region. case. In this study the genetic heterogeneity of the disease and the Cytogenetic analysis was made in 85 patients included in the microdeletion extremely variable phenotypes in HPE families have been confirmed.Clinical genetics 108 P0132. The molecular-genetic study of Marfan syndrome in First propositus exhibited severe after birth hypotonia, later on cardiac Russia. defect was evaluated. After the first year of age gain of weight and R. Valiev, R. Khusainova, I. Kutuev, E. Khusnutdinova; typical appereance of PWS was observed. Institute of biochemestry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. Cytogenetic investigation confirmed translocation 46,XX,t(8;15)(q Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an inherited autosomal dominant disorder 24.1;q21.2). The same translocation was found in the mother. FISH of connective tissue. Abnormalities appear mainly in skeletal, ocular analysis for PWS detection didn´t prove deletion of the critical region. and cardiovascular systems. The prevalence is approximately 10:100 Finally uniparental maternal disomy was confirmed. 000 and about 30 % of them are sporadic cases. The prevalence Second proband exhibits obesity, moderate mental retardation and of MFS in Republic of Bashkortostan is 2,5: 100 000. We suppose severe epilepsy . Short after the birth he failed to thrive and was that such low ratio is probably concerned with insufficient genetic investigated due to hypotonia. The PCR using STR polymorphisms counseling in remote areas: 83% of registered patients live in large at 15q11q13 showed normal pattern. Finally methylation studies cities. We also suppose that the prevalence of MFS depends on confirmed the diagnosis of PWS, defect of IC centre is suspected. ecological background. Because of known associations of MFS with Altough the majority of cases of PWS are sporadic, precise elucidation mutations in the FBN-1 gene we have carried out mutations screening of the causative genetic mechanism is essential either for the accurate of this gene by SSCP method with further direct sequencing. We diagnosis as well as for the precise genetic counselling. analyzed 30 exons of FBN-1 gene in 70 patients with MS from different Supported by GAUK, grant No 61/2004. regions of Russia (Republics of Bashkortostan, Kabardino-Balkaria, the North-Osetia-Alania, Sakha-Yakutia). SSCP analysis revealed P0135. Two novel TNNI3 mutations in restrictive cardiomyopathy different abnormal migrating patterns. We identified 2 missense R. Blok1, A. van den Wijngaard1, D. Merckx1, C. Marcelis2, E. Rubio1,3, R. de mutations (G1176Y in exon 28 and C2489Y in exon 60) which affect Coo4, C. de Die1, R. Jongbloed1, B. Smeets1; cbEGF-like motifs of fibrillin-1 protein in two patients with classical 1Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, MFS symptoms. We also revealed 5 mutations which don’t lead to 2Clinical Genetics, Radboud Hospital Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, amino acid substitutions (IVS15+10delA, 2952C>A in exon 24, 3Pediatrics, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4Child 3294C>T in exon 26, IVS61+17InsG, IVS65+13InsG). We identified Neurology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 4 reported polymorphisms (1875T>C in exon 15, IVS17-46A>G, Troponine I (TNNI3) is a sarcomeric protein expressed in the human IVS28+15delTTTTA, IVS62+8A>C). Polymorphism revealed in exon15 ventricular myocardium. The protein is essential for the coupling (1875T>C) has been found in 24 patients (30,4%). between the myosin heavy chain globulair head and actin during contraction of the cardiac fibers. Occasionally mutations in TNNI3 are P0133. Family case-report on the balanced translocation and the found in families with hypertrofic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Recently, monogenic syndrome combination also some mutations were reported in patients with restrictive N. V. Nikitina, M. G. Sumina, G. V. Pavlov, V. A. Sorokina; cardiomyopathy. Restrictive cardiomyopathy is a rare cardiomyopathic Medical Genetic Center, Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation. disorder characterized by impaired ventricular filling with reduced A 6-month-old girl was sent to the geneticist’s consultation on suspicion volume, ultimately leading to heart failure. Especially in young children of arthrogryposis. During the examination the narrow palpebral fissures, the prognosis is poor compared to adults where the clinical course is the elbow joint contractures attracted the doctor’s attention. The more variable. In this study we screened two exons of TNNI3 , known early motor milestones corresponded to the girl’s age. The patient’s to contain the majority of previously identified mutations, in 69 HCM karyotype revealed a balanced translocation: 46,XX,t(1;18)(p10;q10). families for mutations by DHPLC. In addition, the complete TNNI3 The family was invited for a thorough examination and the diagnosis gene was analyzed by direct sequence analysis in four families with specification. idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy. No mutations were identified The father’s phenotype includes blepharophimosis, ptosis of eyelids, in the HCM families. However, in two of the four unrelated probands inverted epicanth, arch-looking eyebrows, low-set prominent ears that with restrictive cardiomyopathy we found three mutations. In proband goes into autosomic dominant syndrome BPES,OMIM:110100, which 1 we found a novel splice site mutation (IVS7+2delT) and in proband gene is localized on the 3q23. The intellect has not become worse. 2 we found a known mutation (R145Q) together with a novel mutation Karyotype: 46,XY,t(1;18)(p10;q10). (Arg192Cys). In both families the probands were young girls (age 0.5 The elder sibling, a 12-years-old brother, has his father’s phenotypic and 9 years respectively). The disease manifestation is more severe in features, such as blepharophimosis, ptosis of eyelids, inverted proband 1, which might be explained by the difference in the underlying epicanth, arch-looking eyebrows, low-set prominent ears. The intellect genetic defect. These data indicate that TNNI3 should be analyzed is on the level. Karyotype: 46,XY. completely when restrictive cardiomyopathy is diagnosed especially The mother’s phenotype has not got any peculiarities. Karyotype: in young patients. 46,XY. To sum up, the father exposed the balanced translocation and the P0136. Familial stenosis of the pulmonary artery branches with a monogenic syndrome combination. The son inherited the monogenic JAG1 mutation syndrome BPES and the daughter -the balanced translocation. At the A. Medeira1, A. B. Sousa1, B. M. Kamath2, N. B. Spinner3, I. Cordeiro1; same time, one can suppose the daughter possesses the incomplete 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Divi- penetration of the BPES. The narrow palpebral fissures and joint sion of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, contractures are described in the phenotypic features of this syndrome Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Division of Human Genetics, The Children's according to the McKusic catalogue. Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. We present a case of familial isolated stenosis of the pulmonary P0134. Different genetic mechanisms resulting in Prader Willi artery branches, which was found to represent a mild form of Alagille syndrome - genetic counselling consequences Syndrome (AGS). M. Havlovicová1, M. Simandlova1, G. Calounová1, A. Krepelova1, D. Novotná1, AGS is an autosomal dominant disorder, characterised by intrahepatic E. Kocarek1, P. Tláskal2, P. Krsek3, S. Kolousková4, P. Goetz1; cholestasis, heart, ocular, vertebral defects and typical facial features. 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, University Hos- A mutation in the NOTCH ligand Jagged1 (JAG1) is found in most pital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Paediatric Clinic, 2nd Medical Faculty, patients. However, JAG1 mutations have been associated with a wide University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Child Neurology Clinic, spectrum of clinical manifestations, from clinically insignificant findings 2nd Medical Faculty, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Pae- to classical Alagille syndrome, with remarkable intrafamilial variation. diatric Clinic, 2nd Medical faculty, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech The proband, aged 11 months, was diagnosed with mild stenosis of Republic. the pulmonary artery branches. His mother had been diagnosed with Prader Willi syndrome (PWS) is a neurobehavioural disorder arising the same heart defect as a child. No striking dysmorphic features were through a number of genetic mechanisms. All involve loss of paternal noted. Karyotype was normal and FISH excluded 22q11 and 10p13 gene expression from chromosome 15q11q13. We present two PWS microdeletions. cases with different genetic etiology. Although the child had no peculiar facial features, he did have, as hisClinical genetics 109 mother, a prominent forehead and deep-set eyes. Ophthalmologic P0139. Cytogenetic, moleculargenetic findings and syndromes examination revealed abnormalities of the eye anterior chamber in in amenorrhoea etiology both. The mother also had minor vertebral findings. Both had normal E. Kurvinen1,2, T. Zõrjanova1, R. Zordania1, I. Vool1, Ü. Jakovlev3, T. Kahre4; liver function and abdominal sonography. This, together with reports 1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2National Institute for Public of JAG1 mutations in familial isolated congenital heart defects, Health, Tallinn, Estonia, 3East Tallinn Central Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 4Mo- prompted us to study JAG1. Molecular analysis revealed a deletion lecular Diagnostic Centre, United Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, in exon 9 (1126delG), which is predicted to cause a frameshift leading Estonia. to a prematurely truncated protein. The mutation was shown to be of Primary amenorrhoea (PA) and amenorrhea caused by premature maternal origin. ovarian failure (POF) are heterogeneous groups of menstrual disorders This family represents a case of mild AGS, illustrating the extreme where a genetic basis are suggested. variability of this syndrome, and underlining the importance of facial Purpose. To determine the role of genetic factors in patients with features in the evaluation of (familial) congenital heart disease. menstrual disturbances. Material and methods. Clinical and cytogenetical data of 56 PA P0137. Clinical and cytogenetic findings of 38 females with and 22 POF patients were studied in Genetic Service of Outpatient Turner syndrome in Estonia s Children Clinic in the past 10 years (1995-2004). Clinical data and R. Zordania1, T. Zõrjanova1, E. Kurvinen1, O. Bartsch2; standard karyotypes using G banding were available in all cases, in 1Tallinn` Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Institute for Human Genetics, some cases chromosomal study from skin fibroblasts was performed University of Mainz, Germany. for final diagnosis. In POF patients premutations in FMR1 gene were Background. Turner syndrome (TS) is a significant cause of growth detected. retardation and/or ovarian failure in females. Patients do not initiate Results. Normal female karyotype occurred in 71% (40/56) patients puberty or uterine development. Early cytogenetic diagnosis may with PA. The variable forms of Turner syndrome [45,X; 46,XX/45X; improve their quality of life and enables timely hormone treatment. 46,Xi(Xq)] were diagnosed in 13 cases. Two patients represents Objective was a survey of Estonian patients with TS. 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis. In 5 female Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster Methods. We analysed clinical and cytogenetic data of all females with anomaly and in one MURCS association were diagnosed. Among TS studied by geneticists at Tallinn Children's Hospital during 9 years POF patients normal female karyotype was detected in 68% (15/22) (1996-2004). In some cases, diagnostic work-ups included FISH and/ females. Turner syndrome (45,X; 46,XX/45,X) was estimated in two or chromosomal studies of skin fibroblasts. patients. X;autosome translocation 1/22, dicentric X-chromosome Results. We identified 38 females with TS representing three age 1/22 and Poland syndrome 1/22 were possible causes of secondary groups, (Group-1) 16 girls under 12 years, (Group-2) 11 subjects amenorrhoea. Two POF patients showed premutation in FMR1 gene. diagnosed from 12 to 17.9 years, and (Group-3) 11 adults diagnosed Conclusion. Our data confirmed the heterogeneous etiology of between 18 and 36 years. Group-1, 75% showed overt TS, 62% short amenorrhoea. The chromosomal abnormality value is quite high in stature under -2SD, 31% discrete anomalies, and 6% delayed puberty. both groups of amenorrhoeic patients. Karyotypes included 45,X (n=14) and mosaics (n=2). Group-2, short stature was present in 81%, overt TS in 36%, and delayed puberty in P0140. An unknown case report 36%. Karyotypes included 45,X (n=7), mosaics (n=3), and complex B. Azadeh; complements (n=1). Group-3, 100% presented amenorrhea, 45% short Welfare Organization, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. stature, 36% overt TS, and 9% discrete anomalies. Five patients had An unrelated couple were reffered to Medical - Genetic center of karyotypes of 45,X and six showed mosaicism or complex karyotypes. Isfahan welfare organization due to their son's problems. The man was The complex karyotypes will be presented in detail. 59 years old, and an uneducated worker. The woman was 45 years old Conclusion. TS was suspected based on growth retardation and/or the an uneducated housewife. phenotype in most cases. In 1/3 of the cases, a delayed diagnosis was This son is fifth child of his parents. He was delivered normally by made based on absent or irregular menorrhea. N.V.D and was good until 11 month's old. After that time some parts of his body grew more than other parts and became hypertrophic. P0138. Noonan syndrome - clinical evaluation and molecular According to evaluation from 11 month's old until several years the analysis in 11 portuguese cases diagnosis was made as local hypertrophy + Neurofibromatosis. But L. C. Ramos1, S. B. Sousa1, M. Venancio1, H. Gabriel2, I. Santos1, S. Beck2, M. now which he is 19 years old he hasn't any signs and symptoms of Jorge1, L. Simão1, P. Tavares2, J. M. Saraiva1; Neurofibromatosis or willm's tumor. He has asymmetric face, abnormal 1Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Centro de Genética Cli- curve in cervical and dorsal spine, high patchy hypertrophy in many nica, Porto, Portugal. parts of his body including some fingers, toes, face, and …. Because Noonan syndrome (NS, MIM#163950) is characterized by typical facial of unusual growing of his right knee, he was operated and his knee features, short stature and congenital heart defect. Its prevalence is was fixed .The report of pathology was proliferation on hyaline cartilage estimated 1/1000-2500 new-borns. Familial cases are generally which has resulted in hypertrophy of joint cartilage and possibly of autosomal dominant but neomutations are common. In 2001, the gene meniscus. There is no evidence of malignant change. Sonography PTPN11 encoding for the non-receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase of kidneys and Adrenals are normal. The reports of his radiographies SHP-2, was identified as being responsible for about 30-60% of the are: sever cervical and dorsolumbar scoliosis with congenital vertebral cases with SN. fusion in cervical spine + L 3/4 spondylolisthesis. RT knee ankylosing + In order to explore the genotype-phenotype correlation, direct sequencing Atrophy + osteopenia, RT femoral neck widening, T9 wedge vertebra. of the exons 3 and 8 of the PTPN11 gene as well as a careful clinical, His intelligent is good. He finished his high-school when he was 18 psychological and laboratorial evaluation was carried out in the Hospital years old. Pediátrico de Coimbra in 11 patients with NS (ten index cases and one So now what is your diagnosis? with NS/neurofibromatosis type 1 - NF1). Five additional patients with possible NS were also surveyed (two with NS/NF1). P0141. Phenotypic differencies in Williams-Beuren syndrome Mutations were found in 2 index cases. In the only familial case A. Puchmajerová1, M. Malíková1, V. Krutílková2, D. Novotná1, E. Kocárek1, A. evaluated (father and daughter), it was identified a mutation in the Krepelová1, P. Goetz1, M. Havlovicová1; exon 8 hotspot N308D (922 A>G). The second case presented a de 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, University Hos- novo mutation in the exon 3 (D61G; 182 A>G), previously described. pital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Center of Medical Genetics and Prenatal We confirmed the lower prevalence of cardiomyopathy in patients with Diagnosis Gennet s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic. PTPN11 mutations and its absence in the SN/NF1 cases. Both index Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder cases presented atrioventricular canal and chylotorax antecedents, not affecting several systems caused by a heterozygous deletion in the observed in other patients. The cohort studied had a high prevalence chromosomal region 7q11.23. A common interval that includes up to of mental retardation (8/9) as well as other features, likely to result 17 genes reported so far is deleted in the great majority of patients. from the referral to genetic units of only the most severe cases. Specific contribution most of deleted genes to the WBS phenotypeClinical genetics 110 remains unknown. WBS is transmitted in an autosomal dominant including Peters’ anomaly, corneal dystrophy, congenital cataracts and manner. Most of the cases arises de novo, but occasionally parent- dominantly inherited nystagmus, foveal hypoplasia, and a variety of to-child transmission is observed. Over 99% of individuals with the optic nerve malformations. There is no clear cut phenotype-genotype clinical diagnosis of WBS have this contiguous gene deletion, which correlation in ocular defects related to PAX6 mutations nevertheless can be detected using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). The nonsense mutations are predominantly associated with classical WBS phenotype is variable, and no single clinical feature is required to aniridia. establish the diagnosis. Herein we report a three generation family with dominantly inherited We investigated 13 patients with a clinical diagnosis of WBS or WBS- coloboma showing a nonsense PAX6 gene mutation, R203X. Within like features, aged 4 months - 24 years (average 5,5 years). Deletion the family the phenotypic spectrum of the typical coloboma and at 7q11 was found in all patients. ocular malformation is wide, illustrating an intrafamilial variability of All (100%) patients showed the typical dysmorphic signs, in most cases expression. (11 of 13 = 77%) had some degree of mental retardation (usually mild Previously the 15 recorded cases of this nonsense mutation have mental retardation). 11(77%) patients had cardiovascular malformation, been associated with the aniridia phenotype. Futhermore the typical 7(56%) had a specific heart anomaly (supravalvular aortic stenosis), coloboma phenotype caused by PAX6 gene mutations has only been 2(15%) none. Growth deficiency and mild microcephaly was observed reported three times, and in each case never showing a nonsense at 9(69%) patients. Hypercalcemia was observed at 4 (31%) patients. mutation. Our preliminary results are in accordance with the published data. To determine the extend of deletion molecular-genetics analysis using P0144. Prenatally Detected Extra Structurally Abnormal MLPA is in our Institute in progress. This analysis will enable us to Chromosome: a Dilemma for Genetic Counseling evaluate precise phenotype-genotype correlation. O. Reish, M. Mashevich; Supported by grant projects IGA NE 6912-4 and IGA NE 5685-3. Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, Israel. We describe a series of 3 cases with prenatally detected Extra P0142. Clinical and MRI features of patients with Shah- Structurally Abnormal Chromosome (ESAC). All were of spontaneous Waardenburg syndrome associated with SOX10 mutations: a conceptions. The first was singleton, the second and third were ones of case report and review of the literature twins, bichorionic biamniotic and monozygotic respectively. In two cases J. B. G. M. Verheij1, D. A. Sival2, J. H. van der Hoeven3, Y. J. Vos1, L. C. Mein- amniocentesis was performed due to advanced maternal age and the ers4, O. F. Brouwer3, A. J. van Essen1; ESAC was a co-incidental finding and in the third, amniocentesis was 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center, Groningen, The performed due to increased Nuchal Translucency in one twin. Utilizing Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center, Groningen, Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH), ESACs were shown to be The Netherlands, 3Department of Neurology, University Medical Center, Gron- bisatellited and were derived from chromosome 15 in cases 1 and ingen, The Netherlands, 4Department of Radiology, University Medical Center, 2, inv dup (15), and monosatellited that derived from chromosomes Groningen, The Netherlands. 14/22 in case 3. The ESAC was maternally transmitted in case 2 but Shah-Waardenburg syndrome is a rare congenital disorder with variable was de novo in cases 1 and 3. No mosaicism was detected in the first clinical expression, characterised by aganglionosis of the rectosigmoïd two cases but a level of 80% was demonstrated in the third. FISH to (Hirschsprung disease), and abnormal melanocyte migration, resulting the Prader Willi region in the 15-ESACs and Cat Eye Syndrome region in pigmentary abnormalities and sensorineural deafness (Waardenburg in the 14/22-ESAC showed no signal. In all cases uniparental disomy syndrome). Mutations in the EDN, EDNRB and SOX10 genes can be was excluded. Following an extensive genetic counseling, pregnancy found in patients with this syndrome. SOX10 mutations are specifically 1 was terminated while the other two pregnancies were continued. The associated with a more severe phenotype called PCWH: peripheral decision making process particularly of monozygotic twins with hetero demyelinating neuropathy, central dysmyelinating leukodystrophy, karyotypes is presented. Waardenburg syndrome, and Hirschsprung disease. Neuronal expression of SOX10 occurs in neural crest cells during early P0145. Two novel families with Borjeson syndrome ascribed to a embryonic development and in glial cells of the peripheral and central recurrent PHF6 gene mutation nervous systems during late embryonic development and in adults. J. Tinat1, F. Prieur1, A. Combes1, S. Chabrier1, M. Cordier2, R. L. Touraine1; The natural history of patients with SOX10 related Shah Waardenburg 1CHU-Hopital Nord, Saint Etienne, France, 2CHU- Hopital E Herriot, Lyon, syndrome or PCWH is still unknown. We present a 4-year-old girl France. with a de novo nonsense mutation (S384X) in SOX10. Main clinical A diagnosis of Borjeson syndrome was made in two families. The features were mental retardation, peripheral neuropathy, deafness, affected persons were 2 brothers in family 1, and 3 males (a young Hirschsprung disease, distal arthrogryposis, white hairlock, and growth boy and his 2 uncles) and a woman (half sister of the 2 uncles) in retardation. She presented with hypotonia, developmental delay, family 2. reduced peripheral nerve conduction velocities, and radiologically In both families, diagnosis was made on clinical grounds for the 3 assessed central hypomyelination. Subsequently formation of young boys. They had a similar presentation with intra uterine growth abnormal myelin within the central and peripheral nervous system was retardation and neonatal hypotonia. Developmental retardation became functionally and radiologically assessed. rapidly obvious, later with hyperactivity. They had feeding problems Children presenting with features of Waardenburg syndrome and with failure to thrive. Nevertheless, after the age of 3 they developed neurological dysfunction should be tested for mutations in the SOX10 obesity and hyperphagia. Facial gestalt suggested the diagnosis of gene to enable diagnosis and counselling. Borjeson syndrome : we considered that the shape of their mouth and their ears is particularly noteworthy. P0143. A three generation family with dominantly inherited 3 of the 4 conducting women were totally asymptomatic. X inactivation coloboma associated with a nonsense PAX6 mutation was 100% skewed in these 4 conducting women. B. Demeer1, M. Vincent2, Y. Alembik1, C. Speeg-Schatz1, J. Flament1, P. Cal- Other persons with mental retardation had been further identified in vas2, H. Dollfus1; these 2 families and will be studied. 1Centre de référence pour les maladies héréditaires ophtalmologiques, Service The coding exons of the PHF6 gene were screened by DHPLC and de Génétique Médicale et Service d’Ophtalmologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de the sequence of exon 10 revealed a nucleotide substitution conducting Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Service de Génétique Médicale et INSERM to the R342X nonsense mutation. This mutation has previously been U563, CHU Toulouse-Hôpital Purpan, France, Toulouse, France. described in 3 families, including the original family described by The PAX6 gene, a member of the paired box family, encodes a Borjeson. transcription factor. PAX6 is involved in eye morphogenesis and is We therefore confirm the recurrent nature of the R342X mutation of the expressed in the developing central nervous system and numerous PHF6 gene in our 2 independent families. ocular tissues during development. Autosomal dominant aniridia was Our observation further emphasize the possible expression in woman the first condition to be associated with PAX6 mutations. Since then in spite of a totally skewed X inactivation. PAX6 mutations have been detected in various ocular anomaliesClinical genetics 111 P0146. Three novel CDKL5 mutations in patients with a severe dysmorphism, dental anomalies, scoliosis and flexion contractures early onset seizure disorder and phenotypic overlap with Rett were previously described in few sporadic cases and no hereditary Syndrome. component has yet been reported. This family presenting AR-CFEOM J. C. Evans1, H. L. Archer1, J. P. Colley2, K. Ravn3, J. B. Neilsen4, A. M. Kerr5, associated with other system malformations and lack of linkage to J. Christodoulou6, J. Gecz7, L. Lazarou8, R. Butler8, J. R. Sampson1, S. D. ARIX region represents a new form of CFEOM phenotype (CFEOM4) Whatley9, A. J. Clarke1; 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Wales Gene Park, Cardiff, United P0148. Raine syndrome : report of a new case Kingdom, 3University Hospital Department of Genetics, Copenhagen, Denmark, C. Coubes1, N. Bigi1, C. Rouleau2, M. P. Legac1, G. Lefort1, P. Sarda1, P. Blan- 4John F Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 5Glasgow University Department chet1; of Psychological Medicine, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 6Western Sydney Genet- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Montpellier, ics Program, Sydney, Australia, 7Department of Genetic Medicine, Adelaide, France, 2Department of Histopathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Mont- Australia, 8Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 9Department pellier, France. of Medical Biochemistry, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Raine syndrome is a rare lethal osteosclerotic bone dysplasia, first Objective described in 1989. It associates generalized osteosclerosis and The CDKL5 gene has been implicated in infantile spasms in two craniofacial dysplasia. females with X;autosome translocations. Recently, we described We report a new case in an infant girl born to consanguineous further mutations in two families with a Rett Syndrome (RTT)-like Moroccan parents. phenotype. We aimed to determine the frequency of CDKL5 mutations Multiple fetal anomalies were detected on ultrasonography during in different subtypes of RTT. pregnancy : Methods microcephaly with craniostenosis and dysmorphic features including The coding region of CDKL5 was screened by DHPLC and/or direct midface hypoplasia, exophtalmos, hypoplastic nose, low-set ears. sequencing in 94 patients initially referred for MECP2 analysis :16 Intracranial calcifications and hydramnios were also present. males and 78 females, of whom 38 fulfilled the criteria for RTT and Fetal karyotype on amniotic fluid cultures was normal (46,XX). 33 had seizures in the first year of life. All were negative for MECP2 At birth, antenatal findings were confirmed and additional features mutations both by sequencing and quantitative analysis of exons 1, included cleft palate, hypertrophic gums, hirsutism and generalized 2, 3 or 4. osteosclerosis. The baby died shortly after birth of respiratory distress Results due to lung hypoplasia. We identified 3 novel, pathogenic mutations in CDKL5. Two of these Diagnosis of Raine syndrome is based on two major features : typical were splice site mutations, confirmed by further RNA studies. One was craniofacial dysplasia and generalized osteosclerosis. Prenatal a de novo missense change in a conserved region of CDKL5. Two diagnosis has not been reported for a first case but would be possible patients presented with an epileptic encephalopathy and one with RTT. when confronted with the association of intracranial calcifications and All had seizures in the first 3 months of life. The phenotype will be characteristic craniofacial features.To date only 13 cases have been discussed in the context of the other reported cases, and tentative reported in the literature. Autosomal recessive inheritance has been genotype-phenotype correlations made. suggested, but the underlying metabolic or molecular defects are not Conclusions yet know. This study reinforces the observation that the CDKL5 phenotype overlaps with RTT. CDKL5 mutations are relatively common in patients P0149. Wilkie Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental (OFCD) syndrome whose seizures begin before the age of 6 months (3/17 in this study). S. N. Whalen1, C. N. Vilain1, D. Bremond-Gignac2, I. Bailleul-Forrestier3, I. Pav- CDKL5 analysis is indicated in patients with features of RTT and a lov4, A. Verloes1; severe seizure disorder commencing in the first 3 months of life or 1Unité de génétique clinique. Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Dpt Oph- infantile spasms. In addition it may be of value in undiagnosed epileptic talmologie. Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Dpt Stomatologie. Hopital encephalopathy. Robert Debré, Paris, France, 4Dpt odontologie. Garancières Hotel Dieu. Inserm EMI 0110., Paris, France. P0147. A new autosomal recessive form of congenital Wilkie Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental (OFCD) syndrome is a rare extraocular muscular fibrosis with associated malformations MCA syndrome with congenital cataract, microphtalmia, secondary and exclusion analysis of ARIX gene glaucoma, ptosis, characteristic face, atrial/ventricular septal defect, F. Duzcan1, C. Yildirim2, N. L. Satiroglu Tufan1, C. N. Semerci1, H. Bagci1, A. N. cleft palate, dental and digital abnormalities. The facial dysmorphia Akarsu3; consists in a long and narrow face, broad nasal tip, wich appears bifid 1Medical Biology, Medical Faculty, Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey, 2Oph- and long philtrum. The dental abnormalities include hypo/oligodontia, thalmology, Medical Faculty, Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey, 3Gene Map- radiculomegaly, delayed tooth eruption and dental fusion. OFCD ping Lab., Pediatrics, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. is an X-linked dominant condition with presumed male lethality and Congenital extraocular muscle fibrosis (CFEOM, MIM 135700) is an probable skewed X inactivation in female carriers. It results from inherited strabismus characterized by restrictive ophthalmoplegia. To specific mutations in the BCOR gene, located on Xp11.4, wich is a key date, a total of three loci on chromosomes 12q12 (FEOM1) , 11q13 transcriptional regulator during early embryogenesis, particularly in the (FEOM2) and 16q24 (FEOM3) were reported. Mutations in KIF21A eye, skeleton and central nervous system. Mutations in BCOR are also (12q12) and ARIX (11q13) genes are responsible for both autosomal found in MAA2 (microphtalmia with asociated anomalies type 2), one dominant (AD) and recessive (AR) forms respectively. No gene has yet form of Lenz microphtalmia. been identified for 16q linked families demonstrating AD inheritance We report the case of a 14 year old girl, who presented with with reduced penetrance and variable expressivity. Here, we report bilateral congenital cataract, secondary glaucoma of the right eye, a nuclear pedigree with two affected and a normal sib born in a oligodontia, dental fusion and mild developemental delay. She had consanguineous parents. One affected member had restrictive exotropia a long face, characteristic nose shape, asymetric eye globes with with the globes frozen in abduction, and a normal levator function. right microphtalmia, a nasal speech. Her dental examination showed The other subject demonstrated unilateral ptosis with contralateral fused medial and lateral upper incisors, large interdental space, loss of ocular movements. Both patients had a short stature, unusual and agenesis of the medial lower incisors. The diagnosis of OFCD facies, contractures of extremities, camptodactyly, pes cavus, patellar syndrome has been proposed, despite the absence of heart defect hypoplasia, and scoliosis. Electroneuromyography (ENMG) revealed and mild developmental delay. The molecular analysis of BCOR is still normal neural motor and sensorial conduction velocities. This family underway at time of submission. tested for a linkage to AR-FEOM2 locus. The order of the markers with respect to ARIX gene are: D11S2006-(8.9Mb)-D11S4113-(1.66Mb)- D11S4139-(1.45Mb)-ARIX-(1.72Mb)-D11S4207/D11S2371-(6.29Mb)- D11S2002. Entire region was excluded by lack of homozygosity and no significant linkage. Systemic malformations such as craniofacialClinical genetics 112 P0150. A boy with facial dysmorphism, macrocephaly, and with idioventricular rhythm. The heart ultrasound showed an Atrial Dandy-Walker malformation due to familial unbalanced Septal Defect of type ostium secundum, together with atrio-ventricular traslocation der(18)t(11;18)(q23.3;p11.21)mat asynchrony. There were not associated other organ malformations. I. G. Balikova1, I. M. Bradinova1, E. G. Simeonov1, I. I. Kalev1, J. Fryns2, B. I. The block was not responsive to medical therapy and the patient Dimitrov2; died in the third day of life due to heart failure.Conclusion: This is an 1Department of Pediatrics, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Centre for Human Genetics, Univer- unusual form of presentation of a Trisomy 21 with a bad prognosis. sity Hospital Gasthuisberg, KU Leuven, Belgium. This etiology should be taken into account in the differential diagosis The proband is a 14-years old boy born after the fifth normal pregnancy of the fetal bradicardia. and delivery, born at term, in a family of young and unrelated Caucasian parents. Birth weight and length were 3300g and 52cm, respectively. P0153. The 22q13.3 microdeletion syndrome: description of a He was referred to the clinic at 1 year and 7 months of age because case with a particular phenotype of facial dysmorphism, cleft soft palate and developmental delay. M. G. D'Avanzo1, M. Biondi1, D. De Brasi1, A. R. Colucci1, C. Rosania1, S. He presented with macro-dolichocephaly, occipital encephalocele, Guarducci2; dysmorphic facies, high prominent forehead, hypertelorism, ptosis, 1Division of Medical Genetics S.G. Moscati Hospital, Avellino, Italy, 2Genetics protruding eyes, convergent strabism, prominent philtrum, down-turned Unit, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. mouth corners, high palate, dysplastic ears, generalised hypotonia, The first case of 22q13 deletion syndrome was identified by the hypoplastic genitalia with bilateral cryptorchidism, club feet and mental results of cytogenetic analysys in a family with pericentric inversion of retardation. CT scan revealed a Dandy-Walker malformation. During chromosome 22. Approximately 70 patients with this syndrome have his early childhood the diagnosis of Walker-Warburg syndrome was been reported and the clinical phenotype is now better delineated. considered even the absence of specific ocular abnormalities. We describe the case of a child, 8 years old, second daughter of Clinical evaluation at 14 years of age revealed a distinct phenotype non consanguineous parents, born at term from caesarean section consisting of macrocephaly, peculiar face, prominent dysplastic ears, performed in reason of macrosomic foetus. At birth a wide cheilogn triangular mouth, generalized hypotonia, hypoplastic genitalia and athopalatoschisis was diagnosed. After birth the newborn suffered cryptorchidism. Family history was positive for recurrent spontaneous from anoxia and hypoglycaemia. The proband was able to walk miscarriages and perinatal deaths with multiple congenital anomalies. autonomously at two years of life. At the moment she pronounces only G-banded high-resolution re-examination of the karyotype revealed senseless sounds. In infancy several feverish seizures happened and an unbalanced maternal translocation between chromosomes 11 and antiepileptic therapy (valproic acid) was started. Clinical examination 18 resulting in partial trisomy 11q23.3→qter and partial monosomy showed “Kabuki-like” phenotype with long palpebral fissures, sparse 18pter→p11.21. Additional molecular cytogenetic analysis was lateral eyebrows, convergent strabismus, hypertelorism, large ears performed to unravel the phenotype/genotype correlation in this with “cup-like” aspect, thick lips, occipital exostosis, long fingers and unique patient. toes, bilateral syndactylia between II-III toes, overgrowth, diffuse hypotonia and severe mental retardation. The proband previously P0151. Genotype-phenotype relationships in Noonan syndrome performed: standard karyotype (46 XX), diurnal and nocturnal video- I. van der Burgt1, M. Jongmans2, A. Rikken2, W. Nillesen2, R. Tamminga3, K. EEG polygraphic registration (absence of sleep physiological pattern); Noordam2, E. Sistermans2; cerebral MRI showed hypoplasia of corpus callosum and dysmorphic 1Academic Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2University Medical Centre, aspect of cerebellar vermis, amigdalas and IV ventriculus. Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3University Hospital, Groningen, The Netherlands. A cryptic 22q13.3 deletion was detected by FISH analysis, using the Noonan Syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder, VCFS/DGS FSH Kit (Oncor USA). characterized by short stature, typical face and congenital heart Conclusion: we are now planning a deletion study at molecular level, defects. In approximately 50% of cases the condition is caused by to determine the size of the 22q13 deletion, in our patient, using missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene on chromosome 12, resulting minisatellite, microsatellite and FISH analysis, and to get phenotype/ in a gain of function of the protein SHP-2. genothype correlation informations, comparing with the literature In this study PTPN11 mutation analysis was performed in 170 unrelated data. NS patients. In 76 (45%) of them a mutation was identified. In total 24 different heterozygous missense mutations were detected; 48.7% P0154. Singleton-Merten Syndrome: Evidence of autosomal were located in the N-SH2 domain, 48.7% in the PTP domain, and dominant inheritance in the first European family 2.6% within the C-SH2 domain. The 922A->G change was most often F. Rutsch1, H. G. Kehl1, N. Ruf2, J. Vogt1, J. Kleinheinz3, F. Rauch4, L. C. Hof- detected (21%). The benefit of the NS scoring system developed by bauer5, H. Rehder6, M. Arslan-Kirchner7, P. Nuernberg8; van der Burgt et al. [1994] is shown: among physicians who based their 1University Children's Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 2Max Delbrueck Center diagnosis on this NS scoring system the percentage mutation positive for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany, 3Department of Craniomaxil- subjects was 54%, whereas this percentage was only 39% among the lofacial Surgery, Muenster University Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 4Shriners others. Of the 56 well documented mutation-positive NS patients, 38 Hospital for Children, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 5Department of Internal Medicine, patients (68%) had a valvular pulmonary stenosis, 4 patients (7%) had Marburg University Hospital, Marburg, Germany, 6Institute of Clinical Genetics, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, and 14 patients (25%) had Marburg University Hospital, Marburg, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, no heart defect. Two patients with classical NS and some uncommon University of Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 8Cologne Center for Genomics, manifestations had a mutation in the C-SH2 domain. A trend was Cologne, Germany. observed in patients carrying the 922A→G change (Asn308Asp) In 1973, Singleton and Merten described two unrelated females with receiving normal education. dental dysplasia, aortic valve calcification, glaucoma and widened In one patient with NS and mild juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia medullary cavities of the phalanges. Up to now, only 2 consecutive (JMML) the mutation 218C→T (Thr73Ile) was found. This confirms case reports have been published, including one Canadian family with previous findings indicating that individuals with NS with specific multiple affected family members of both sexes. mutations in PTPN11 are at risk of developing JMML. A 28 year old German woman and her 23 year old brother presented with juvenile glaucoma, calcifying aortic valve stenosis, dental dysplasia P0152. Trisomy 21 presenting as fetal heart rhythm anomalies with poor root development, acro-osteolysis of the hands and feet, A. I. Toma1, D. F. Albu2, E. M. Severin2, C. C. Albu2, M. Dumitrescu2; widened medullary cavities of the metacarpals and phalanges and 1"Panait Sarbu" Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 2"Carol Davila" Medicine Univer- focally decreased bone density. In the female, the aortic and mitral sity, Bucharest, Romania. valve had to be replaced because of extensive calcifications at the Objective: To describe the clinical case of a neonate with Trisomy 21 age of 14 and 28 years, respectively. Both siblings had no pathogenic associated with heart rhythm anomalies.Case Presentation: A male mutation in ENPP1, a gene recently linked to generalized infantile newborn was delivered at 36 weeks gestational age by emergency arterial calcification. Serum levels of receptor activator of NF-κB and cesarean section for fetal bradicardia. The clinical examination of the osteoprotegerin (which, when deleted in mice, are associated with newborn noticed a Down fenotype and bradicardia (40/minute). The osteoporosis and vascular calcification) were normal. In the male electrocardiogram showed an aspect of total atrioventricular block proband, FBN1 sequencing analysis did not reveal a pathogenicClinical genetics 113 mutation. Family history revealed vertical transmission of the P0157. Fragile X FMR1 triplet repeat detection by PCR phenotype from the father, who lost his secondary dentition before the F. Q. Wang, M. L. Short, J. Cao, M. L. McCarthy, R. K. Saiki, Y. Li, K. M. Tacey, age of 18 and developed intracardiac calcifications at the age of 39 A. Grupe, M. A. Zoccoli; years. This study presents the first European family with Singleton- Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA, United States. Merten Syndrome and confirms autosomal dominant inheritance with Fragile X syndrome is the most common cause of inherited mental variable expression. The finding of focal osteoporosis, dental dysplasia retardation. The causative mutation in 99% of cases is full expansion and cardiovascular calcifications could point to an inborn defect of an of the CGG repeat in the 5' untranslated region of FMR1 (fragile X extracellular matrix protein regulating bone resorption and soft tissue mental retardation), which is located on the X chromosome. Full calcification. mutation is associated with hypermethylation and absence of gene product, FMRP (fragile X mental retardation protein). Genetic testing P0155. Coffin-Siris syndrome - a case with macrocephaly and for fragile X syndrome consists of identifying the CGG repeat length: anus displacement normal size, 5-44 repeats; intermediates-grey zone, 45-54 repeats; A. Jezela-Stanek1, E. Marszal2, E. Jamroz2, E. Gluszkiewicz2; pre-mutation, 55-230 repeats; full mutation, greater than 230 repeats. 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Carrier females and newborns with larger than normal repeats are Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Child Neurology, Silesian Medical University, difficult to detect with PCR due to disproportionate amplification Katowice, Poland. of repeat sizes. Celera Diagnostics has developed research PCR Aim: to present a new case of Coffin-Siris syndrome, a rare genetic reagents capable of amplifying more than 680 repeats. An ABI disorder, characterized by the typical facial phenotype with absent/ Prism® 3100 Genetic Analyzer research protocol was developed that hypoplastic nail and terminal phalanx of the fifth finger. The mode of accurately sizes normal repeats within one repeat and pre-mutation inheritance is thought to be autosomal recessive, although majority of repeats within three repeats. Inclusion of a sex-linked gene that co- affected individuals are female (85%). amplifies in a multiplex with the triplet repeat allows gender and X Case report: a female infant, the first child of healthy parents, born after chromosome number determination. Homozygote normal females vaginal delivery. At birth body weight, lengh and head circumference with repeats of identical size can be identified and carrier females with was normal but lumbosacral hypertrichosis, umbilical hernia and anus large repeat size differences can be flagged for reflex testing. The AB displacement were noted. Her psychomotor development was delayed 3100 research protocol can detect up to 117 repeats while keeping and accompanied by hypotonia, feeding difficulties and reccurent small repeats on scale and maintaining normal allele copy number upper respiratory tract infections. Physical examination at the age of determination. We have developed an efficient and robust PCR 4 showed: macrocephaly with sparse scalp hair, flat nasal bridge with method for rapid and accurate detection of normal and pre-mutation wide nasal tip, upturned nostrils and wide mouth. Moreover hypoplastic CGG repeats in the FMR1 gene. fifth digit nails and toenails were noted. She had expressive language delayed and was very irritable. X-ray of the hands shows absence of P0158. Molecular and cytogenetic analysis in IVF failure cases terminal phalanx of the fifth fingers. No other abnormalities on MRI R. Dada1, R. Kumar1, R. Sharma2, K. Kucheria1; of the brain and internal organs were noted. Metabolic testing for 1All India Institute of Medical Sciences, N Delhi, India, 2Army Reseach and mucopolysaccharides excretion was within normal range. Referral Hospital, N Delhi, India. Disscusion: The clinical features show typical stigmata of Cofin-Siris Chromosomal abnormalities in infertile couples results in spermatogenic syndrome with: “coarse face”, absence of the distal phalanx of the fifth arrest, premature ovarian failure, implantation failure and consequently finger and developmental delay. The presence of macrocephaly and failure of InVitro fertilization (IVF). Thirty eight infertile couples with IVF anteriorly placed anus has not been described previously. Thus, this failure having poor blastocyst development and implantation were new clinical features further expanded the symptomatology of Coffin- analysed cytogenetically and for molecular analysis of AZF loci in the Siris syndrome. men. Two females with recurrent IVF failure showed partial deletion of long P0156. Prader -Willi syndrome - 5 years diagnostic experiences arm of one of the X chromosomes and the other female had 10% in prepubertal children in Slovakia. cell line showing deletion of pericenteromeric region of long arm of D. Durovcikova1, J. Kršiaková2, F. Cisarik3, I. Cernakova1, D. Zmajkovicova1, K. chromosome number 1. The male partners in these cases were Fiedlerova1, D. Brejova1, P. Capkova4; cytogenetically normal and had no microdeletion in the AZF loci. 1Slovak Medical University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Dept. Med. Genetics, Faculty Of these couples microdeletion analysis of 30 cytogenetically normal Hospital, Martin, Slovakia, 3Dept. of Med Genetics, Zilina, Slovakia, 43. Institut infertile men, only two cases showed deletion; one with AZFc loci (STS of Medical Genetics and Fetal Medicine, Faculty Hospital, Olomouc, Czech deleted sY 254,sY255) and the other case had deletion of AZFb loci Republic. (STS deleted sY127,sY134). Prader-Willi syndrome ( PWS ) is one of the most common recognized The couple where female partener had deletion of long arm of X genetic forms of obesity due to loss of paternal genes located in the chromosome(Xq-) resulted in repeated failure of blastocyt development, 15q11-13 region which spans a large cluster of imprinted genes. The in 4 IVF cycles. The case with AZFb microdeletion had maturation disorders are caused by four genetic defects ( microdeletion, single arrest and case with AZFc deletion had hypospermatogenesis. In these gene mutation, uniparental disomy, imprinting defects ) and for their cases sperms could be retrieved from the testis, to be used for IVF or detection different laboratory methods are required. In this study Intracytoplasmic sperm injection. (ICSI).Thus AZF analysis determines we summarise clinical data on 13 Slovak PWS patients which were the prognosis and management of these cases. In cases with sex laboratory confirmed in prepubertal age during the last 5 years. This chromosomal and autosomal aberrations there is probability of poor group includes 10 boys and 3 girls with a mean age of 6.5 years. embryo development and consequently poor implantation , which may New PWS cases have been recently diagnosed in the first year of be a result of high segregation abnormalities and may negatively affect life, including one newborn. The PWS score in our patients ranged the outcome of assisted reproductive techniques. from 5 to 10 points. Except for 3 children, microdeletion was detected by use of FISH methods. DNA analysis with a specific methylation P0159. Prevalence of hereditary pathology in infants with probe confirmed presence of only the maternal methylation pattern in congenital malformations in Moldova 2 cases and uniparental maternal disomy was observed in one case. E. A. Grigori; Managment of PWS patients including growth hormone substitution National Centre of Health Reproductive, Medical Genetic &Family Planning, may have a positive effect on the health, functional abilities and longevity Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. of affected individuals (Einholzer et al., 1998; Cassidy, 2001). This The present study deals with the data of medical genetic investigation depends onearly diagnosis of PWS confirmed by laboratory tests. Our of 2594 infants with congenital malformations (CM) born inthe period results during the last five years reflect good coordination of continuing 1990-2000 ascertained by population-based monitoring CM in genetic education and close cooperation with endocrinologists and newborns in Moldova. other medical specialists. The most frequent were MC multifactorial inheritance - 45.2% cases and included most isolated MC involving the heart - 19.8% cases,Clinical genetics 114 musculoskeletal system - 26.1% cases, central nervous system - X-linked dominant syndrome, its not severe expression in phenotype 10.9% cases. Autosomal recessive pathology was in 5.1%, included and loss of X chromosome in the part of cells. Until this case we have 34 nosological forms with 133 infants. Parents were consanguinous met only one description of combination in female of sex-chromosome in 11.3%. Autosomal dominant pathology was seen in 6.4%, included anomaly (47,XXX) with oral-facial-digital syndrome. 32 nosological forms with 165 patients. 83.6% of cases were sporadic, determined by mutation de novo. X -linked diseases included 9 P0162. A two months old girl with the new autosomal recessive syndromes and constituted 0.5% X-linked recessive pathology and syndrome with Zellweger-like manifestations 0.2% X-linked dominant pathology in common structure. Associations R. S. -. Tincheva1,2; were seen in 2.2% and comprised 11 nosological forms (54 infants). 1University Pediatric Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Chromosomal abnormalities were found in 11.2%. Major chromosomal Sofia, Bulgaria. abnormalities were Down syndrome - 84.6% cases, Patau syndrome Zellweger syndrome is an autosomal-recessive disorder associated - 0.7%, Edvards syndrome - 0.5%, Turner syndrome - 3.1%, Klinefelter with peroxisomal absence and characteristic phenotypic features: syndrome - 0.3%, structural aberrations - 8.1%, disorders of sexual high forehead, broad nasal bridge, epicanthal folds, upslanting differentiation and development - 2.7% cases. CM of teratogenic palpebral fissures and micrognathia, combined with severe hypotonia, aetiology were established in 5.8%. The most frequent was fetal hepatomegaly, renal cysts and developmental delay. This phenotype is alcohol syndrome - 39.1%, infection embryofetopathies - 37.8%. The characterized with elevation of very long chain fatty acids. non-classified complex of multiple MC consisted of 23.4% cases. We present a two months old girl with phenotypic features that are typically seen in Zellweger syndrome: high forehead, broad nasal P0160. Microdeletion 2q31- redefining the correlated clinical bridge, epicanthal fold, upslanting palpebral fissures, and micrognathia. phenotype In addition to the physical anomalies she has also severe psychomotor B. I. Dimitrov1, I. G. Balikova2, E. G. Simeonov2, J. Fryns1, P. Debeer1; retardation , hypotonia and multifocal seizures. The hepar and rens 1Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Pediatrics, are with normal size and structure, very long chain fatty acids and Medical University of Sofia, Bulgaria. plasma acids level were normal. The child is born from healthy non Several patients with an interstitial deletion of chromosome 2q have consanguineous parents who have an older healthy son. been described till now. The clinical phenotype consists of a variety Ahn and al.(2003)described two sibs born to Ashkenazi Jewish of digital anomalies of hands and feet, including a wide cleft between consanguineous parents with similar dysmorphic feature and normal the first and second toes, variable toe syndactyly, wide halluces and VLCFA. They found respiratory chain abnormalities in muscle biopsy a spectrum of finger abnormalities, ranging from monodactylous and suggest that this is a new autosomal recessive syndrome that limbs, through brachydactyly type E and D to camptodactyly. In could be due to a nuclear-encoded mitochondrial defect. addition there are different internal organ anomalies affecting the CNS, heart and uro-genital system. Hemizygousity for the HOXD13 P0163. Is there genetic heterogeneity in Classical Hemimelia? and EVX2 genes have been proposed to be responsible for the An ongoing study in a large UAE national family. clinical spectrum. Recently, based on the phenotype in patients with M. Naveed, M. T. AlAli; overlapping interstitial deletions of the 2q31 region, a new locus Center For Arab Genomic Studies (CAGS), Dubai, United Arab Emirates. responsible for cleft foot-hand syndrome has been mapped proximally The Arab population provides unique opportunities to identify and to the HOXD cluster between EVX2 and marker D2S294. A 4-year-old understand the genetics and biology of human traits and their boy born to healthy, unrelated parents, presenting with microcephaly, variation. We have come across a very rare form of skeletal dysplasia complex CNS anomaly, hypotonia, cleft palate, camptodactyly, 4-5 in a multiple generation UAE national family, which is closely akin to toe syndactyly, short stature and mental retardation was referred for a partially defined genetic disorder known as Tibial Hemimelia (THM). diagnostic evaluation. Karyotyping revealed an intersticial deletion 2q At present, even the gene for the classical form of Tibial Hemimelia (23.4-3.1). Combining the deletion data in this patient with the small (MIM 275220) is not defined. In this UAE national family, an initial deletions within HOXD13 in other patients and the literature review, we analysis of six generations has identified 13 affected persons (both reinforce the hypothesis that the variable phenotype in patients with an sexes) with a spectrum of skeletal anomalies. Of these, at least 10 intersticial deletion of chromosome 2q31 is a result of hemizygousity are transmitted through a single parent. The ongoing study of some of for HOXD gene. the members of this family has revealed variable expression, skipped generations, incomplete penetrance, unilateral tibial hemimelia, P0161. The case of combination of chromosomal anomaly with bilateral tibial hemimelia, foot deformities, post-axial polydactyly oral-facial-digital syndrome, type 1 (incomplete), syndactyly, oligodactyly and facial dysmorphism. One M. Sumina, N. Nikitina; of the main skeletal abnormalities is Tibial Hemimelia. We will be Medical Genetic Center, Ekatherinburg, Russian Federation. analyzing whether this family represents a clinical heterogeneous form We observed a female with combination of chromosomal anomaly of previously defined Tibial Hemimelia or a new entity. The ongoing (mosaic form of Turner′s syndrome) and monogenic syndrome (oral- studies we are pursuing in this family include FISH studies for 8q and facial-digital syndrome type 1). Chromosomal anomaly was revealed 10q regions and a genome wide scanning for the candidate gene using primary. The cause of cytogenetic study was three miscarriages in her micro satellite markers and SNPs. Identification of the candidate gene anamnesis. Moreover she had several slightly expressed phenotypic in this family will be very helpful for carrier detection, prenatal and post- features such as short stature, hypertelorism of eyes, brachydactyly natal diagnosis. and camptodactyly, polycystic kidneys (without any clinic symptoms). Karyotype was mosaic: 45,X/46,XX; 45,X met in 15% of cells. So P0164. The Spanish Overgrowth Syndrome Registry phenotype was explained by this chromosomal abnormality. During I. Incera, L. Magano, P. Arias, L. Fernández, M. Palomares, A. Delicado, M. L. the next pregnancy the fetus′s karyotype was defined and it was de Torres, M. A. Mori, I. López Pajares, R. Gracia, P. Lapunzina; normal (46,XX). The patient completed a full-term pregnancy without Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. complication. The newborn girl had multiple congenital abnormalities: The Spanish Overgrowth Syndrome Registry (SOGSR) has been midline cleft of upper lip, clefts of maxillary alveolar ridge, multiple established in 2003 aimed to record patients with Overgrowth hyperplastic oral frenulae, lobulated and bifid tongue, prominent Syndromes (OGS). It is located at the Hospital Universitario La Paz, milia on the face, sparse hair, brachydactyly and clinodactyly, partial in Madrid, Spain sindactyly. The child′s phenotype absolutely corresponded to oral- All patients with OGS are included in a database. Most of these facial-digital syndrome, 1 type. The following thorough examination patients have laboratory tests for syndromes and in the majority of of the mother revealed very small bifid of the tongue and multiple them biological samples (DNA; slides, tissues) have been stored. In oral frenulae. So the woman demonstrated partial expression of the addition, a clinical picture/s is also requested to document the files. syndrome and some main features of it were not noticed, especially Written permission for both clinical photographs and biological samples after revealing of chromosomal anomaly, which seemed to be the only are obtained. cause of her phenotype. It is unknown if there is connection between The aims of the registry are: -to include all patient with any OGS in aClinical genetics 115 National database, -to compare frequencies of OGS; -to describe rates in male patients. Osteopenia and/or osteoporosis were detected in of incidence and prevalence; -to monitorise the outcome of associated 84% (26/31) of our patients, even in the absence of renal insufficiency. malformations; -to develop guidelines and algorithms for clinical and We advise to perform bone densitometry in all FD patients to assess cancer follow-up; -to known the frequency and outcome of mental their risk of pathologic fractures. With emerging enzyme replacement retardation in the OGS; -to collaborate in the clinical, cytogenetic and therapies for FD and the hope of increased life expectancy, reduced molecular diagnosis of this syndromes; -to coordinate the molecular bone mineral density may become an important symptom to consider. tests of each OGS performed in Spain and to create a site and a Number of discussion forum for both physicians and patients or parents. WHO BMD Class patients (%) The addresses are : www.overgrowthsyndrome.org and www.sindrom edesobrecrecimiento.org Normal 5 (16%) The Registry is organized in 4 main items. 1- management of the Osteopenia at 1 site, normal value at Registry, 2- ILaboratory and the handling of the biological samples, 10 (33%) other site 3- Genetic Counselling and Prenatal Diagnosis, and 4- Projects and Osteopenia both sites 6 (19%) Research By January 2005, 196 patients have been included in the Registry, most Osteoporosis at 1 site, normal value at 1 (3%) of them with Beckwith-Wiedemann, Sotos, Simpson Goalbi Behmel, other site Macrocephaly -cutis marmorata, Costello syndrome and others. Osteoporosis at 1 site, osteopenia at 8 (26%) other site P0165. MOMO syndrome or new syndrome: description of a case D. De Brasi, M. Biondi, C. Rosania, A. R. Colucci, M. G. D'Avanzo; Osteoporosis both sites 1 (3%) Division of Medical Genetics "S.G. Moscati" Hospital, Avellino, Italy. Severe osteoporosis 0 Obesity in genetic syndromes is a very common finding, but often it’s a part of complex clnical picture and remain undiagnosed. P0167. An atypical swelling of the forearm We describe the case of a child, second daughter of non A. M. A. Lachmeijer1, P. H. Holwerda2, M. M. Weiss3, J. F. van der Blij4, J. M. consanguineous parents, with severe obesity, diffuse hypotonia and van Hagen1; serious psychomotor retardation. She began to sit alone only after 12 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics and Human Genetics, VU University Medical Centre, months and at 5 years she spoke only few words. Since the second Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Dept. of Pathology, Medical Centre Alkmaar, year of life an increasing appetite and consequent weight gain were Alkmaar, The Netherlands, 3Clinical Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Centre observed. She suffers of recurrent asthmatic bronchitis. At age 7 years for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, she was admitted to our observation. The girl has coarse round face, The Netherlands, 4Dept. of Pediatrics, Medical Centre Alkmaar, Alkmaar, The hypertelorism, bilateral epicanthal folds, large open mouth, lowset ears, Netherlands. short neck, adipomastia, tapering fingers, genua valga and bowing Here we report on a 3 years old Tunesian girl, born from consanguineous tibiae, striae distensae at the roots of lower limbs. Anthropometric data: parents, who was referred to the pediatrician because of a congenital height 122cm (+0.58 SDS); family target height 162,5cm (+0.05 SDS). swelling of her right forearm just below the elbow joint. A biopsy of the OFC 54 cm (+2.1 SDS). Weight 69.6 kg (>> 99° centile). BMI 46,7 swelling was taken and histopathologic examination revealed that the (+24.1 SDS); waist circumference 94 cm; WHR 0.81; Tanner stage lesion matched the criteria for a Gardner-associated fibroma (GAF) Ph1, B1. Bone age was slightly advanced. which can be a feature of Gardner syndrome (GS). Serum calcium, phosphorus, PTH, calcitonin were in the normal range. Gardner syndrome (MIM#175100) is characterized by intestinal Metabolic screening was normal. Karyotype: 46,XX. Molecular studies polyposis and various bone and soft-tissue lesions, including e.g. for Prader-Willi, Angelman syndrome and matUPD14 were carried out osteomas, fibromas, and desmoid fibromas. It is considered a variant with normal results. Fundus Oculi: light pale optic discs, with shading of familial adenomatous polyposis coli (FAP). GS patients inevitably edges. Neuropsychiatric evaluation showed severe mental retardation. develop intestinal carcinoma at a much younger age than those EEG and cerebral MRI were normal. with sporadic intestinal carcinoma. Typically, the soft-tissue lesions We propose the diagnosis of MOMO syndrome (Macrosomia- occur before the development of intestinal polyps. GS is caused by Obesity-Macrocephaly-Ocular abnormalities), even if no major ocular truncating mutations in a portion of the APC-gene on chromosome defects (i.e. coloboma, glaucoma) have been found in the proposita. 5q22-23 (codons 1403 and 1578) that differs from classic FAP (codons Alternatively a new syndrome could be suggested. 169-1600). In our proband a heterozygous truncating mutation in codon 1465 P0166. Decreased mineral bone density: Previously (exon 15); 4393_4394delAG (Ser1465fs) was found. DNA analysis in unrecognized feature of Fabry disease her parents and paternal half-sister did not show the mutation. K. Benistan1, C. Mutschler2, J. Pouchot3, D. P. Germain1; Accurate histologic identification of a GAF, even in an unusual place 1Department of Genetics, HEGP., Paris, France, 2Department of Radiology, like our proband's forearm, represents a sentinal event for the detection HEGP., Paris, France, 3Department of Internal Medicine, HEGP., Paris, France. of unsuspected GS. It allows for early and close monitoring of GS Background: Fabry disease (FD, OMIM 301500) is an X-linked symptoms and for possible preventive interventions. inborn error of metabolism due to the deficient activity of alpha- galactosidase, a lysosomal enzyme. While the progressive deposition P0168. Diastrophic dysplasia - early detection of a new case of glycosphingolipids throughout the body is known to have protean A. Sireteanu, M. Volosciuc, C. Rusu, V. Gorduza, M. Georgescu, E. Braha, M. clinical manifestations, no data is available regarding the skeletal Covic; involvement. Sf. Maria Hospital, Iasi, Romania. Methods: We prospectively investigated bone involvement in 31 Diastrophic dysplasia (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome) is a very rare consecutive hemizygous males with a mean age of 32 years (median 28 form of chondrodysplasia, recessively inherited, characterized by years, range 16-61 years) affected with classic FD. Bone densitometry prenatal dwarfism, limb shortening, abnormal ears, progressive joint of the lumbar spine and femoral neck was assessed in all patients, deformities and contractures, typical hand defect (“hitchhiker thumb”), using dual energy X-ray absorptiometry. progressive spinal curvature and clubfeet. We present a new case in Results: Bone densitometry examination revealed a statistically order to illustrate this rare entity and to discuss the diagnosis and the significant decrease in bone mineral density. Using the World Health management. Our proband is a one-month-old male infant, the third Organisation (WHO) classification of bone mineral density (BMD) child of a young, unrelated, apparently normal couple. The pregnancy abnormalities, the following results (N=31) were obtained at testing was uneventful and no fetal ultrasound scan was done. He was born lumbar spine and femoral neck (Table). at 32 weeks gestation (Wt 1650 g, Ht 40 cm, HC 31 cm, Apgar score Twenty-four patients had normal kidney function. 6). A suspicion of diastrophic dysplasia was established after birth. The Discussion : This is the first study demonstrating that FD is associated infant was reexamined one month later, when physical examination to an increased risk of developing bone mineral density abnormalities revealed: short limbed dwarfism, dismorphic face (mild exophthalmia,Clinical genetics 116 cleft soft palate, microretrognathia and low-set, thickened ears), Conclusion : This study shows the high proportion of false-positive short neck, thumbs and halluxes in abducted position bilaterally. regarding ammonia measurement in pediatric population. Fortunately, Radiological examination showed typical aspects. We have established the clinical impact seems to be limited but not negligible, especially for the diagnosis of diastrophic dysplasia based on the characteristic patients with inborn errors of metabolism. Capillary sample should be association of short limbed dwarfism, cleft palate, thickened ears and avoided for ammonia determination. “hitchhiker thumb”. Differential diagnosis was done with other types of short limbed dwarfism (camptomelic dysplasia, Ellis van Creveld etc). P0171. Clinical features in patients with mutations in JARID1C The plan for the management and the follow up of the patient will be A. Tzschach1, S. Lenzner1, A. R. Janecke2, G. Tariverdian3, J. Chelly4, J. presented. Fryns5, H. Van Esch5, T. Kleefstra6, B. Hamel6, C. Moraine7, J. Gécz8, G. Turn- In conclusion, we present a new case of diastrophic dysplasia in order er9, V. M. Kalscheuer1, H. Ropers1, L. R. Jensen1; to illustrate this rare genetic disorder, but also to discuss the importance 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of of a complex medical specialist team for a correct diagnosis and Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, management of the affected family. Austria, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Ger- many, 4Institut Cochin de Génétique Moleculaire, CNRS/INSERM, CHU Cochin, P0169. A particular case of ring chromosome 5 Paris, France, 5Center for Human Genetics, Clinical Genetics Unit, Leuven, C. Rusu1, M. Gramescu1, M. Volosciuc1, A. Sireteanu2, V. Streanga3, M. Covic1; Belgium, 6Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre, Nijme- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Medical Genetics Cen- gen, The Netherlands, 7Services de Génétique-INSERM U316, CHU Breton- tre, Children's Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 31st Pediatrics Clinic, Children's Hospi- neau, Tours, France, 8Women's and Children's Hospital, University of Adelaide, tal, Iasi, Romania. Adelaide, Australia, 9Genetics of Learning Disability (GOLD) Service, Hunter Ring chromosome 5 is a rare chromosomal abnormality expressed Genetics, University of Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia. clinically by features of cri-du-chat syndrome associated with other We have recently shown that mutations in JARID1C are one of the features depending on the fragment lacking from the long arm. We more common known causes of X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) present a particular case of r5 chromosome in order to illustrate this (see abstract of Jensen et al. at this conference). Here, we report rare entity and to discuss diagnosis and management. Our proband is on the clinical phenotypes of 21 patients with JARID1C mutations. a 2 years 5 months old female child, single child of a young, unrelated, Mental retardation of various severity is the prominent clinical feature apparently normal couple. The pregnancy evolved with polyhydramnios. in all patients. In addition, short stature is also present in the majority No foetal ultrasound scan was performed. She was born at 9 months of cases. Numerous dysmorphic signs and neurological features gestation (Wt 1550 g, Ht 38 cm, HC 28 cm, Apgar score 8) and needed have been observed in some but not all patients. These include intensive care. Postnatal development was severely delayed. Physical microcephaly, maxillary hypoplasia, cryptorchidism, macroorchidism, examination revealed: proportionate dwarfism (Ht -2.86 SD, Wt -4.66 spasticity and epilepsy. We will give a detailed account of the individual SD) associated with microcephaly (HC -5.08 SD), dismorphic face phenotypes of the patients with JARID1C mutations. This will help to (triangular face, hypertelorism, abnormal, asymmetric ears), mewing identify patients in whom mutation screening in JARID1C should be cry and severe developmental delay. Echocardiography: subaortic considered. VSD. Renal echography: normal. Psychological examination: IQ 45. We thought of Cri-du-chat syndrome reason why a karyotype P0172. Mutational analysis of the 21-hydroxylase gene, CYP21, was indicated. The result was: 46,XX,r5/ 45,XX,-5/ 47,XX,r5,r5. in 17 Estonian Patients Diagnosed with Congenital Adrenal Differential diagnosis was done mainly with the typical form of cri-du- Hyperplasia chat syndrome. The plan for the management and the follow up of the S. E. Tobi1, H. Schlecht1, V. Tillman2, K. Liivak2, M. Coleman1, R. Elles1; patient will be presented, as well as the hypothesis for the mechanism 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Tartu that led to this disorder. University Children's Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. In conclusion, we present a particular case of ring 5 chromosome in At least 90% of all cases of the autosomal recessive condition order to illustrate this rare genetic disorder, but also to discuss the Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) are caused by mutations in the importance of different features for the diagnosis and the management 21-hydroxylase gene (CYP21). The most common mutations found in of the family. CYP21 are a result of either unequal crossing-over or gene conversion events involving the neighbouring, highly homologous pseudogene P0170. False-positive proportion for pediatric ammonia , CYP21P, on chromosome 6p21.3. We have screened 17 Estonian determination and its clinical impact patients (in most cases with both parents), clinically diagnosed with B. Maranda, J. Cousineau, M. Lambert; CAH, for eight common CYP21 mutations using a series of PCR Hopital Ste-Justine, Montreal, PQ, Canada. ARMS tests. 18 % (6/34) of all CYP21 alleles harboured a chimeric Objective: Plasma ammonia measurement is critical for the pseudogene:gene mutation consisting of 5’ CYP21P sequence and diagnosis and management of several inborn errors of metabolism. 3’ CYP21 sequence and arising from a large scale deletion event. A Its determination is subject to several sources of error. False-positive c.292 -13A/C>G (g.655 A/C>G) intron 2 splice site mutation, which is results might be harmful to patients. We wanted to evaluate the found at a similar frequency to CYP21 deletions/conversions in the UK prevalence and clinical impact of false-positive results for plasma population, accounted for only 6% (2/34) of alleles. The point mutations ammonia in a pediatric tertiary care hospital. Ile172Asn, Gln318Stop, and Arg356Trp all occurred at a frequency of Design: Data from the clinical biochemistry laboratory were scrutinized 9% (3/34) while one patient harboured four sequential point mutations over a 28-month period. Each case that presented at least one suggesting a large conversion of the 3’end of CYP21 to CYP21P. Work abnormal result was revised. These files were reviewed to determine if is ongoing to identify further CYP21 mutations in remaining alleles by a medical condition could account for the initial elevation of ammonia Southern blot and sequencing analysis. and its subsequent normalization. Results: 1980 ammonia measurements were obtained from 479 P0173. A novel KCNQ2 splicing mutation causes BFNC in a large patients. Ammonemia concentration ranged from 5 to 1863 µmol/L. multi-generational family Median values for neonates (less than 1 month) and older patients D. Pinto1, G. J. de Haan2, D. Carton3, A. Bader1,2, L. Volkers1, J. Witte4, E. Pe- were 65 and 50 µmol/L respectively (p<0,001). Elevated results ters1, M. Wapenaar1, M. G. van Erp5, W. Vandereyken6, E. H. J. F. Boezeman7, were found in 42% blood samples from 151 patients. Among 86 files B. P. C. Koeleman1, D. Lindhout1; revised, we have found 41 false-positives for plasma ammonia, which 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Stichting Epilep- represents 48%. Capillary samples were overrepresented among sie Instellingen Nederland, Heemstede, The Netherlands, 3Universiteitszieken- false-positives. There was also a long delay of 7,9 hours between the huis, Gent, Belgium, 4Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Nether- falsely elevated value and its subsequent normal value for hospitalized lands, 5Kempenhaeghe, Heeze, The Netherlands, 6Stadskliniek, Sint-Niklaas, patients. The major clinical impact was regarding additional laboratory Belgium, 7Sint Antoniusziekenhuis, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands. analyses. There were no prolonged hospitalization attributable to a Benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC) is a rare epilepsy disorder false-positive. with autosomal dominant inheritance and high penetrance. TwoClinical genetics 117 genes have been identified to be responsible for BFNC, KCNQ2 at condition of passivity and greatest dependence. He understands he 20q13.3 and KCNQ3 at 8q24. KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 encode potassium doesn’t overtake the daily problems without help. He reacts isolating channel subunits that mediate the M-current, which limits neuronal from the real life, taking refuge in a fantastic world. He closes himself hyperexcitability through spike-frequency adaptation. The study of in a autistic passivity as the only answer to his own inadequacy. The new pedigrees may help to detect new mutations and define genotype- world outside seems to him full of hostility. phenotype correlations, leading towards a better understanding of the More than ten years ago we chose, in favour of patients with genetic pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying neonatal convulsions. We syndromes, a multidimensional and multidisciplinary approach revisited a BFNC family with 13 affected members in five generations coordinated by a clinical genetist. Therapeutical results have been in order to assess long-term outcome after 20 years of follow-up: satisfactory in KBG patients. 11 showed remission within two months with normal neurological We noted: acceptance of their own body, more optimistic approach to development, one had mild learning disabilities and one developed life, improvement of school and working integration, higher control of photosensitive myoclonic epilepsy later in life. Molecular genetic nutritional and drug addiction. analysis revealed linkage to chromosome 20 and a single intronic This experience improved our life and our profession, allowing a mutation IVS14-6 C>A in KCNQ2 that segregated with the BFNC trait deep and empathyc interaction between patient and physician, that in all affected members, and was absent in 100 unrelated controls. represents the true essence of every medical act. Taking advantage of the fact that tissue-specific genes may be expressed ubiquitously at very low levels (illegitimate transcription), P0176. A quantitative definition of monosomy 5p syndrome. we evaluated the effect of the KCNQ2 mutation at the mRNA level R. Posmyk1, B. Panasiuk1, A. Latos-Bielenska2, D. Wolnik-Brzozowska2, M. using reverse transcribed total RNA isolated from blood leukocytes. Piotrowicz3, V. Kucinskas4, L. Korniszewski5, B. Kozak-Klonowska6, G. Sorbaj- This mutation creates a new splice site preferentially used for splicing. Sucharska7, A. T. Midro1; Alternative splicing adds 4 nt containing a premature stop codon to 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University, Bialystok, Poland, 2De- the transcript, which results in a truncated protein after position R588. partment of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Poznan, Poland, 3Depart- This novel KCNQ2 mutation cosegregates with BFNC but not with ment of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Lodz, Poland, 4Center of Human photosensitivity. Gentics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 5Dept of Pediatrics, Section of Diabetology and Birth Defects, Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, 6Genetic Couselling Unit, P0174. Clinic and genetic heterogeneity in Ehlers-Danlos Swietokrzyski Oncology Center, Kielce, Poland, 7Regional Childrens Hospital, syndrome Olsztyn, Poland. M. Puiu, S. Dragan; Monosomy 5p syndrome (cri du chat)(OMIM#123450) belongs to a University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. group of classical chromosomal entities with characteristic facial traits, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heterogeneous group of organ malformations, functional impairment and developmental delay hereditable connective tissue disorders characterized by articular due to a partial monosomy of a short arm of chromosome 5. Although hypermobility, skin hyperextensibility, and tissue fragility. EDS type IV several hundreds of cases have been published to date, a systematic being the most life-threatening form. It is characterized by a type III collection of its clinical symptoms and anthropological traits is missing collagen deficiency and this disease involves a col3A1 gene mutation. in the literature. Today, as cases with sub-microscopic 5p deletions are We report the case of a 47 year-old woman with type IV EDS. The known, and CDCS genes are being searched, more exact knowledge medical history of our patient included multiple spontaneous bone seems to be necessary. The main aim of this work is a contribution for fractures, anomalies of subclavian artery, moderate bruising and quantitative syndrome definition obtained by systematic evaluation of rupture of hollow organs such as the intestine and stomach, requiring clinical symptoms and anthropological traits. A group of 22 children repeated surgical interventions, generalized joint hypermobility, skin with terminal 5p deletion aged between 1 month and 18 years were hyperextensibility, chronic joint pain, recurrent joint dislocations, examined. A catalogue of well-defined 807 dysmorphic and clinical extensive bruising, characteristic facial appearance, varicose veins, features from the Munich Dysmorphology Database according to progressive scoliosis, osteopenia. Each of her two children presented Stengel-Rutkowski was used. Anamnestic data were obtained from clinical elements of EDS: her daughter (25 years old) presented the parents and hospital records. A semi-standardized protocol was especially molluscoid pseudotumours, subcutaneous spheroids joint used for the assessment of rare anthropological traits in the skull, hypermobility, chronic joint pain with recurrent joint dislocations, easy face, trunk and limbs. Facial measurements were performed from bruising and spontaneous bone fractures. Her son (18 years old) frontal and profile photographs quantifying seventeen traits by age presented recurrent joint dislocations, moderate skin hyperextensibilty, related indices. The trait list for each child was set up by checking all articular hypermobility and autism. Clinic and genetic heterogeneity informative features for presence or absence. Seventy two clinical and of the disease is very evident in this family, the three family members anthropological features have been observed with a frequency of 50% presenting clinical symptoms and comorbidities which made difficult or more (at least 5 informative features) in our group with monosomy the attempt to integrate them in a certain EDS type; these three 5p. On this basis quantitative phenotype definition of monosomy 5p cases presented a various clinical expression and severity. Another syndrome was suggested. particularity is also represented by the presence and high frequency of associated spontaneous bone fractures. Molecular investigations P0177. The first case of galactosialidosis (Goldberg syndrome) could probably explain the mechanism which associates Osteogenesis in the St.Petersburg population Imperfecta signs to EDS symptomps, but we couldn’t perform these O. L. Kolobova1, M. O. Mkheidze2, O. P. Romanenko3, I. M. Vorontcov1; investigations for the time. 1Medical Paediatric Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical Academy for postgraduate training, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Centre P0175. Adolescental problems in KBG syndrome: our experience of Medical Genetics, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. M. Biondi, D. De Brasi, A. R. Colucci, C. Rosania, M. G. D'Avanzo; Galactosialidosis (GSL, Goldberg syndrome, MIM 256540) is a Division of Medical Genetics "S.G. Moscati" Hospital, Avellino, Italy. lysosomal storage disease with autosomal recessive type of inheritance, KBG syndrome is a rare, but underestimated, autosomal dominant gene map locus 20q13.1. The condition is caused by a deficiency of disease (40 cases described), characterized by macro-oligodontia, carboxypeptidase-L protective protein, which forms a high molecular short stature, mild to medium mental retardation, skeletal defects weight complex with alpha-neuraminidase and beta-galactosidase in and other clinical features. We report 7 sporadic cases, 3 M and 4 the lysosomes. Proband, a male aged 1 year, 3 months and 25 days, F, observed during adolescence.This period is characterized by the is under our observation. He was born after the second spontaneous modification of previous relationships, that leads, to a possible change premature delivery. This pregnancy was complicated with late toxemia in the role and importance of the family and reference figures.The and threatened abortion. His parents are nonconsanguineous, his elder child grows and “the chrysalis becomes butterfly”. The process seems brother is healthy. Proband birth weight was 2850g. At birth severe complicated and difficult in KBG patient. He links superficially to other oedema of eyelids, face and scrotum, moderate hepatosplenomegaly, persons. His world remains limited to a biunivocal relation with the hyperbilirubinemia were observed. At age1 year and 4 months mother, that lasts longer than the other children, so remaining in a the proband had some additional symptoms of dangerous illness:Clinical genetics 118 coarse facial features, mental retardation, telangiectasia of skin, P0180. Segmental Neurofibromatosis type-1 presenting as increased hepatosplenomegaly, hypotonia, some biochemical signs isolated plexiform neurofibromas of metabolic disturbance. Oligosacchariduria and beta-galactosidase J. L. Lauzon, R. B. Lowry, F. P. Bernier; and neuraminidase deficiency were shown in the Scientific Centre Alberta Children's Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada. of Medical Genetics, Moscow. These data confirmed our presumed We present a 41-year-old woman with recurrent plexiform diagnosis of galactosialidosis, early infantile type. neurofibromas without signs of classical Neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF-1). She presented with a superficial plexiform neurofibroma on P0178. Collecting oro-dental phenotypic data: standardisation the left scapula in adolescence. She was subsequently found to have and networking via D[4]/ PHENODENT a thoracic intraspinal neurofibroma, two plexiform neurofibromas in A. Bloch-Zupan1,2, J. Ennesser1, A. Musset1, M. Schmittbuhl1, P. Ashley2; her left kidney and three plexiform neurofibromas in the subcutaneous 1Faculty of Dentistry, Louis Pasteur University, Strasbourg, France, 2Eastman tissue of her left posterior chest wall. Our patient underwent surgical Dental Institute, University College, London, United Kingdom. debulking of her tumors but the plexiform neurofibroma in her chest The aims and objectives of the D[4]/ PHENODENT project are to create wall persists. Physical examination reveals no café-au-lait macules, a collaborative interactive biomedical database D[4] (Diagnosing inguinal or axillary freckling, or Lisch nodules. There is no family Dental Defects Database) linked to a dynamic web site PHENODENT history of NF-1 and her daughter has no clinical features of this allowing standardisation of data collection and therefore assisting in disorder. There are a handful of Segmental NF-1cases describing the oro-dental phenotyping. occurrence of localized deep-tissue plexiform neurofibromas and no This tool will permit integration of these data within the medical and cutaneous manifestations. Local recurrence is common but malignant genetic general context enhancing multidisciplinary patient management transformation of the plexiform neurofibromas has not been reported in approaches. It will facilitate understanding of dental and oral biology these cases. It is felt that this rare form of Segmental NF-1 is due to a and associated disorders and diseases implementing science based post-zygotic mutation in the neurofibromin gene in early development. evidence diagnosis and therapeutic options. These data might be used Subsequent loss of heterozygosity in this cell line may account for the in public health as markers of gene/environment relationships in the case development of the plexiform neurofibromas. Molecular investigations of acquired dental defects. D[4]/ PHENODENT will stimulate patient have been initiated in our patient to further characterize these tumors. recruitment and install a basis for molecular analysis and anatomo- We feel that this condition should be distinguished from generalized pathological investigations. It will allow the creation of larger cohorts NF-1 and other similar disorders for the purposes of medical of patients, presenting with these rare oro-dental defects, that could management and recurrence-risk counseling. Screening of individuals be involved in future research projects like - Oro-dental phenotypes who present with isolated plexiform neurofibromas for other tumors in syndromes - Identification of mutations in known genes involved in should be considered as they may have Segmental NF-1 and be at risk dental development and diseases - Phenotype/genotype correlation of developing further neurofibromas. - Population genetics - New gene identification - Gene expression during odontogenesis - Mouse/Human correlations. Standardisation P0181. Cornelia-de-Lange Syndrome, Phenotypic and will facilitate sharing of data and materials among investigators. Cytogenetic Analysis of 20 Iranian Cases; Clinical Case Report PHENODENT will constitute a link between participating clinical A. Entezari1, G. Vakili1, J. Hourzad2, M. Kariminejad3, Y. Shafeghati1,3; diagnosis centres and research laboratories thus representing 1Genetics Research Center/USWR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran Med- a powerful tool for national (French INSERM GIS rare diseases, ical Science University Tehran Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Karimine- Odontogenetics network) and international (European COST) jad/Najmabadi genetics center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. networks. Cornelia-de-Lange syndrome(CDLS) is a rare multisystemic This work is funded partially via INSERM « Reseau de Recherche malformative syndrome of uncertain etiology characterized by Clinique et Reseaux de Recherche en Sante des populations 2003 » severe psychomotor and mental retardation, and multiple congenital and COST-STSM-B23-00900. anomalies. Here we report the phenotypic and cytogenetic analysis of 20 cases P0179. Detoxification system genes involved into the resistance of Iranian patients who displayed the classical clinical symptomatology to the steroid therapy in asthmatic patients. of CDLS. O. G. Sideleva1,2; In this report , we have done necessary evaluation of clinical findings, 1St.Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Zoological chromosomal studies and laboratory investigations. Institute RAS, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. Clinical manifestations in our patients were as similar as the cases were Steroids, using for the reducing of asthma symptoms in patient with reported in the medical literature. Chromosomal analysis by traditional severe disease was shown as non-effective in 34% of patients in St. GTG banding technique; in all of the affected patients were normal. Petersburg, Russia. The major role in inactivation almost all drugs, We did not do FISH analysis in our cases .The diagnosis of CDLS in coming to the organisms from the environment, as well as steroid this patients were based on clinical evaluation and comparison of the medications, play the detoxification system enzymes. Mutations in the findings with reported cases by Brachmann in 1916 and Cornelia-de genes coding this enzymes lead to the loss of function of complete Lange in 1933 and other reported cases. absence of them. Thus, asthmatic patients, having detoxification genes deficiency, suppose to be very sensitive to the medications, using for P0182. Severe zinc deficiency in Thalassemia Major patients on asthma therapy. In the present study the distribution of normal and deferiprone mutant genotypes Phase I detoxification gene CYP1A1 and Phase A. -. Saxena; II detoxification genes NAT2, GSTT1 and GSTP1 did not show Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India. significant differences in patients with positive and negative response Thalassemia major demands frequent blood transfusion to maintain lfe to the therapy. At the same time, we found strong association between while hemosiderosis requires continuous iron chelation. Increased zinc GSTM1 gene deficiency in asthmatics and their steroid resistance. excretion is known to occur in thalassemic patients receiving regular 93.3% of resistant patients had GSTM1 0/0 genotype. In the group chelation therapy with deferiprone. This study was conducted, firstly, of asthmatics giving the best response to the steroid treatment to examine seum zinc level in thalassemic patients in order to know predominated individuals with normal genotype GSTM1 +/+, GSTP1 how much zinc supplementation was required and secondly, to see A/A : 20% vs 4.5% in the group of the drug resistant patients, p=0.01 if zinc supplementaion contributed towards better growth. Methods: (in the control group from the general population of St.Petersburg Study was conducted on 86 thalassemia major patients on hyper- distribution of this genotype comprise 34.4%, p=0.0001). transfusion treatment aged between 4 and 19 years at SGPGIMS. Zinc Thus, Phase II detoxification enzymes coding by GSTM1 and GSTP1 levels were checked before and after zinc supplementation. Low dose genes are important for the steroid resistance of asthmatic patients. of zinc 23.5 mg as Zevit capsule was given once a day for one year. Growth velocities and pubertal development were evaluated every 3 months. Results: Out of 86 patients 52 (60.4%) had low serum zinc level. Compliance to zinc supplementation was significantly associatedClinical genetics 119 with increased serum zinc levels. Pre supplementation mean height P0185. Autosomal dominant inheritance of cardiac valve and weight velocities were 4.54 (± 2.26) and 1.4 (± 1.46) and post anomalies supplementation were 4.71 (± 2.38)cm and 1.7 (± 1.02) respectively. In M. Wessels1, D. Majoor-Krakauer2, B. de Vries3, P. Willems4; individual cases post supplementation height and weight were higher 1Dept Obstetrics and Gynecology, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The compared to pre supplementation. Serum ferritin was negatively Netherlands, 2Dept Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The correlated (P<.001%) with pre and post supplementation growth Netherlands, 3Dept Clinical Genetics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4GENDIA, velocities. Pre and post supplementation serum ferritin and hemoglobin Antwerp, Belgium. levels were strongly correlated (P<.001%). Compliance to zinc Anomalies of the atrioventricular and semilunar heart valves account supplementation was negatively correlated with pre-supplementation for 25 -30 % of all congenital heart malformations (CHM). The majority hemoglobin levels. Conclusion: With optimally maintained hemoglobin of these heart malformations are sporadic, although some pedigrees level zinc supplementation given in high doses can have beneficial with autosomal dominant inheritance of non-syndromic heart valves effects on growth. anomalies have been described. Cardiac valve anomalies can also be part of well-defined syndromes with autosomal dominant inheritance P0183. GM1 gangliosidosis: Clinical and laboratory findings in (such as Noonan syndrome and Alagille syndrome). one Iranian family with 5 affected patients. We describe here two multiplex pedigrees with non-syndromic forms G. Vakili1, A. Entezari1, Y. Shafeghati1,2, M. Roushandel2, R. Karimi-Nejad3; of heart valve anomalies that segregate as an autosomal dominant 1Genetics Research Center/USWR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran condition. Medical Science University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Karimi-Nejad/ The first family is a 3-generation pedigree with 9 family members Najmabadi Genetics laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. affected with congenital defects of the cardiac valves, including aortic GM1 gangliosidosis is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder stenosis (4 patients), aortic (1 patient) and mitral (3 patients) valve due to deficiency of lysosomal enzyme beta-galactosidase, with the insufficiency, and bicuspid aortic valve (2 patients). Pulmonary atresia, consequence of tissue accumulation of especially GM1 ganglioside. pulmonary stenosis and tricuspid insufficiency was present in one In the present paper, we report the clinical and laboratory findings of patient each. Several patients had septal defects. The second family an Iranian family that have had history of five affected patients. Four consists of 7 patients in 2 generations with valvular aortic stenosis in 3 of them died in about four to five years of age, because of probable patients. Two patients presented with defects of the pulmonary valves; diagnosis of Neimann-Pick disease. Parents are first cousin relatives one with pulmonary atresia and narrow tricuspid valve and a second there were no similar cases in other close relatives. The family have only with valvular and infundibular pulmonary stenosis with intact ventricular one healthy daughter, she is 11-year-old and product of 8th pregnancy septum. Both patients also had an atrial septal defect.These families of mother. Our proband is also suffering from the same clinical feature might be instrumental in identifying genes involved in cardiac valve of deceased siblings. She was about 4-year-old when reffered to us. formation and malformation. Hypotonia, neuromotor retardation, hepatosplenomegaly, and coarse facies were the cardinal clinical findings. The disease evolves towards P0186. Michels Syndrome, Carnevale Syndrome, and Malpuech convulsions and blindness, deafness,and ultimately decerebrate syndrome: Variable Expression of a Single Disorder (M2C state. Leading to patient's death when she was five years old. After syndrome) ? complete clinical and laboratory investigation, we found abnormal A. Verloes1,2, L. Titomanlio1, S. Bennaceur3, D. Bremond-Gignac4, C. Bau- foamy histiocyte in the bone marrow aspirate. Then we sent blood and mann1, O. Dupuy5; skin biopsy samples to the Metabolic Service of Erasmus University 1Clinical Genetic Unit, Hôpital R Debré, Paris, France, 2INSERM U676, Paris, in the Netherlands. Because of complete deficiency of enzyme beta- France, 3Maxillofacial Surgery Unit, Hôpital R Debré, Paris, France, 4Oph- galactosidase in her WBC, and skin fibroblasts, final diagnosis in this thalmology dept, Hôpital R Debré, Paris, France, 5Cytogenetic Unit, Hôpital R family was GM1 gangliosidosis. This is the first diagnosed family Debré, Paris, France. confirmed by enzyme assay from Iran. We report a 3-year-old girl with Michels syndrome, a rare condition characterized by craniosynostosis, blepharophimosis, ptosis, P0184. Myotonic dystrophy in the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) epicanthus inversus, cleft lip/palate, abnormal supra-umbilical (Russia) abdominal wall and mental deficiency. The phenotypic findings are A. L. Sukhomyasova1, N. R. Maksimova2, M. N. Korotov1, S. A. Fedorova2, A. compared with the 6 previously reported Michels cases, and with L. Danilova2, A. N. Nogovitcina1; patients referred to as Carnevale, OSA and Malpuech syndromes. 1Republican Hospital №1 – National Center of Medicine, Yakutsk, Russian Michels syndrome is characterized by cleft lip and palate, anterior Federation, 2Yakutsk Research Center of RAMS and Government of RS(Y), chamber anomalies, blepharophimosis, epicanthus inversus, and Yakutsk, Russian Federation. craniosynostosis. Carnevale syndrome shows hypertelorism, During last 20 years 105 patients with diagnosis myotonic dystrophy downslanting palpebral fissures, ptosis, strabismus synophrys, large (MD) from 39 families are registered. Now 98 is alive (58,16 % - women, and fleshy ears, and lozenge-shaped diastasis around the umbilicus. 41,84 %-men). 92 of them are Yakuts (93,88 %) from 35 families. The OSA syndrome resembles Carnevale, with humeroradial synostoses prevalence of MD in the Yakut population (total population is about 420 and spinal anomalies as extra features. Malpuech syndrome shows 000) is 23,28 on 100 000. Disease is registered in 18 of 35 administrative IUGR, hypertelorism, cleft lip and palate, micropenis, hypospadias, units. Prevalence of MD in separate areas changes from 2,23 up to renal anomalies and caudal appendage. All are autosomal recessive. 122,22 on 100 000 population. Among agricultural population where Despite the presence of distinctive key features, it appears that these the indigenous population makes the majority, prevalence MD in 4,2 4 entities share multiple similarities in the facial Gestalt and the pattern times is higher, than among city. of MCA. Those similarities lead us to postulate that they could belong In regional medical genetic consulting department there are 81 to the same spectrum, which could be referred to as “M2C syndrome” patients with clinical diagnosis “myotonic dystrophy” in the age of from (Malpuech-Michels-Carnevale syndrome). 0 till 63 years and 173 their clinically healthy relatives. Among affected patients usually occur classical adult form of MD (45,7%), in 2,5% - P0187. Familial Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome mild form, in 35, 8% - juvenile and congenital form - 3, 7%. Molecular- R. Teek1,2, R. Rein3, E. Essenson3, I. Marats3, K. Õunap1,4; genetic diagnostics is carried out by method PCR with the subsequent 1Medical Genetics Center, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute electrophoresis. There were 9 prenatal diagnostic investigations in 8 of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, affected families. 3Children`s Clinic of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Probably, one of the reasons of accumulation MD among indigenous Estonia, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. population is the effect of the founder. The further researches are Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a clinically well-defined syndrome necessary for an explanation of the reasons of high prevalence MD in characterized by a combination of broad thumbs and halluces, Yakuts, expansion of opportunities of medical-genetic consultation of characteristic facial dysmorphism, growth retardation, and mental families with MD with use of molecular-genetic methods with a view of deficiency. RTS was shown to be associated with disruption of one reduction of a genetic cargo. copy of the CREB-binding protein gene, either by gross chromosomalClinical genetics 120 rearrangements or by point mutations. It was supposed that RTS hMSH2 genes. The amplicons were screened by SSCP for mutations. has usually sporadic occurrence, but there have been few reports of Samples which showed band shifts on the SSCP were verified by familial cases with autosomal-dominant inheritance. We report a new direct sequencing. familial occurrence of RTS in two generations (a boy, his father and Results: fathers’ sister). For the hMLH1 gene we found one missense mutation in the exon 11 Patient 1, 8-year-old boy has short stature (-2,5 SD), highly arched at c.326T>C(Val - - Ala) and two nonsense mutations in the exons 13 eyebrows, down-slanting palpebral fissures, ptosis, epicanthal folds, and 19 at c.487C>T(Arg - - Stop) and c.2146_2147 delGT(Val - - Stop), short convex nose, long columella, long philtrum, low-set dysplastic respectively. ears, broad thumbs and halluces, clinodactyly of fifth finger and For the hMSH2 gene an insertion was found at the nucleotide 3010 Ins unilateral cryptorchid testis. Ultrasound investigation showed G causing a frameshift in the exon 13.This mutation was found in four horseshoe kidney. The speech disturbance was diagnosed. The father patients.In one of the patients another transversion was also found at of patient 1 has only broad thumbs and halluces, but normal growth c.677C>G(Thr - - Arg) in the exon 13 besides the 3010InsG. and development. Discussion: Patient 2, 48-year-old aunt of patient 1, who also has short stature This is the first report of the mutational analysis of patients with HNPCC (-3,5 SD), obesity (+4,5 SD), normal mental development and similar in Iran. Our results provide further insight into the mutational spectrum facial features - down-slanting palpebral fissures, short prominent of MMR genes in HNPCC families. nose, long columella, high palate, low posterior hairline, broad thumbs and halluces. P0190. Genotype-phenotype correlations of the Wilson disease At least 7 familial cases of RTS or Rubinstein-like syndrome have been in Volga-Ural region. described. Most of the patients in familial cases are mildly affected and A. Magzhanova1, A. Karunas1, R. Magzhanov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; with heterogeneous phenotype like in our described family. This family 1Insitute of Biochemistry & Genetics of Ufa Scientific Center Russian Acad. Sci., supports the conclusion of Bartsch et al. (2002) that mild alleles or Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkirian State Medical University, Ufa, Russian modifying factors can lead to incomplete RTS. Federation. Wilson's disease is an autosomal recessive disorder of hepatic copper P0188. Gene polymorphisms COL1A1 and VDR analysis in metabolism caused by mutations in the gene encoding a copper- patients with syringomyelia from Bashkortostan. transporting P-type ATPase (13 q 14.3-q 21.1) and leading to hepatic A. S. Abulgatina, R. Khusainova, I. Khidiyatova, E. Khusnutdinova; or neurological disease. Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. Wilson disease has an irregular ethnic and geographic occurrence Syringomyelia is a neurodegenerative disorder, resulting from spinal in populations and is characterized by interfamily and intrafamily cavity formation. To study the role of genes involved in the functioning variability. of conective tissue, we perfomed SpI polymorphism analysis in the The purpose of this research was the analysis of the correlation COL1A1 gene (collagen, type I, alpha-1, 17q21.3-2) and Fok-I RLPA between clinical features (neurological, neuropsychological and liver analysis in the VDR gene (vitamin D receptor). The groups analyzed disorders) and types of mutations of 29 patients from Bashkortostan. included 116 patients with syringomyelia and 185 healthy individuals Using SSCP analysis followed by sequencing of shifted exons we from 3 ethnic groups: Russians, Tatars, Bashkirs. have identified 4 mutations: His1069Gln (43.5%), 3402delC(6.5%), The SpI allele frequency distribution showed statistically significant 3559+1G>T (6.5%), the Glu1064Lys substitution was found to be differences between patients of Tatar and Russian origin. There were heterozygous in two WD families. no statistically significant differences between Russians, Tatars and All patients were divided into 3 groups: 1-homozygous for the Bashkirs in the control group. There were also no statistically significant His1069Gln mutation, 2-compound-heterozygous on for the differences in allele and genotype frequencies at this locus in affected His1069Gln mutation and 3-patients with unknown mutations. patients as a whole and in ethnically different groups of patients Our results show that homozygotes for the His1069Gln mutation had a as well as in controls, although in patients and controls of Russian milder disease onset at a later age and rare severe liver disorder. origin the frequency of the s allele, corresponding to less active form In several cases we found an interfamily variability between sibs in age of syringomielia was 0.258 in affected patients and 0.108 in controls of manifestation and character of clinical symptoms, which could not (OR=2.863). This result lets us suggest that the s allele may be a risk be explained by the types of mutation. factor for disease development. According our studies Wilson disease is more frequently in the Tatar In the VDR gene Fok-I polymorphism there were no significant population and has a severe disease course. differences in genotype frequencies between patients and controls. Our results indicate that Wilson disease has interfamily and intrafamily FF genotype is significantly more frequent in patients than in controls variability which needs to be studying further. (P=0.0005, OR=3.71). There were no differences in allele frequencies between patients and controls in this locus. P0191. Sotos syndrome. Novel and known mutations of NSD1 So, according to our data, FF genotype may be considered as a gene, in a new group of unpublished italian patients. susceptibility genetic marker for syringomyelia. E. Andreucci, L. Giunti, S. Guarducci, U. Ricci, I. Sani, M. Ottaviani, E. Lapi, M. Giovannucci Uzielli; P0189. Preliminary results of hMLH1 and hMSH2 mutation University of Florence, Dep Paediatrics, Genetics, Children's Hospital A.Meyer, analysis among Iranian patients with HNPCC Florence, Italy. N. Abedin, B. Noorinayer, N. Rahnamaye-chitsaz, M. Shahmoradgoli, N. Sotos syndrome (OMIM #117550) is an overgrowth syndrome Karimianpour, F. Taghizadeh, H. Asadzadeh, M. Zali; characterized by pre- and post-natal overgrowth, macrocephaly, The Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Tehran, Islamic advanced bone age, mental retardation, and typical facial features. Republic of Iran. The recent identification of deletions and point mutations of NSD1 (Nuclear receptor-binding SET domain containing protein) in more Background: than half (> 60%) of Sotos syndrome subjects has allowed the re- Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is one of the evaluation of clinical phenotype and natural history of this disorder for most common inherited cancer syndromes, accounting for 3-5% of all a genotype/phenotype correlation. In the same time, the interest t is cases of colorectal cancer. growing to identify other molecular defects underlying about 40% of Germline mutations in the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes MSH2 Sotos syndrome typical cases. and MLH1 are responsible for the majority of HNPCC patients We analyzed genomic DNA from 12 patients with Sotos syndrome Methods: (isolated and familial cases) for mutations of the NSD1 gene, by using We screened 41 Iranian patients who fulfilled the bethesda criteria direct sequencing and MLPA analysis. All patients were included in the for HNPCC. Germline mutations for hMLH1 or hMSH2 genes were register of our Unit with the diagnosis of Sotos syndrome, following an evaluated in all 41 patients. Mutation analysis was performed by accurate clinical evaluation and a regular follow-up specific programme, PCR amplification of the 19 exons for hMLH1 and 16 exons of the performed in the same Genetics Unit since many years. In all cases,Clinical genetics 121 G and Q banding chromosome analysis, from phytohaemagglutinin may be of interest in the analysis of genotype-phenotype correlations stimulated peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures using standard in Rett syndrome. procedures, showed a normal karyotype Based on the published genomic sequence, for the direct sequencing P0194. Oral clefts: associations with epidemiological and clinical analysis, 40 primer pairs were used for PCR amplification of exons characteristics among newborns in Lithuania, 1993 - 1997 and splicing junctions of the NSD1 gene. For the MLPA technique, A. Utkus1, L. Linkevičienė2, V. Kučinskas1; we used the probemix P026B for 24 NSD1 gene regions.We were 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics of Vilnius University, Vilnius, able to confirm the clear predominance of point mutations, with the Lithuania, 2Institute of Odontology of Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. identification of well known, or not yet described exonic mutations in The clefts of lip, alveolar ridge and palate are common heterogeneous the coding regions, and intronic mutation at the splicing sites. congenital anomalies. Epidemiological studies of oral clefts in various geographical and ethnical areas exhibit some differences. The P0192. Muenke craniosynostosis: mutational analysis of FGFR3 incidence of oral clefts nowadays is not falling ans sometimes shows gene improves the identification of an otherwise clinically a tendency to an increase. The aim of the study was to establish the underdiagnosed disorder incidence rate of oral clefts in Lithuania and in its separate regions I. Sani, L. Giunti, E. Andreucci, U. Ricci, S. Guarducci, A. Cecconi, M. Ottavi- during 1993-1997; to create structural model registry and to perform a ani, E. Lapi, M. Giovannucci Uzielli; retrospective comparative analysis of oral clefts. University of Florence, Dep of Pediatrics, Genetics, Children's Hospital The incidence rate of oral clefts for 1000 livebirths in Lithuania during A.Meyer, Florence, Italy. 1993-1997 was 1.84 (1:544), and in separate regions of Lithuania the Proline to Arginine gain-of-function mutation in FGFR3 gene (Pro250Arg), rate of clefts for 1000 livebirths was from 0.01 to 3.34. Isolated clefts caused by a C749G transversion, results in Muenke syndrome (MS), formed 74.1% of all clefts. Syndromic clefts formed 25.9% of all clefts characterized by coronal precocious synostosis , macrocephaly and and comparing to the period 1953-1964 showed a statistically reliable abnormal skull shape. A high arched palate, sensorineural hearing increase owning to improved diagnostics and registration. Unilateral loss, and developmental delay can also be evident.The FGFR3 gene clefts are more frequent than bilateral, and the left unilateral cleft is maps to human chromosome 4p16.3: consists of 19 exons and 18 more common than the right. The most common diagnoses were introns. FGFR (Fibroblast growth factor receptor) 3 gene, is associated isolated palatal clefts forming 40.4% of all clefts and statistically reliably with other genetic disorders (Achondroplasia, Hypochondroplasia, diagnosed more for female patients. Unilateral total upper lip, maxillary Saddan syndrome, Lethal Thanatophoric Dysplasia, some cases of alveolus and palate cleft was diagnosed for 21.8% of all clefts and was Crouzon syndrome) with different, recurrent, mutations. statistically relaibly more common for male newborns. Different regions We report the preliminary results of a two years project designed of Lithuania were divided into four clusters and the incidence of clefts to identify the Muenke syndrome, associated with the FGFR3 gene cases per 1000 newborns in 1993-1997 did not differ statistically in the mutations in newborns and childrens with apparently isolated coronal administrative regions of Lithuania. cranyosynostosis, or with a syndromic phenotype suggestive for Muenke syndrome. P0195. Cytogenetics & Molecular Study of Acquired and The direct sequencing analysis revealed the same Pro250Arg Congenital Disorders mutation in seven patients. One family with almost three affected K. Kucheria; subjects. A couple of MZ twins, and two other unrelated subjects with a All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. de novo mutation.We emphasize the variable clinical phenotype, also The present study aimed to use fluorescent-labeled probes for in the same family: in particular, with complete or partial, bicoronal or screening various congenital anomalies (sex chromosomal and unicoronal synostosis. In the MZ twins, craniosynostosis was identified autosomal), prenatal diagnosis and cancer genetics. Standard during the pregnancy by morphological fetal study, early in the third techniques were used for conventional cytogenetics and Fluorescence trimester. In Situ Hybridization (FISH). Sex chromosome aneuploidies (XXY, XO, XXX, XYY) were analyzed using probes for chromosomes X and Y. P0193. High frequency of skewed X chromosome inactivation in The cases with ambiguous genitalia were further analyzed using probe Rett patients and their mothers for SRY gene. Prenatal diagnosis included screening aneuploidies of G. P. S. Knudsen1, T. C. S. Neilson2, M. E. S. Bailey2, M. Hulten3, K. H. chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y on uncultured cells and metaphases Orstavik1,4; obtained from amniotic fluid and chorionic villi samplings. Gene 1Faculty Division Rikshospitalet, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2Division alterations were studied in Retinoblastoma and leukemias using of Molecular Genetics,Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, University of specific probes. Response to therapy was assessed by evaluating Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Department of Biological Science, Uni- minimal residual disease (MRD) in leukemia patients. Attempts were versity of Warwick, Warwick, United Kingdom, 4Department of Medical Genet- also made to analyze cells obtained from buccal mucosa and bladder ics, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway. epithelium that could facilitate rapid screening anomalies without Rett syndrome is an X-linked neurological disorder with a characteristic painful invasive techniques. phenotype, and substantial phenotypic variability. This variability has Prenatal diagnosis using FISH on uncultured cells provided accurate been partly attributed to an effect of X chromosome inactivation. A and rapid results within 24 hours. Molecular rearrangements that higher frequency of skewed X inactivation in Rett patients has been could not be detected with conventional cytogenetics were identified reported. We report here a study of X inactivation ratios in DNA from using FISH technique. The SRY region was detected in few cases of blood and buccal cells of Rett patients (N = 69) and their mothers (N ambiguous genitalia that lacked the Y chromosome. Most leukemia = 73). The mean degree of skewing in blood was higher in patients patients in complete cytogenetic remission showed molecular (71.1%) than controls (65.7%) (N = 58; p<0.01). Unexpectedly, the evidence of MRD. Aneuploidies and gene rearrangements could also mean degree of skewing in blood was also higher in the mothers be detected on interphase (non-dividing) cells obtained from peripheral (71.5%) (p<0.01). The Rett patients and the mothers had a higher blood and bone marrow. To conclude, the present study stresses that frequency (25 % and 29 %) of skewed X inactivation (defined as FISH does add to the utility of cytogenetics by decreasing the time >80 %) than controls (16 %), but the difference was not statistical interval between sampling and diagnosis. significant. The mean degree of skewing in buccal smear was lower than for blood, and was significantly higher in mothers than in controls P0196. A patient with a de novo terminal deletion of (p<0.05). To test whether the Rett patients with skewed X inactivation chromosome 1q were daughters of skewed mothers, 53 mother-daughter pairs were M. C. Panzaru, C. Rusu, L. Butnariu, M. Gramescu, V. Gorduza; analysed. There was no evidence for a relationship between skewing Medical Genetics Center, Iasi, Romania. in patients and mothers; of 14 patients with skewed X inactivation, Terminal deletion of the long arm of chromosome 1 is characterized by only 3 had a mother with skewed X inactivation. We conclude that Rett multiple anomalies and neurological signs including psychomotor and patients and their mothers may have a significantly greater degree of X developmental delay, hypotonia, seizures, microcephaly, characteristic inactivation skewing than controls, and suggest that this phenomenon facies, congenital heart diseases, bone defects and genital anomalies.Clinical genetics 122 More than 70 cases were reported in the literature showing variable gonadal fibroblasts. SRY gene mutations are observed only in no more expressivity. than 15% of patients with XY-gonadal dysgenesis and any of them is We report a 3 years old male patient, the only child of an apparently clearly connected with the risk of gonadoblastoma. The hypothesis of normal, young, unrelated couple. He was born naturally, at term, after GBY locus existence has no direct evidence in cases of dysgenetic an uneventful pregnancy (Wt 2500g, Ht 47 cm). Postnatal development gonad tumors. was delayed. One episode of seizures was recorded (1 year old). We discuss that persistence of germ cells as well as sex cord elements Physical examination performed at 3 years 4month revealed: growth in some cases of dysgenetic gonads. It may have the character of retardation (Ht - 2 SD, Wt - 1,76 SD), microbrachycephaly, dysmorfic linear probability because of SRY presence. In consecutive cases the face (round face, upslanting palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, cellular components may undergo tumorgenesis under the influence of epicanthic folds, broad nasal bridge, long philtrum, downturned mouth, genetic as well as hormonal factors. thin upper lip, cupid’s bow, low set ears with preauricular pits), short The study was supported in part by the Polish Committee for Scientific neck, clinodactyly of IInd and IVth fingers, hypospadias, cryptorchidism Research, grant No 6 PO5E 135 21. (operated), sacro-coccygeal sinus, hypotonia, developmental delay. Echocardiography identified an ASD. Abdominal echography was P0199. Gingival Fibromatosis, sparse hair and congenital normal. Based on the association of multiple birth defects, a karyotype glaucoma: broadening the phenotype? was indicated. Chromosome analysis revealed a terminal deletion F. Forzano1, V. Viassolo1, D. DeAngelis2, P. Brunamonti Binelli2, P. Quilici3, R. (1)(q42.1qter); parental karyotypes were normal. Bandelloni3, P. Balbi2, F. Faravelli1; In conclusion, we present this case to illustrate this relatively rare 1Human Genetics Department, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Dentistry and chromosomal abnormality and to compare the data of our patient with Oral Medicine Service, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3Histopatology Depart- those presented in the literature ment, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy. Isolated gingival fibromatosis is generally a sporadic condition, but P0197. A large gap between age at diagnosis by screening and occasionally is seen in families. In this case, the onset is within the by symptoms in parent/offspring pairs with autosomal-dominant first ten years. Today, many patients had been described in literature, dilated cardiomyopathy either presenting with gingival fibromatosis as an isolated feature or in M. Pasotti1, A. Repetto1, A. Serio1, M. Grasso2, N. Marziliano2, C. Campana1, A. association with other signs. Brega3, M. Diegoli4, L. Tavazzi1, E. Arbustini2; Jorgenson (1971) reported an adult female with gingival fibromatosis 1Department of Cardiology, Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Molecular Diag- who also had sparse hair, nystagmus, and myopia. nostic Lab, Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Biology and Ge- Here we present a girl who suffers from gingival fibromatosis, which netics, University of Milan, Italy, 4Department of Pathology, University of Pavia, is also affected by unilateral glaucoma and localized sparse hair. Pavia, Italy. Karyotype on blood cells and gingival fibroblast is 46,XX. Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDCM) is inherited in about one third We propose our patient represents an association of feature helpful in of cases. The new strategy of diagnosis familial diseases by means of refining phenotype of this condition. the serial clinical screening of first- and second-degree relatives has References provided evidence that the disease may be diagnosed in as many as Jorgenson RJ. Gingival fibromatosis. BDOAS 1971;7(7):278-280. 6-10% of the asymptomatic relatives. We document a large gap in age between symptom-based and screening-based diagnoses of AD-DCM P0200. Cytogenetic investigation of POF subjects in Coimbatore in 26 pairs/triplets of parents and offspring from 23 families. IDCM District, Coimbatore, India. was diagnosed according to WHO criteria. The inclusion criteria were: K. Sasikala, M. Vimala Devi, R. Sangeetha; 1)two contemporarily affected relatives from a same family: one parent Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. and one of the offspring; 2)first diagnosis and monitoring of all pairs/ Human infertility has become a growing problem in the world today. triplets of relatives at our Centre; 3)one of the pair/triplet of patients Infertility is a major public health problem in India and it has also been diagnosed by screening. The proband was the parent in 16 families estimated that in India between 10-15 % of the couples are infertile. with 17 pairs and two triplets of affected parent-offspring (group A), Premature Ovarian Failure (POF), is a common form of ovulatory one of the offspring in seven families with five pairs and two triplets dysfunction. POF, premature menopause, or early menopause, is of affected members (group B). In group A, the clinical and functional a condition characterized by amenorrhea, hypoestrogenism, and findings were significantly more severe in the probands than in the elevated serum gonadotropin levels in women younger than 40 years. relatives diagnosed by screening, but this was not the case in group B Premature failure (POF) is a "triad of amenorrhea, hyperandrogenism where the clinical worsening of the disease was rapid. In pairs/triplets and hyperestrogenism and loss of fertility in women under the age of 40 parent-offspring contemporarily diagnosed as having AD-DCM, there years". POF is a typical feature in Turners syndrome. The most common is a one-generation gap between a symptom-based and screening- etiology of gonadal dysgenesis is X monosomy (45, X), occurring in based diagnosis. These data suggest that DCM has a long-lasting approximately 50% of individuals with the premature ovarian failure. A asymptomatic phase in pairs in which the proband is the parent, may total number of 250 women were screened for infertility and nearly 144 be genetically anticipated in pairs in which the proband is one of the patients showing Ovulatory Disorders were selected. Of them, 62 of offspring. them were with Premature ovarian failure. The 62 subjects presented with POF were presented with different types of chromosomal P0198. Dysgerminoma (seminoma), gonadoblastoma and aberrations as, 45,X0 ; 47,XXX ; 45,X0/46,XY ; 46,XX,t(1p_ ; 11q+); mixed germ tumor in two adult 46,XY females after estrogen- 46,XX,del(Xq); 45,X0,22s+; 45,X0/46,Xi(Xq) ; 46,XX,t(8p_ ; 9q+); progesterone treatment initiated at their 16 years of age 46,XX, t(6p+ ; 15q_). An major event of this investigation is to assess L. Jakubowski1, W. Alaszewski1, A. Jeziorowska1, A. Bielak1, T. Krawczyk1, A. X chromosomal alterations in infertility related to women population of Maciejczak1, I. Pinkier1, J. Słowikowska-Hilczer2, K. Kula2; this part of the country and to determine if chromosomal abnormality 1Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital - Research Institute, Lodz, Poland, 2Medical corresponds with Ovulatory disorders and to assess whether either University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland. predicts clinical outcome in ovarian disorders. We report two XY females, 19- and 25-year-old, with clinical signs of pure gonadal dysgenesis. Both patients underwent a laparoscopic P0201. Frequency of Y chromosome microdeletions in Iranian gonadectomy. Histological examination of the gonads showed in each males with idiopathic infertility case coexistence of gonadoblastoma and dysgerminoma. Additionally E. Nobakht Haghighi1,2, M. A. Sedighi Gilani2, H. Imanian3, H. Najmabadi1,3; in gonads of the first patient mixed germ tumor elements were found. 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation PCR analysis showed no deletion of Y chromosome specific sequences Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sci- in lymphocytes and fibroblasts of gonads in both cases. In the first ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology case nonsense point mutation in the codon 81 within HMG-domain of and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the SRY gene [SRY, GLU81TER] was diagnosed. The mutation was Among couples with infertility problems, the male factor is the etiology excluded in the father of this patient. In the second case the SRY gene in almost 50% of the cases and nearly 20% of all infertile men was apparently normal in lymphocytes of peripheral blood as well as in have idiopathic oligozoospermia. Recent studies reported that DNAClinical genetics 123 microdeletions on the long arm of the Y chromosome (Yq) may be P0204. The frequency of chromosome 22q11.2 microdeletion in a responsible for some cases of idiopathic male infertility. The most group of 48 patients with conotruncal heart anomaly depending important region of Yq is within intervals 5 and 6, which is designated on the qualification criteria for FISH analysis used the azoospermic factor (AZF). There are four subregions of this factor, M. Piotrowicz, T. Chilarska, N. Wieczorek-Cichecka, W. Hawuła, A. Ulańska, J. named AZFa, AZFb, AZFc and AZFd, which we examined in our Kiełbasiewicz-Binikowska, K. Ostrowska, L. Jakubowski; study to determine the frequency of Y chromosome microdeletions Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital - Research Institute, Lodz, Poland. in Iranian males with idiopathic infertility. Microdeletions at the AZFa, DiGeorge/velo-cardio-facial syndrome (DG/VCFS, CATCH 22) is the AZFb, AZFc/DAZ, and AZFd regions were examined in 454 males most frequent observed chromosomal microdeletion syndrome. It is with oligozoo-/azoospermia using PCR. Our results showed that 32 a contigous gene syndrome usually connected with conotruncal heart out of 454 subjects (7%) had Yq microdeletions: 30 with the AZFc/ anomalies, characteristic facial dysmorphic features, velopharyngeal DAZ, 5 with AZFa, 5 with AZFb and 4 with AZFd microdeletion were insufficiency, hypoplasia/aplasia of the thymus with T-cell deficiency, found. Three patients with AZFabcd, two with AZFab, and one with hypoplasia/aplasia of parathyroid glands with hypocalcaemia and 1,5- AZFcd microdeletions were detected. Since microdeletion on the 3 Mb deletion on chromosome 22q11.2. Y chromosome, especially at its AZFc/DAZ region, may be a major Congenital heart diseases occur in approximately 8 out of 1000 live cause of oligozoo-/azoospermia resulting in male infertility in Iran, it births and conotruncal malformations account for about 50-60% of is recommended that infertile men have Y chromosome microdeletion congenital heart defects diagnosed during the neonatal period. Recently detection before in vitro fertilization. many authors have proved that chromosome 22q11.2 deletion is very uncommon in isolated conotruncal heart defects. The percentage of P0202. Premature ovarian failure (POF) in a mother and a cytogenetically confirmed cases increased dramatically if the heart daughter with a balanced translocation t(X;11)(q24;q13) defect was accompanied by at least one additional manifestation of M. R. Mansouri1, B. Carlsson1, E. Stattin2, I. Golovleva3, N. Dahl1; the DG/VCF phenotype.In our study we examined 48 children with 1Dept of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Dept conotruncal defects and accompanying extracardiac anomalies or of Pediatrics, Umea University Hospital, Umea, Sweden, 3Dept of Clinical Ge- dysmorphic features. The aim of the study was to establish qualification netics, Umea University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. criteria for the fluorescent ‘in situ’ hybridisation (FISH), in order to Premature ovarian failure (POF) is defined as the complete cessation of assess the diagnosis efficiency depending on the qualification criteria the menstrual discharge before the age of 40. The condition affects 1% used. FISH was performed using DiGeorge DGCR2(“N25”,CLTD) of women and is heterogeneous. Several X;autosome translocations region probe. We observed the best diagnostic rate in case of have previously been associated with POF. Here we report a mother patients with conotruncal heart anomaly, velopharyngeal insufficiency and a daughter with a balanced translocation t(X;11)(q24;q13) and and characteristic facial dysmorphism (22q11.2 microdeletion was POF. confirmed in 74% of cases). However, taking into account the Physical mapping using FISH localised the Xq24 breakpoint to within possibility of complications connected with immunity deficiency and a gene not previously reported as associated with POF. Similarly, the hypocalcaemia we suggest that testing for the 22q11.2 microdeletion 11q13 breakpoint was mapped to a 70 kb region containing a gene in newborn and very young children with conotruncal anomalies and which is expressed in the ovaries. We hypothesize that a subnormal a mild dysmorphic features or extracardiac abnormalities should be transcription of both genes may contribute to POF in the two patients. always recommended. Further studies are in progress to characterise the two breakpoints, the X-inactivation pattern and to clarify the role of the affected genes P0205. Hemiduplication - A Dysorganization-like syndrome? in POF. T. Ben-Omran1, K. Chung2, B. Mullen3, D. Chitayat4; 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medi- P0203. arthritis in two children with chromosomal abnormalities cal Genetics Program , Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical and Meta- C. Dracou1, K. Salavoura2, S. Drakonaki1, C. Sofocleous3, A. Kolialexi4, A. bolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Mavrou4; Ontario, Canada, Toronto, ON, Canada, 22Department of Pediatrics, Division 1Paediatrics Rheumatology Outpatients' Clinic, 2nd Dept of Paediatrics, NHS, of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics,, The Hospital for Sick Children, University P&A Kyriakou, Athens, Greece, 2Immunology Dept, Childrens' Hospital Aghia of Toro, ON, Canada, 3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Sophia, Athens, Greece, 3Dept of Medical Genetics, Athens University School Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Department of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 4Dept of Medical Genetics, Athens University of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics School of Medicine, Athens, Greece. Program, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Association of chromosomal abnormalities with arthropathies has The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. been described before. In the present study, two children with juvenile The mouse mutant disorganization phenotype was first described by rheumatoid arthritis and a chromosomal abnormality are presented. Hummel [1958, 1959]. It arises spontaneously and disrupts the orderly Patient A is a 9 years old girl with 18q minus syndrome and IgA processes of development. It causes bizarre and variable developmental deficiency. At birth she had dysmorphic features (hypertelorism, anomalies, such as mirror-limb duplications; hamartomatous skin upslanting fissures, small mouth and chin, dysmorpic ears) and papillae, and other internal organ abnormalities. secundum atrial defect. Karyotype and telomere investigation revealed We report the autopsy finding in a fetus with hemiduplication of most 18q minus syndrome. At the age of 5 years, she developed painful body organs. swelling of her left knee. Within next months arthritis of her both ankles, A 29-year-old primigravida woman presented with ultrasonographic wrists, hands and feet was added to her clinical picture. One year findings of 2-vessel cord, bilateral club feet, and right diaphragmatic later she developed joint contractures. Patient B is a 9 years old child hernia. with developmental delay, autism, dysmorphy (blepharoptosis, small The couple is non-consanguineous. The pregnancy was uncomplicated. nose, low set ears) and joint hypermbility. At the age of 7 years, she The fetal karyotype was 46,XX . The autopsy showed right hemifacial developed fever, arthritis of her knees and of her both hands and toes microsomia and hemiatrophy of the right trunk, labia majora, sternum of small joints. Karyotype was 47XX+15(pter-q13) and investigation of and ribs. There was duplication of the right arm, to the mid-humerus PWSR was normal. level, right clavicle, right scapula, part of the right iliac wing, right Conclusions: Juvenile arthritis in 18q minus syndrome has been adrenal gland, right kidney, right lung, stomach and most of the small described in 4 patients, but has not been connected with chromosome bowel. The duplicated right kidney revealed multicystic dysplastic 15, previously. Further investigation may expand our knowledge changes. There was a cloacal tag and malposition of the anus, right as far as the probable existing association between chromosomal diaphragmatic hernia, pulmonary hypoplasia and deviation of the heart abnormalities and juvenille arthritis. to the left. The uterus was bicornuate, the pancreas was annular and there was a segmentation defect of the upper thoracic spine. There were 11 pairs of ribs, bilateral talipes equinovarus and left sandal gap. The right leg was shortened with a right knee and right elbow pterygia and a single umbilical artery. The spinal cord showed myelodysplasiaClinical genetics 124 and the gray matter was disorganized. Mytonic dystrophy (MD) is a frequent neuromuscular affection due The above findings are unique and represent a variant of the mouse to an unstable CTG trinucleotide repeat (CTGtr) located in the 3’ DS or a whole body twining. untranslated region of the dystrophia myotonica protein kinase (DMPK) at 19q13.3. P0206. 6q terminal deletions: presentation of two new cases. Normal subjects have 5 to 37 CTGtr copies which remain stable A. Valetto1, V. Bertini1, G. De Vito2, R. Costa3, P. Simi1; following intergenerational transmission while affected patients have 1Cytogenetic and molecular genetic unit, Pisa, Italy, 2IRCS Stella Maris, Pisa, over 50 CTGtr. In a majority of DM patients, the number of repeats Italy, 3A.O. Massa, Massa, Italy. is highly unstable and increases during parent-offspring transmission Deletions of the distal part of the long arm of chromosome 6 have of the mutant allele, providing molecular basis to the anticipation not been associated to a well distinctive and recognizable phenotype, phenomenon (increased severity of the disease in successive even if an emerging ‘6q- terminal deletion syndrome’ starts to be generations). delineated. We report on apparent CTGtr stability in three generations of women In order to verify this, we compared the phenotype of two new cases with with MD. The number of the CTGtr in blood cells was estimated at 133, the cases described in literature. A common phenotype emerged from 121 and 109 for the grandmother, mother and daughter, respectively. these reports, including psycomotor retardation, growth retardation, We had the opportunity to analyse the CTGtr in several fetal tissues hypotonia, seizures, and ‘typical’ facial dysmorphisms, along with after termination of the pregnancy of the 121 CTGtr carrier woman for various non specific malformations. These differences can be ascribed an affected fetus at 15 WG. The size of the CTGtr (n = 113) was strictly to a different deletion extent or in difficulties in defining precisely the identical in muscle, brain, liver and heart and chorionic villi as well. breakpoints on the basis of only classic cytogentic studies. These data suggest the existence of a dominantly inherited factor In our patients the deletion extent was further analyzed by molecular- preventing the instability of the expanded CTG stretch during female cytogenetic techniques: in both of them the breakpoint was located in gametogenesis in this family. Studies of some candidate genes are in an interval of about 442 Kb, between the clone RP11-150P20 (present) progress. and the clone RP11-152P19 (deleted). The breakpoints fall within the fragile site FRA6E, the ‘centre’ of which is overlapping with the PARK2 P0209. A BAC tiling array for human chromosome 21: gene, that spans the telomeric half of the fragile site. A potential role of comparative genome hybridization (CGH) to map partial trisomies, deletions and translocations, and insertion-deletion fragile sites in generating terminal deletion is suggested. polymorphisms The 8 Mb deleted region is known to contain several genes; two of them, PARK2 and TBP, are known to be associated with the autosomal C. Gehrig1, G. Lopez1, S. Gagos1, J. M. Delabar2, E. A. Y. Graison2, M. Costan- recessive form of juvenile parkinsonism; and the autosomal dominant tine2, P. M. Sinet3, S. E. Antonarakis1, R. Lyle1; spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA 17), respectively. All the cases 1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of reported were pediatric, thus it is not known if any of them has shown Paris Denis Diderot, Paris, France, 3Institut Paul Broca, Paris, France. these neurological manifestations during years. A major goal of Down syndrome (DS) research is to identify which genes or other functional genomic elements are responsible for particular P0207. A new locus for brachydactyly type A2 maps to aspects of this complex syndrome. Central to this is the concept of chromosome 20p critical regions (CRs). That is, regions of Hsa21 which, when present K. W. Kjaer1, K. Lehmann2, J. Correa3, P. Nürnberg4, N. Tommerup1, S. Mund- in 3 copies (aneuploid), result in one or more of the characteristic los5,2; features of DS. Based on rare indviduals with partial aneuploidy, CRs 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Medical Genet- have been mapped for several features of DS. However, the extent ics, University of Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Medical Genetics, of these regions have not been determined in detail. Studies of other Charité Universitary Medicine Berlin (Campus Virchow), Berlin, Germany, rearrangements (for example, deletions and translocations) involving 3Department of Medical Genetics, Federal University of Sao Paolo, Sao Paolo, Hsa21 may also provide information on the contribution of Hsa21 Brazil, 4Molecular Genetics and Gene Mapping Center, Max-Delbrueck-Center genes to DS. for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 5Max-Planck Institute for Molecular In order to provide high resolution mapping of pathogenic partial Genetics, Berlin, Germany. aneuploidies, deletions and translocations, and to identify polymorphic insertion-deletions, involving Hsa21, we have made a BAC array Brachydactyly type A2, an autosomal dominant hand malformation, covering 21q. The array consists of 411 Hsa21 BACs (from RPCI and is characterized by short and laterally deviated second and fifth CTD libraries), with a mean overlap of 85kb giving an approximately fingers. Also, the first and second toes can be affected in a similar 2-fold tiling path. The array also includes approximately 100 BACs for way. Heterozygous missense mutations in the gene coding for bone normalization and controls. This CGH array will be used to assess the morphogenetic protein receptor 1b (BMPR1B) were shown to cause Hsa21 content of partial trisomy cases of DS to aid in the understanding brachydactyly type A2 in some cases by acting in a dominant negative of genotype-phenotype correlations. In addition, we will characterize manner. Recently, we performed a clinical study in a large Brazilian the extent of Hsa21 large-scale copy number variation which was pedigree presenting with brachydactyly type A2, including radiographic recently identified in the human genome. More than 50 samples with evaluation of hands, feet and spine. We further undertook a linkage Hsa21 genomic abnormalities are available to us and their analysis is analysis using the SNP-GeneChip Human Mapping 10K Array/Assay in progress. Kit from Affymetrix. Additional polymorphic microsatellite markers were used for the fine mapping to narrow the defined region. Using this P0210. Cohen syndrome: molecular analysis of the COH1 gene approach, we mapped a new locus for brachydactyly A2 to a 17 cM in the Italian cohort of patients. region on chromosome 20p. As a candidate gene located within this new locus, we first sequenced the coding region of BMP2, known as C. Pescucci1, F. Ariani1, F. Mari1, C. Speciale1, M. Bedeschi2, P. Veggiotti3, R. an important ligand of the BMPRs that mediates essential functions in Fischetto4, R. Grasso5, R. Ghilardi6, A. Selicorni6, M. di Rocco7, M. Mantovan8, chondrocyte differentiation and bone formation, but no mutation was M. Priolo9, A. Mendicino10, R. Tenconi11, A. Renieri1; found. Several other candidate genes located within the disease locus 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, ICP, Clinica Mangiagal- will now be sequenced. li, Milano, Italy, 3Child Neuropsychiatry Department, Neurological Institute Ca- simiro Mondino IRCCS, Pavia, Italy, 4Divisione Malattie Metaboliche-Genetica P0208. Apparent intergenerational stability of CTG trinucleotide Medica, Ospedale Regionale Pediatrico Giovanni XXIII, Bari, Italy, 5Scientific repeats in three generations of women with myotonic dystrophy. Institute Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy, 6Ambulatorio Genetica D. Geneviève1, M. Jambou1, G. Gourdon2, Y. Dumez3, M. Masri4, A. Munnich1, Clinica, Clinica Pediatrica de Marchi, Milano, Italy, 7II Pediatria, Istituto Gaslini, J. Bonnefont1; Genova, Italy, 8Child Neuropsychiatry Azienda Ospedaliera Careggi, Firenze, 1Département de génétique Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, Italy, 9Medical Genetics, Azienda Ospedaliera Bianchi-Melacrino- Morelli, Reg- 2Unité INSERM U383, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Service gio Calabria, Italy, 10UO Genetica AUSL RME, Roma, Italy, 11Medical Genetics, Dept. Pediatrics, Universiy of Padova, Padova, Italy. de Gynécologie Obstétrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4Service de Gynécologie Obstétrique, Hôpital François Mitterrand, Pau, France. Cohen syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive condition characterizedClinical genetics 125 by mild to severe mental retardation associated with microcephaly and paternal allele. Heterozygosity and biparental inheritance was proven truncal obesity. Characteristic dysmorphic features are down slanting for D15S1007 at 15q14 and all other distal loci. Thus, approx. 15-20 palpebral fissures, short philtrum, open mouth, prominent upper central Mb of proximal 15q including PWS region is deleted. So far no gene incisors, prominent nose. Beside the facial gestalt, major diagnostic for HSCR has been identified within chromosome 15q11q14. HSCR in criteria include retinal dystrophy and neutropenia. Cohen syndrome our patient might be related to hemizygosity of the deleted segment. is a quite rare condition overrepresented in the Finnish population, However, none of the rare patients with comparable deletions with a highly homogeneous phenotype. In other populations clinical (Windpassinger et al, 2003) demonstrate HSCR. Alternatively, one of features may be remarkably different. We have collected a cohort of 15 the breakpoints may have interrupted sequences important to prevent Italian patients, originating from different regions. A diagnostic rating formation of HSCR. Significant might be the recent mapping of a novel of ‘certain’ (5 patients), ‘probable’ (4) and ‘possible’ (6) was assigned locus for primary ciliary dykinesia (CILD4, Jeganathan et al., 2004) to a on the basis of clinical criteria. DHPLC mutation analysis of the COH1 17cm critical segment overlapping with our distal breakpoint region. gene, recently identified as responsible for Cohen syndrome is ongoing. Analysis of the first 8 exons revealed three truncating mutations in P0213. Skewed X-inactivation in a family with mental retardation heterozygous state. Two are novel mutations: p.Q721fsX744 and and PQBP1 mutation p.R1143X. One, p.R2535X, is a recurrent mutation previously identified C. Romano, M. Fichera, M. Falco, M. Lo Giudice, L. Castiglia, V. Guarnaccia, in the German population. The mutation, p.C1117fsX1124, prevalent F. Calì, A. Spalletta, C. Scuderi, E. Avola; in the Finnish population, was not found. The above mutations were Oasi Institute (IRCCS), Troina, Italy. found in three patients who are likely genetic compounds as expected We previously reported on a family with mentally retarded males, by the absence of consanguinity in the Italian cohort. Two patients obligate carriers with skewed X-inactivation and the gene responsible were classified as ‘certain’ and one as ‘probable’ on the basis of clinical for this condition mapping in the Xp11-q12 region. Here we present more criteria. Presently, no mutations were found in the group of ‘possible’ clinical and molecular data within an expanded pedigree segregating a Cohen although only 8 out of 62 exons were analyzed. Extension of known four-bases deletion in the exon 4 of PQBP1 gene. The unusual the analysis to the entire coding sequence will allow to define Cohen X-inactivation pattern of the obligate carriers in this family raises the syndrome clinical features in the Italian population. topic about a possible modulation of the carrier's phenotype by the X-inactivation status. Mental impairment within the affected males is P0211. Unusual observations associated with novel C-terminal widely variable, ranging from borderline intelligence to severe mental MECP2 mutations retardation. These data support the search for PQBP1 mutations when K. Oexle1, B. Thamm-Mücke2, A. Bier1, S. Tinschert1; mentally retarded males in a family kindred compatible with X-linked 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany, inheritance show microcephaly, short stature, spastic diplegia/brisk 2Labor Reising-Ackermann, Leipzig, Germany. reflexes. We report novel C-terminal MECP2 mutations. One was a frameshift deletion, 1135_1142delCCCGTGCC, inducing a premature stop P0214. Screening of mutations in the human NIPBL gene in codon in a 19-year-old woman with mental retardation and epilepsy. patients with Cornelia de Lange syndrome by DGGE. Preservation of language capabilities, purposeful hand use and H. Gabriel, A. Lott, A. Gencik; sufficient locomotion implied an atypical variant of Rett syndrome. Zentrum fuer Medizinische Genetik, Osnabrueck, Germany. Occipito-frontal head circumference was large at birth (36 cm; SDS Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a clinically heterogeneous = 1.7) and increased to macrocephaly in the adult patient (58.5 cm; autosomal-dominant developmental disorder characterized by upper- SDS = 2.3). Thus, head size and head growth appear to be of limited extremity malformations, cardiac defects, growth retardation and reliability in the diagnosis of MECP2-associated phenotypes. gastrointestinal abnormalities. Additionally, typical facial features In a 3.7-year-old girl who presented with classical signs of Rett syndrome include rotated low-set ears, long eyelashes, thiner upper lip and such as delayed head growth, stop of language development, and depressed nasal bridge are found in patients. ataxia, four C-terminal MECP2-mutations were detected: an in-frame The prevalence of CdLS is estimated to be around 1/10,000. Most deletion of 3 nucleotides, 992_994del3bp, resulting in the removal cases are sporadic, although several family cases are described. of the lysine at position 331, a one-nucleotide frameshift deletion, Recently, it was documented that CdLS is caused by missense and 1027delG, a missense mutation 1061G>C, and a second frameshift nonsense mutations in the human NIPBL gene. NIBPL is the human deletion, 1160_1193del34bp. None of these mutations is contained in homolog of the Drosophila Nipped-B gene which is involved in Notch the MECP2 mutation databases. The 1061G>C mutation that causes signaling. an arginine to leucine substitution was present in the non-affected The human NIpBL gene consists of 47 exons. Mutations were found in father of the patient indicating that this mutation probably is a normal the entire coding region (Gillis et al., 2004). variant . To identify mutations in german CdLS patients we established a Our observations indicate a large variability associated with C-terminal DGGE-screnning protocol for detection of mutations in all exons of the MECP2 mutations. NIPBL gene. So far, we screened 20 german patients with suspected CdLS. Our P0212. Is there a novel locus for Hirschsprung disease(HSCR) preliminary data indicate that DGGE is a highly sensitive screening on chromosome 15q11q14? method for detection of mutations in the NIPBL gene. D. Wand, C. Gläser, I. Hansmann; Institut f Humangenetik u. Medizinische Biologie, 06097 Halle/Saale, Germany. P0215. Hemispheric polymicrogyria in a patient with a Sturge- Hirschsprung disease (HSCR, MIM # 142623) is a major cause of Weber-like Syndrome functional intestinal obstruction with an incidence of 1:5.000 live births. H. Faghfoury1, W. B. Dobyns2, R. J. Leventer3, S. Blaser4, C. Trevors1, M. M. HSCR is considered a multifactorial malformation with low and sex Nezarati1; dependent penetrance and variable expression depending on the 1Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, length of the aganglionic segment. At least 8 major genes have been ON, Canada, 2Department of Human Genetics, Neurology and Pediatrics, Uni- identified to be involved in HSCR. Interstitial chromosomal deletions versity of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 3Children's Neuroscience Center in combination with HSCR lead to the identification of such genes and Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, like RET (10q11.2), SIP1 (2q22q23) and EDNRB (13q22.1q32.1). Melbourne, Australia, 4Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Hospital for Sick According to our knowledge, chromosome 15q11q14 has not been Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. associated so far with HSCR. Sturge-Weber syndrome is a rare neurocutaneous disorder We report about a now 16 months-old girl with HSCR and major characterized by facial cutaneous vascular malformations and features of Prader Willi syndrome (PWS, MIM# 176270) associated leptomeningeal angiomatosis. Associated features include seizures with a de novo paternal deletion 46,XX,del(15)(q11.1q13/q14)(D15Z or other neurologic consequences and glaucoma. We report here 1x2,SNRPNx1,UBE3Ax1,PMLx2). Genotyping identified hemizygosity the case of a 3½-year-old girl born to consanguineous Amish of 2 microsatellite markers (D15S1048; D15S976) with loss of the parents. She presented with midline and right forehead port-wineClinical genetics 126 stains, left-sided weakness demonstrated by right hand preference, syndrome. Currently we are developing a quantitative real - time PCR first noted at 6 months, as well as eversion and rotation of the left method to detect also small deletions, to further clarify the mutational foot. She developed seizures, responsive to carbamazepine, at the spectrum in Finnish patients, and improve the molecular genetic testing age of 2½ years. Physical examination showed no other dysmorphic of the syndrome. Genotype - phenotype correlation will be discussed. features and appropriate growth. Imaging of the brain showed right hemispheric dysgenesis most prominent in the frontal lobe with an P0218. Cumming syndrome: report of two affected sibs irregular microgyric pattern and apparent cortical thickening in the F. Lalatta1, F. Natacci1, T. Rizzuti2, U. Cavallari1, M. Rustico3, M. F. Bedeschi1; frontal, parietal and anterior temporal lobes, typical of polymicrogyria. 1Medical Genetics Unit, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 2Pathol- There was reduced white matter underlying the polymicrogyria. ogy Unit, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 3Prenatal diagnosis The association of polymicrogyria in association with Sturge Weber Unit, Ospedale V.Buzzi, ICP, Milan, Italy. syndrome has been rarely reported and may provide insight into In 1986 Cumming et al. described a stillborn male infant, born at 27 the pathogenesis of polymicrogyria, suggesting an association with weeks’ gestation who had bowed limbs, marked cervical lymphocele abnormal cortical vasculature during development. polycystic dysplasia of the kidneys, pancreas and liver and polysplenia. P0216. Is there a specific phenotype associated with 3p14 Subsequently Urioste M. et al 1991 and Perez del Rio et al. 1999 microdeletion? reported four cases with similar findings. We have recently described F. Mari1, G. Gregato2, S. Gimelli2, T. Pramparo2, C. Pescucci1, C. Speciale1, E. (Am J Med Genet 2005) a 46,XX fetus with ascites, campomelia, Pretegiani1, M. Mencarelli1, K. Sampieri1, O. Zuffardi2, A. Renieri1; multicystic dysplastic kidneys, polysplenia, absence of fallopian tubes 1Medical Genetics, Dept. Mol. Biol., University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2General and uterus and laterality defects of the heart and lungs suggesting the Biology and Medical Genetics, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. diagnosis of Cumming. We report here a 26 year-old male patient with mental retardation The patient was the first-born of healthy, non consanguineous and dysmorphic features. Facies is characterized by high forehead, Caucasian parents. Family history was unremarkable. Ultrasound narrow horizontal palpebral fissures, epicanthic folds attenuating examination at 22nd week showed a thoracic hypoplasia , ascites, with the age, broad nasal bridge, bulbous and broad nasal tip with mild hyperchogenic kidneys, oligohydramnios, shortening and bowing prominent columella, slightly posteriorly angulated ears of normal of the lower limbs.The fetal stomach was not visualised and there was length with thick helix and hypoplastic lobules. He has a normal head a single umbilical artery was noted. Fetal blood chromosomes were circumference. He also has very small hands and feet and pes planus, 46,XX.The pregnancy was terminated. During the following pregnancy contractures of finger joints and clinodactyly of the 5° finger. Language ultrasound at 16th week showed oligohydramnios, hyperechogenic is absent. A brain MRI, performed at 14 years, showed hyperplasia kidneys, bowing of the lower limbs. Cytogenetic analysis on AL showed of corpus callosum. During the examination he shows an aggressive normal male karyotype. Pregnancy was terminated. Pathology: on and self-injuring behavior. Standard karyotype was normal. Whole external examination the fetus showed a cystic hygroma, ascites. genome array-CGH analysis revealed a deletion of about 8 Mb of Bowing femura and bilateral talipes equinovarus were present. Kidneys the short arm of chromosome 3. High resolution karyotype confirmed showed diffuse multicystic dysplasia. The external genitalia were male the presence of an interstitial deletion: 46,XY,del(3)(p14.3;p14.1). and testes were in abdomen. Other organs were normal in number Interstitial deletions of proximal 3p were reported in other 13 cases. and structure. All of them were identified by standard karyotype. Two are slightly The findings of our cases are similar to those reported by Cumming larger deletions totally missing the band p14 and the other partially et al (1986). The recurrence of a similar clinical picture in two sibs overlap extending toward the centromere. This is the smaller reported supports the autosomal recessive inheritance of the syndrome. deletion. Some dysmorphic features like high forehead, epicanthic folds and narrow horizontal palpebral fissures seem to be consistent P0219. Auditory function in Bardet-Biedl patients with deletion of this region. The finding of these features in a patient A. Besancon1, M. Eliot1, V. Weyl1, V. Laurier1, C. Stoetzel2, P. Sardat3, S. should represent a clinical hint for deeper investigation of proximal Sigaudy4, M. Holder5, C. Mireille6, C. Brandt1, F. Perrin-Schmitt7, J. Mandel8, D. short arm of chromosome 3. Widely use of array-CGH may also lead Kemp9, P. Beales10, H. Dollfus11; to the identification of additional microdeletions, further delineating a 1Hôpitaux Universitairesde Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire de specific syndrome. génétique médicale ULP , Faculté de médecine, Strasbourg, France, 3CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 5CHU P0217. Mutational analysis of NSD1 gene in Finnish patients with Lille, Lille, France, 6Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, Sotos syndrome 7Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France, P. Vuorela1, K. Huoponen1, M. Peippo2, M. Penttinen3, H. Kääriäinen1,3; 8IGBMC, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 9UCL, 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Family Center for auditory research, London, France, 10Institute Child health, Molecular Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3Turku University Central Hospital, Medecine Unit, London, United Kingdom, 11Hôpitaux Universitaires de Stras- Turku, Finland. bourg, Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale ULP, Strasbourg, France. Sotos syndrome (OMIM #117550) is a rare childhood overgrowth Introduction: Recently, the pathophysiology of Bardet-Biedl syndrome syndrome characterized by pre- and postnatal overgrowth, typical has been described as a primary ciliary dysfunction disorder. Ciliated facial appearance, advanced bone age, developmental delay and cells are present in the inner ear. predisposition to cancer. Although most cases are sporadic, few families Methods: A cohort of 21 patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome with autosomal dominant inheritance have been reported. Heterozygous genotyped for 8 BBS genes was studied. Patients were evaluated point mutations in the NSD1 gene or a microdeletion covering the for the auditory function with audiogramms and otoacoustic emission entire gene are the major cause of the syndrome. There is no hot spot (recording of vibrations created by contraction of outer hair cells). for mutations and to date there are over hundred different published Results: Audiogramms showed normal hearing. The threshold was pathogenic mutations in the NSD1 gene. inferior to 20dB for twenty patients but was higher then expected for Here we report the results of a mutation analysis using denaturing the age. One patient had moderate hearing loss. Otoacoustic emission high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and/or direct was altered for 55% of the patients ( 31% absent and diminished for sequencing of the NSD1 gene in 17 patients with clinically diagnosed 24%). Sotos syndrome. All cases were sporadic but only in two cases we had Discussion: The selective alteration at the level of the outer hair parental samples. Out of the 17 patients 15 (88%) were found to carry cells, revealed by the OAE may be due to a defect at the level of a unique heterozygous mutation. Eleven of these mutations resulted in the kinocilium, a primary cilia (9+0) found at the top of outer hair cell a truncated protein product and four resulted in amino acid changes. bundle, probably necessary for the cellular organisation the bundle. Twelve mutations are novel and three have been published previously. No specific genotype -auditory phenotype correlation was identified In the analysed families mutations had occurred de novo. Our results are to date. concordant with the results of the previous studies, which have shown that in European populations point mutations are the major cause of theClinical genetics 127 P0220. Recurrence of Achondrogenesis type II caused by a report we discuss the relevant clinical features, the molecular studies dominant COL2A1 mutation and “patchy” expression in the as well as our experiences with the ERT. Different levels of medical mosaic father attendance will be also presented. F. Faravelli1, F. Forzano1, A. Superti-Furga2, G. Wildhard3, B. Zabel3; Case report: A 27 years old male patient was admitted to our department 1Human Genetics Department, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Division of with angiokeratomas and recurrent diarrhoea. The diagnosis of Fabry Molecular Pediatrics, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3University of Mainz - disease was confirmed with the decreased plasma activity of GAL. The Children's Hospital, Mainz, Germany. corneal involvement was revealed by slit-lamp examination. Cardiac Achondrogenesis type 2 (ACG2) is produced by dominant mutations manifestation was ruled out. Normal renal function was observed. in COL2A1. These occur de novo in the vast majority of cases. In rare We performed reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis cases, mutations leading to Kniest dysplasia in children have been using RNA isolated from whole-blood sample. The amplicons were found at mosaic state in one of the parents who fitted the diagnostic subcloned and sequenced. A novel missense mutation was identified criteria for Stickler syndrome or mild spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia in the 266. codon (5. exon) of GAL: GAT (Asp) → TAT (Tyr). (Winterpacht et al, 1993; Spranger et al, 1994). In another family, After 12 months of ERT the patients reported improvements in the recurrence of ACG2 in two fetuses of an healthy couple was interpreted ability to sense heat as well as in his general well being. Decreased as evidence for gonadal mosaicism (Faivre et al, 2004). numbers of diarrhoea were occurred. New organ involvement or We present a family in which three fetuses were affected by ACG2. progression was not observed. Both parents were of normal height, but the father had had scoliosis Conclusion: ERT should be started in the early stage of the disease, as a child and showed slight body disproportion with short trunk as an before the irreversible complications are developed. To get this optimal adult. His femoral heads, pelvis and lumbar vertebrae (telltale sites point, cooperation of paediatricians, cardiologists, nephrologists, for collagen 2 disorders) were normal on xrays; only some thoracic neurologists, ophthalmologists, dermatologists and molecular vertebrae showed mild flattening and anterior wedging. Although biologists should be performed. a somatic mosaicism was considered unlikely, molecular analysis revealed a COL2A1 point mutation (G1037T) in the fetuses, and a P0223. Deafness : clinical and genetic evaluation of 102 patients. signal consistent with mosaicism in father’s blood DNA. B. Gilbert-Dussardier1, K. Barsotti1, C. Gohler1, N. Bourmeyster1, C. Magde- This evidence reinforces the need to consider mosaicism in families laine2, P. Amati-Bonneau3, J. M. Klossek1; with newly recognized COL2A1 disorders and indicates that somatic 1Hopital Jean Bernard, Poitiers, France, 2CHU Dupuytren, Limoges, France, mosaicism can lead not only to milder but generalized clinical 3CHU, Angers, France. phenotype but also to regional (“patchy”) expression, with some bones Deafness is the most prevalent (1/700) sensory defects in humans. It affected and others entirely unaffected. This may depend by the time is an etiologically heterogeneous trait with many known genetic and of onset and the body region or segment in which the somatic mutation environmental causes. arises. We reviewed medical records from 102 patients who have been seen in our department of clinical genetics over 6 years. We analyzed clinical P0221. Results of prenatal diagnosis of thalassemia in the features of deafness : isolated or syndromic form, type and severity Iranian province of Hormozgan (2001-2004) of hearing impairment, age of onset, uni or bi-lateral impairment, P. Nikuei1, M. Saberi1, H. Najmabadi2, G. Tabasi3, N. Ansarian4; sporadic or familial case, and looked to medical investigations they 1Social Welfare Organisation, Bandarabbas, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics had : presence of any malformation and/or dysmorphologic features, Research Center, The Social Welfare &Rehabilitation Sciences University, Teh- X-rays of inner ear, renal, cardiac, thyroïd, visual, physical and mental ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Dr.Nikuei Mediical Genetic Counselling Center, development, chromosomal and/or genetic screening. Bandarabbas, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dr.Nikuei Medical Genetic Counselling Out of 102 patients, there were 40 adults and 62 children. Sex ratio Center, Bandarabbas, Islamic Republic of Iran. was 1.37 F/M. Half of them (49 %) had a syndromic form and 53 % We review 126 persons (63 couples) with hemoglobinopathy attending had an isolated deafness. Out of the patients with syndromic forms, two genetic counseling centers in Hormozgan province, which is we could identify 15 Usher, 4 type I Waardenburg, 3 Goldenhar, located in the south of Iran in the north of the Persian Gulf, for the 4 B.O.R. syndromes. One had a partial chromosomal del 2q. Out years 2001- 2004. After genetic counseling these couples were of 53 nonsyndromic cases, 16 were sporadic and 37 were familial. referred for molecular investigations. Results are as follows: 122 Transmission was clearly autosomal dominant (DFNA) in 13 cases persons (96.8%) were Fars, four (3.2%) were Baloochis. Thirty eight and autosomal recessive (DFNB) in 10 cases. Seven cases were couples had consanguinous marriages (61.3%). Twenty couples that homozygotous for mutations in GBJ2 and 5 composit heterozygotous were referred to us had an affected child. Among the patients who for a mutation in GJB2 and a mutation in GJB6. One familial case with were referred to us, 111 individuals had beta thalassemia minor while a maternal transmission was due to the T7511C mitochondrial DNA 15 other individuals were carriers for other hemoglobin disorders such mutation. as alpha thalassemia, hemoglobin D and hemoglobin S. The mutation We found few studies with such an approach of a global population of spectrum reveals IVS1-5 (76 cases) as the major beta thalassemia death patients. We will comment ad compare our results. mutation in our province followed by IVSII-I (11 cases), IVS1-110, IVS1- 6, C5, C15, C30. Two types of sampling were performed for prenatal P0224. The effects of pentoxyfilline on drug allergy induced by diagnosis: CVS (chorionic villus sampling) and amniocentesis. In 50 α-galactosidase cases prenatal diagnosis was done. The results were as follow: minor T. Constantin, A. Ponyi, M. Garami, G. Fekete; thalassemia: 26 fetuses (52%); normal homozygote: 11 fetuses (22%), 2nd Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, major thalassemia: 13 fetuses (26%). Our result shows a Mendelian Budapest, Hungary. distribution in our prenatal diagnostic program in Hormozgan Objective: Pentoxifylline is widely used to treat peripheral vascular province. diseases. Additional to this well-known indication, pentoxifylline is a promising new agent for the treatment of SIRS (severe immune response P0222. Organising the management of patients with Fabry syndrome). Pentoxifylline decreases release of TNF-α, the central disease in the view of multidisciplinary approach mediator of SIRS. It also inhibits cytokine-induced polymorphonuclear G. Fekete, M. Garami, A. Ponyi, R. Biacsi, K. Németh, T. Constantin; cell activation and adherence, as well as polymorphonuclear cell 2nd Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, degranulation and superoxide anion production. Budapest, Hungary. Methods: We report a case of a young male patient with Fabry Objective: Fabry disease is a rare lysosomal storage disorder. The disease in whom hypersensitive reaction developed against enzyme management of Fabry disease is very complex, included the clinical replacement therapy (ERT). and molecular genetic diagnosis, the assessment of disease severity, Case report: A 25-year-old male patient was admitted to our the genetic counselling and the enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Department with angiokeratomas, post-stroke and pain syndromes. Methods: The complexity of the management has given the reason After the diagnosis of Fabry disease was confirmed, ERT was started. for established Fabry Work Group in our Institute. Through a case Since that, two episodes of adverse events were observed with severeClinical genetics 128 shiver and hypertension. The relationship between these events and P0227. The difficult task of sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) in the infusion were probable in both occasion. Although the pre- and patients with idiopathic cardiomyopathies. post infusion IgE titres and the post infusion serum tryptase level M. Diegoli1,2, M. Grasso2, E. Porcu2, E. Disabella2, M. Tagliani2, C. Lucchelli2, S. were normal; the result of lymphocyte transformation test showed Ansaldi2, M. Pasotti3, A. Serio3, L. Tavazzi3, A. Brega4,5, E. Arbustini2; mild hypersensitisation against the drug. Regarding the patient’s 1Dpt. of Pathology - University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Lab. Molecular Genet- progressive multi-organ involvement and the above mentioned results ics, IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Cardiology, IRCCS Policlinico of laboratory studies, continuation of ERT with pre- and post infusion S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 4Dpts. of Biology and Genetics- University of Milan, Mi- pentoxyfilline administration was decided. The patient received 14 lan, Italy, 5Genetics and Microbiology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. courses according to this protocol without any problem. SNHL may occur in patients with inherited cardiomyopathies both Conclusion: The clinical use of ERT is limited mainly by the treatment hypertrophic (HCM) and dilated (IDCM). To date, hearing loss has been cost, the production of neutralising antibodies and the hypersensitive reported in patients with mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) defects related to reactions caused by the antigenic effects of the drug. The presented HCM, or occasionally described in patients with autosomal dominant method may be useful in the treatment of Fabry patients with cardiomyopathies. Recently the epicardin gene (locus 6q23-24) has hypersensitive reaction. been linked to familial IDCM associated with SNHL. No mutations has been identified to date in the epicardin gene. P0225. Carrier diagnosis of DMD/BMD deletions by QPCR Aim of the study was analyzing mtDNA, epicardin, connexin26 (Cx26) L. Alías, A. Freixas, M. J. Rodriguez, M. J. Barceló, M. Baiget, P. Gallano; and connexin30 (Cx30) in patients with cardioauditory syndromes, Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. both HCM and IDCM associated with SNHL. We sought to find a technique to establish a direct DMD/BMD carrier The mtDNA, Cx26, Cx30 and epicardin genes were analysed in 15 diagnosis in families in which it was not possible to perform this kind patients with SNHL, 4 with HCM and 11 with IDCM. MtDNA, Cx26 of diagnosis. and epicardin genes were analysed by direct sequencing (ABI 3100 We applied the QPCR technique by Light Cycler using the Fast Start Genetic Analyzer); Cx30 deletion was evaluated by amplicon size. DNA master SYBR Green (Roche) to muscular and brain promotors We identified the A3243G and the G1644A heteroplasmic mutations and to 25 different exons scattered over the dystrophin gene. in 2 of 4 HCM patients, both with familial matrilinear hearing loss and We diagnosed 64 women from 30 families presenting a risk of being associated encephalomyopathy. The A3243G carrier also carried the DMD/BMD carriers. The women presented risk because they belonged heterozygous V37I mutation in the Cx26 gene. Of the 11 patients with to families in which a deletion in dystrophin gene was detected in the IDCM, one was found to carry the heterozygous G22V mutation in the affected boy. The results were compared with the indirect analysis by epicardin gene and one the Cx26 deletion (del30G). Of the remaining 9 STRs. patients with IDCM, none was carrier of mutations. A second mutation The Light Cycler technique offers reliability and spead in the (D21E) in the epicardin gene was identified in one of 30 patients heterozygous carrier diagnosis. Furthermore, this technique allows us screened for SNHL.Genotyping process of cardioauditory syndromes to avoid the hybridization with specific probes to each exon. should be based on clinical evaluation and addressed to the potential Owing to this method it is possible to diagnose DMD/BMD carrier causative genes by the clinical ground. women in families in which other methods could not be applied or did not yield accurate results (sporadic cases, no informativity by STRs, P0228. Two novel cases of Taybi-Linder syndrome (MOPD I/III) in unavailability of of parents of the women studied). brothers: further delineation of the phenotype focusing on the cerebral malformations P0226. Molecular analysis of CTDP1 gene in consanguineous P. Edery1,2, A. Labalme2, F. Dijoud3, J. Attia-Sobol4, M. Till1, L. Guibaud5; families presenting typical or partial CCFDN phenotype 1Clinical Genetics Service, Lyon, France, 2EA 3739 University Claude Bernard T. Hamadouche1, C. Lagier-Tourenne2, V. Delague1, I. Boccaccio1, H. Dollfus3, Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 3Anatomy and Pathology Service, Lyon, France, 4Gyn- N. Philip4, N. Lévy1,4; aecology and Obstetrics Service, Lyon, France, 5Pediatrics and Foetal Imagery 1Inserm U491, Faculté de Médecine de Marseille, Marseille, France, 2IGBMC, Department, Lyon, France. Strasbourg, France, 3Fédération de Génétique, Strasbourg, France, 4Départe- Microcephalic and osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism (MOPD) type ment de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d'enfants de la Timone, Marseille, I/III or Taybi-Linder syndrome is a very rare autosomal recessive France. syndrome (20 cases reported to date) of unknown cause, characterized Congenital Cataract Facial Dysmorphism Neuropathy syndrome by severe intrauterine growth retardation, dwarfism with short limbs (CCFDN) is a complex autosomal recessive disorder involving multiple and dislocated hips and elbows, dry skin, sparse hair and eyebrows systems and organs. Initially reported from the Roma Gypsy group and microcephaly. Malformations of the central nervous system were originating from Bulgaria, CCFDN is characterized by developmental previously reported in Taybi-Linder syndrome but very few accurate impairments affecting eyes and face, peripheral and central nervous and illustrated descriptions are available to date. Here, we provide a system, growth and intellect. Recently, the disease causing gene was complete phenotypic description of two affected brothers born to first identified, CTDP1, encoding an essential component of the eucaryotic cousin healthy parents. Moreover, we show that, in both patients, transcription machinery. So far, a unique founder homozygous supratentorial anomalies which include frontal polymicrogyria, mutation, g.IVS6+389C>T, has been identified in CCFDN patients, agenesis of the corpus callosum and a large interhemispheric cyst are resulting in an aberrant splicing and causing partial loss of expression. far more severe than the cerebellar ones that appear to be restricted We report molecular analysis of three consanguineous Gypsy families to a mild vermis hypoplasia. with either typical or partial CCFDN. The homozygous mutation was identified in families G and B. Indeed, although typical CCFDN P0229. Anthropometric characteristics of the Polish group of phenotype was observed in family G, in family B, a 5 years old girl patients with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) mainly presented a demyelinating neuropathy with congenital cataract M. Gajdulewicz, K. H. Chrzanowska, H. Rysiewski, K. Spodar, M. Krajewska- although developmental delay and facial dysmorphism were slight. Walasek; In family L, initially diagnosed as non syndromic CMT4, the same Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. mutation was found to be heterozygous in one patient. Investigation Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a rare autosomal recessive of other loci already known to segregate in Gypsies (NDRG1, HMSN- disease characterized by microcephaly, growth retardation, R) and transcriptional studies from cultured lymphocytes from CCFDN immunodeficiency, radiosensitivity, and an elevated risk of cancer. individuals of these families are in progress. However, despite the NBS seems to be prevalent among Central and Eastern European homozygous presence of the mutation in one affected patient (family populations, with Polish patients constituting approximately half of all B), the clinical phenotype is somewhat different, suggesting that typical registered NBS patients worldwide. All 84 Polish patients identified CCFDN might be misdiagnosed at lower ages. We thus propose to date (Polish NBS Registry, December 2004) share the common CTDP1 as a candidate gene in patients presenting a combination of founder mutation in the NBS1 gene, 657del5. A total of 43 patients peripheral neuropathy and congenital cataract, even in absence of aged from birth to 20 years, observed at a single centre (Children's others developmental features. Memorial Health Institute), were enrolled in this study. A detailedClinical genetics 129 physical examination encompassing about 55 phenotypic traits was in 18.5 % and 78.6 %, respectively, but no atypical deletion, while performed. Anthropometric measurements, repeated at 6-12 month 5 % of patients with mildly suggestive, atypical phenotype, showed intervals, included in addition to height and weight, 18 somatic traits atypical distal deletions, which were not detected in a control sample. of the trunk and limbs, and 15 traits of the head. On the basis of These statistical significant differences demonstrate that atypical anthropometric parameters it was shown that the somatic development distal 22q11.2 deletions are very uncommon in patients with ctCHDs, of the patients was not only significantly (p<0.001) delayed from the while atypical congenital heart defects and mild dysmorphism is a very earliest stages of life in comparison with age- and sex-matched recognizable feature of atypical distal deletions. Further phenotype- controls, but was also characterized by a differentiated dynamic of genotype analysis disclosed association of significant developmental ontogenesis. It was possible to identify three developmental stages delay with the distal part of the common deletion region and choanal in relation to height, weight, and chest circumference: delay (years atresia and atypical CHDs with the adjacent distal deletion region. 1-2 of life), acceleration (from age 2 to 10 years, depending on the parameter), and stabilization, and two in relation to head circumference P0232. Mutational analysis in NF1 patients screened for heart (no acceleration). abnormalities This work was supported in part by a grant No 2 P05E06628 from the A. Gabriele1, M. Ruggieri2, G. Peluso1, C. Lucifora2, L. Matti2, P. Sciacca2, T. State Committee for Scientific Research of the Republic of Poland. Sprovieri1, A. Patitucci1, A. Magariello1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, M. Muglia1; P0230. Split hand / foot malformation (SHFM) in two members of 1Institute of Neurological Sciences-National Research Couincil, Cosenza, Italy, a family with monosomy 17p13.3 and 22q11. 2Department of Paediatrics,University of Catania, Catania, Italy. B. Gener1, M. Del Campo1, E. González-Roca2, M. Salido3, C. Orejuela4, O. It is still unclear whether cardiovascular malformations are more Villa3, D. Godal4, M. Vilella4, F. Solé3, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1; common in the NF1 population. Studies so far performed have analysed 1Genetics Unit, Department of Experimental Science,Universitat Pompeu Fab- data from multiple centres or from selected NF1 populations and ra, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 3Cyto- prevalence figures have ranged from 2.3% to 27%. Heart involvement genetics Laboratory, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 4Residència Marinada, has been associated to more severe NF1 phenotypes and large NF1 Grup Pere-Mata, Reus, Spain. gene deletions. We report on a 30 year old man presenting with severe mental The aim of this study is to evaluate the spectrum of cardiovascular retardation, inverted nipples, glandular hypospadias and limb abnormalities in nine NF1 individuals screened for mutations in the NF1 malformation consisting in monodactyly of both hands and lobster claw gene. We studied the heart (by means of electrocardiogram, complete deformity of feet. Standard karyotype revealed 45,XY,der(17)t(17;22)( 2-dimensional echocardiograms and Doppler studies) and performed p13.3;q11.21),-22. The unbalanced rearrangement was also present in (by means of DHPLC and DNA sequencing) a mutational analysis of the proband’s sister, a mentally retarded woman with unilateral breast the whole NF1 gene in nine NF1 patients (4 males, 5 females; aged 3 hypoplasia and unilateral split foot, and in their mother who had mild to 28 years) seen at the Department of Paediatrics of the University of learning difficulties but no limb malformations. Short stature, hypernasal Catania and the National Research Council of Cosenza, Italy. speech and a characteristic facial dysmorphism with variable severity The results showed that none of the nine patients had or developed was present in all three. cardiovascular abnormalities. No large NF1 gene deletions have been FISH studies in the proband and his mother ruled out the deletion of detected, but the NF1 gene analysis revealed 1 stop mutation, 3 LIS1 in 17p13 and confirmed the deletion involving the DGS/VCFS amino acid substitutions, 3 deletions, 1 insertion and 1 intronic change region in 22q11.2 (TUPLE probe) in all cells. CGH study on a microarray affecting splicing. The results confirm previous data by Venturin et al. with the tiling path of chromosome 22 in these two patients showed a where the cardiovascular malformations were associated with "NF1 deletion extending from the centromere to the most proximal 1,5 Mb microdeletion syndrome" caused by a deletion of 1.5 Mb in 17q11.2 within the critical DGS/VCFS region. To our knowledge, this is the first region. case of ectrodactyly (SHFM) in a patient with a chromosomal aberration involving either chromosomes 22 or 17. Only mild limb anomalies have P0233. Orthomolecular therapy of mitochondrial been described in patients with the typical DGS/VCFS phenotype and encephalomyopathy lactic acidosis and stroke-like episode deletion 22q11.2, and none of the 5 known SHSF loci map to either (MELAS): A review of findings and directions for future research of these regions. Our data indicate that monosomy 22q10-q11.21 J. K. Brewer; and/or 17q13.3-qter can lead to disruption of a pathway involved in University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. the development of hands, feet, genitalia and breasts. Current studies A recurring problem in the diagnosis and treatment of mitochondrial aimed at identifying candidate genes for these anomalies are being disorders is the diversity of clinical symptoms that accompany performed. biochemical abnormalities. Well-controlled empirical data with sufficient N are nonexistent. The body of literature with respect to P0231. Systematic assessment of atypical deletions reveals MELAS consists of case reports of varied and inconsistent findings. genotype-phenotype correlation in 22q11.2 Currently, there is no treatment for this disorder; however, some A. Rauch1, S. Zink2, C. Zweier1, A. Koch2, R. Rauch3, M. Weyand4, H. Singer2, researchers have targeted the effects of supplementing patients’ M. Hofbeck3; diets with enzymes critical for electron transport in mitochondria. This 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nurem- qualitative meta-analytic review synthesizes the findings of 18 case berg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Pediatric Cardiology, University Hospital, Erlangen, reports both pre- and post-orthomolecular intervention. Most studies Germany, 3Pediatric Cardiology, University Hospital, Tuebingen, Germany, did not report specific neuropsychological scores or objective measures 4Heart Surgery, University Hospital, Erlangen, Germany. of psychiatric symptoms either before or after treatment, emphasizing Clinical variability associated with the common 22q11.2 microdeletion patients’ subjective reports and biochemical findings instead. Generally, is well known and led to broad application of FISH diagnostics with patients exhibited depressed IQ with gradual decline in global cognitive probes for loci TUPLE1 or D22S75 (N25), although rarely reported functioning. Some patients also exhibited sudden and/or unexplained atypical deletions associated with the same phenotypic spectrum language deficits, including poor verbal comprehension, decreased would not be discovered by these probes. As most types of 22q11.2 word-finding, agraphia, receptive aphasia, phonemic paraphasia, deletions occurred between low copy repeats within the region dysarthria and semantic paraphasia. Almost all patients exhibited (LCR22), we assumed that atypical deletions would be more common impaired motor control. Psychiatric symptoms always co-existed with than reported. To address this question and the possibility of a deletion neuropsychological deficits. Patients with defects in the tempoparietal size related genotype-phenotype correlation, we used a set of 10 FISH regions evidenced on neuroimaging exhibited impairments in the DNA probes which is capable to detect all reported and hypothetical language domain. Patients with defects in the basal ganglia exhibited types of deletions in between the LCR22, and analysed a total of 350 psychiatric symptoms. A suggested neuropsychological test battery patients. emerged. Overall, the temporal correlation between patients’ clinical Patients with conotruncal heart defects (ctCHD) or with typical VCFS improvement and the commencement of treatment with enzymes or phenotype showed the common 3 Mb and nested 1.5 Mb deletions co-factors which upregulate oxidative phophorylation in mitochondriaClinical genetics 130 suggests it may be a useful treatment of patients with MELAS P0236. Identification and characterisation of conserved non- syndrome. These findings may have far-reaching implications as to coding DNA sequences surrounding the human SOX2 gene other disorders of movement and neurodegeneration. F. H. Sharkey, M. Ansari, P. Gautier, D. R. FitzPatrick; Medical Research Council, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. P0234. Del(18p) syndrome with a single central maxillary incisor Microopthalmia, anophthalmia and coloboma (MAC) are among the M. Martins, R. Pinto Leite, B. Carvalho, M. Souto, E. Ribeiro; most common ocular malformations and a significant cause of congenital Centro Hospitalar de Vila Real-Peso da Régua,S.A., Vila Real, Portugal. blindness. Mutations in at least two genes, SOX2 and PAX6 are known Introduction: cause anophthalmia in humans. The idea that animal development is Del (18 p) Syndrome (MIM 607500), which results from the deletion of controlled by non-coding regulatory elements is now well established in the short arm of the chromosome 18, was first described by de Grouchy invertebrates. DNA regulatory elements surrounding SOX2 have also et al. [1963]. There is a broad phenotypic variability associated with the been identified and characterised extensively in chicken, with the chick syndrome but the main clinical manifestations are mild to moderate genome believed to represent the best compromise for phylogenetic mental retardation, growth deficiency and craniofacial dysmorphism comparisons with mammals. Using multiple-species alignments we including mild microcephaly, round face, ptosis, epicanthal folds, have identified ten conserved non-coding DNA elements surrounding low nasal bridge, hypertelorism, dysplastic ears, wide mouth with the human SOX2 gene as candidate regions with a role in regulating downturning corners, microretrognathia, and dental anomalies. the expression of the SOX2 gene during development. These 10 Abnormalities of the limbs, genitalia, brain, eyes, and heart have also sequences that were >95% identical at a nucleotide level across four been described. species (human, mouse, chicken and Xenopus), were used for further More than 150 cases have since been reported, most of them analysis and had a size range of 80-280bp. To test the hypothesis sporadic, due to “de novo” deletion, although familial cases have been that mutations in these regions may result in anophthalmia we used described. About 16% of the cases are due to translocations between DHPLC analysis of PCR products covering these regulatory elements chromosome 18 and acrocentric chromosomes. in 66 patients with structural eye defects. We found no evidence that Clinical Report: mutations in these non-coding sequences surrounding SOX2 are We report a 5-year-old girl that was referred for consultation due to responsible for structural eye defects in our patient cohort (MAC). This mild mental deficiency, language delay and dysmorphic features confirms that SNPs are underrepresented in these highly conserved including a single central maxillary incisor. Cytogenetics analysis, sequences. These regions will now be screened in patient cohorts performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes, by using GTG and CBG for deletions and duplications using high resolution CGH microarray banding techniques, showed a translocation between chromosome 13 analysis. and 18 resulting in monosomy 18p. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) studies with chromosome painting probes for the chromosomes P0237. Cypher/ZASP gene mutations cause idiopathic dilated involved were performed and confirmed the result. Parent’s karyotypes cardiomyopathy (IDCM) with poor prognosis. were normal. A. Pilotto1, M. Grasso1, M. Pasotti2, E. Disabella1, M. Diegoli1,3, C. Lucchelli1, E. Discussion: Porcu1, A. Repetto2, C. Campana2, A. Gavazzi4, L. Tavazzi2, E. Arbustini1; Del (18 p) Syndrome is associated with a wide range of clinical 1Lab. Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Cardiology, manifestations. Although most of the cases are sporadic, family IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Dpt. of Pathology - University of Pa- studies are necessary for proper genetic counselling. We emphasize via, Pavia, Italy, 4Cardiology, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy. the importance of long follow up of patients affected with del(18p) IDCM is characterized by ventricular dilatation and systolic dysfunction syndrome. with signs of heart failure and is inherited in 30-40% of cases. Genetic heterogeneity characterizes familial IDCM. Cypher/ZASP gene P0235. Severe myelopathy in brachytelephalangic chondroplasia encodes a protein that is a component of the Z-line in both skeletal punctata :a non exceptional complication? and cardiac muscle. Recent studies demonstrated that Cypher/ZASP C. Baumann1, A. Garnier2, V. Drouin -Garraud3, A. Delezoide4, C. Garel5, A. knock-out mice develop cardiomyopathy and that defects of the Cypher/ Verloes1; ZASP gene may cause familial IDCM. Six mayor cDNA isoforms of 1Hopital Robert Debré/ UF de genetique clinique, Paris, France, 2Hopital Robert Cypher/ZASP have been identified in human striated muscle and are Debré/ service de réanimation polyvalente, Paris, France, 3Hopital Charles generated by alternative splicing of a single gene. Nicolle /service de génétique, Rouen, France, 4Hopital Robert Debré/ UF de We screened the Cypher/ZASP gene in 25 unrelated probands foetopathologie, Paris, France, 5Hopital Robert Debré/ service de radiologie, with familial AD-IDCM according to WHO criteria. Levels of serum Paris, France. creatine-phoshokinase were measured to evaluate skeletal muscle Brachytelephalangic chondrodysplasia punctata (CPDX1) the involvement. RXL form of chondrodysplasia punctata, results from a deficiency Three mutations, one novel and two known (Asp117Asn, Ser196Leu in arylsulfatase E. It is usually considered as a minor disorder with and Val588Ile) were identified in three probands (12%) and three mild growth disturbance and facial dysmorphism similar to Binder related affected relatives. Two of these six patients underwent heart maxillofacial dysostosis. transplantation (a father and his young son), two died [sudden cardiac We report 4 cases of CPDX1 complicated with severe myelopathy. death (n=1), congestive heart failure (n=1)] while two, from two Two fetuses of a Caucasian woman were suspected for CPDX1 after unrelated families (both young sons of affected patients), are stable the discovery of skeletal anomalies by ultrasonographic scan. TOP in functional NYHA class I and II respectively. None of the patients was done at 26 and 21 WG respectively because of a severe narowing showed echocardiographic features suggestive for non-compaction left of the cervical spinal cord observed by MRI in both cases. ventricle (NCLV) (Chin et al. and McKenna et al. criteria). We confirm In two other unrelated newborns, flat face was noted at prenatal Cypher/ZASP gene as candidate gene for familial IDCM independently ultrasound scan . CPDX1 was diagnosed neonatally .Both children on echocardiographic pattern of NCLV. The genetic heterogeneity of showed neurological anomalies at birth: severe hypotonia, lack of familial IDCM is further increasing thus making complex to address bulbopontine reflexes and pyramidal signs. Medullary MRI showed patients to the analysis of different disease genes according to the vertebral dislocation with cervical spine compression. Both newborns phenotype. died from neurological complications respectively at day 15 and 25. Those 4 cases had facial dysmorphism and skeletal anomalies P0238. Mutation screening in DHH (Desert Hedgehog) gene in characteristic from CPDX1 .Diagnosis was confirmed by the male infertility identification of mutations in the ARSE gene for the 3 families. F. Ganz, P. Dabrilli, C. Vinanzi, L. Bartoloni, C. Bedin, A. Ferlin, C. Foresta; Life threatening spinal cord complications has not been reported so far University of Padova, Padova, Italy. in CPDX1 . These 4 observations indicate that the prognosis of CPDX1 The DHH (Desert Hedgehog) gene codes for a signalling protein in could be worse than usually reported .Careful, in utero or neonatal MRI Sertoli cells, following closely the expression of SRY. Its receptor imaging of the spine is recommended for fetuses or newborns with (PTC1) is localized in Leydig cells and in peritubular cells. Adult and Binder face and stippled epiphyses . prepubertal Dhh null-mice display abnormal peritubular tissue andClinical genetics 131 restricted spermatogenesis. Mutations in the DHH gene are associated missense mutations in the actin-binding domain of filamin B. These with 46,XY complete and partial Gonadal Dysgenesis. We present a data confirm that dominant forms of LS can result from heterozygosity mutation screening in the DHH gene on 100 male infertile patients for missense mutations in FLNB. We have collected clinical materials affected by different testicular defects and 50 normal controls. 30 on 10 genetically independent cases with LS. In 2 of cases, there patients were affected by not obstructive azoospermia; 45 by severe were independent recurrent mutations that were identical to those oligozoospermia (<5million/mL); 25 by moderate oligozoospermia (5- found in the original report of FLNB mutations in Larsen syndrome 20million/mL). All patients were previously studied for mutations in patients. In one family we confirmed germ cell mosaicism in a AR, INSL3 and for microdeletions in Yq. The three DHH exons were grandparent with subsequent dominant transmission. We performed a amplified by PCR and analyzed by direct sequencing and DHPLC systematic comparison of the clinical characteristics and radiographic technique. manifestations of 120 LS cases reported in the literature, and we We detected two polymorphisms in third codon positions in exon 2, not compared these features with those in our research subjects. changing codified aminoacid and present in controls: H181H (c>t) and A163A (g>t). We also detected a INV2-3c>a substitution in intron 2 in P0241. Skewed X-chromosome inactivation in the peripheral a patient affected by anorchia. The intronic substitution is carried by blood but not in the skin lesion of a female patient with linear the father. This variation was found only once, thus having a frequency scleroderma 'en coup de sabre' of 1/300. T. Ozcelik1, S. Bagislar1, C. B. Akyerli1, Y. Demir2; This work evidences that DHH mutations are not a common cause 1Bilkent University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and for human male infertility. According to software prediction, the intron Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University, Faculty of Medicine, 2 substitution could give alternative splicing. Expression studies on Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Afyon, Turkey. mRNA are difficult as the patient lacks testicular tissue, where DHH is We describe a 27-year-old woman, diagnosed with scleroderma expressed. Familiar analysis of patients affected by anorchia does not “en coup de sabre” who has differential patterns of X-chromosome exclude an hypothesis of imprinting for DHH gene. inactivation (XCI) in peripheral blood and atrophic skin lesion cells. The patient presented with linear atrophy of the skin and fat tissue P0239. Clinical, cytogenetical and molecular analyses of Sotos on the right side of her face that began four years before. Thinned and Weaver syndrome in 50 patients epidermis, homogeneous collagen deposition in the dermis and L. Burglen1,2, V. Malan3, P. Saugier-Veber4, M. F. Portnoi3, V. Drouin-Garraud4, perivascular lymphocytic infiltration was observed in the lesion area. D. Feldmann5, J. L. Taillemite3, T. Frebourg4, M. P. Vazquez6; The distribution of the lesion appeared to follow the lines of Blaschko. 1Unite de genetique Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 2UPRES EA 3497, Paris We recently demonstrated extremely skewed XCI in peripheral blood VI, France, 3Laboratoire de cytogenetique Hôpital St-Antoine, Paris, France, cells of female scleroderma patients. Based on the observations 4Laboratoire de genetique moleculaire et INSERM U614, Faculte de Medecine that frontoparietal or linear forms of the disease follow the lines of et de Pharmacie, Service de Genetique, Rouen, France, 5Laboratoire de Bio- Blaschko, we hypothesized that extremely skewed XCI, especially in chimie Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 6Service de chirurgie maxillofaciale hematopoietic stem cells, may be involved in disease pathogenesis. Hôpital Trousseau and UPRES EA 3497 Paris VI, Paris, France. Blaschko’s lines were originally described as unusual pigmented Sotos syndrome is characterised by pre and post natal overgrowth with patterns on the skin, and the boundaries are patches of clonally related advanced bone age, macrocephaly, characteristic facial dysmorphism, X-inactivation derivatives. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the and variable mental retardation. Microdeletions of 5q35 region or androgen receptor polymorphism and demonstrate that XCI mosaicism mutations of NSD1 gene are observed in 60-90% Sotos syndrome and is extremely skewed with the allele ratios of (lower and upper alleles in some patients affected with Weaver syndrome. Furthermore Rio et respectively) 96/4 percent in peripheral blood cells. However, XCI al. reported 11p15 anomalies in 2 patients with Sotos syndrome.We patterns were random with 49/51 percent in normal and 35/65 percent report on clinical and molecular findings in a cohort of 50 patients with in lesion skin biopsy specimens. These results support the hypothesis Sotos and Weaver syndrome (age 5 months- 25 years). Large deletions that extremely skewed XCI could be involved in the pathogenesis of were observed in 5 patients (10%). In 25 patients (50%) we identified autoimmune diseases including scleroderma. NSD1 anomalies. In 20 patients without 5q35 or NSD1 anomalies Supported by grants from the Scientific and Technical Research 11p15 region was studied and was normal. Phenotype-genotype Council of Turkey - TUBITAK-SBAG 2513, and International Center for correlations were studied. As previously reported we observed more Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology - ICGEB-CRP/TUR04-01. severe cognitive impairment in patients harbouring large deletions. One patient with a large deletion presented with a severe behavioural P0242. Alström Syndrome: Clinical and Molecular phenotype, autoagressiveness and autistic behaviour. No Renal, Characterization of two Portuguese families cardiac and ophthalmologic malformations were more frequent and C. Dias1, G. Soares1, J. Pinto-Basto1, M. Rocha1, S. Beck2, P. Tavares2, A. For- more severe in the group with large deletions than in the group with tuna1, M. Lima1, M. Martins1; NSD1 alterations. No tumor was observed in our cohort. Advanced 1Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2Centro de Genética Clínica, bone age and overgrowth were inconstant features. Macrocephaly Porto, Portugal. which was previously considered as a mandatory criterion was not Alström Syndrome (MIM #203800) is an autosomal recessive disorder present in 1/30 patients. characterized by progressive visual impairment caused by cone-rod retinal dystrophy and early onset obesity. Most patients also develop P0240. Genotype-phenotype correlations in Larsen syndrome insulin resistant diabetes mellitus and sensorineural hearing loss during J. M. Graham1, S. P. Robertson2, R. Lachman1, D. Krakow1; the second decade. Other reported features are short stature, metabolic 1Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2University of abnormalities, namely hyperlipidemia, dilated cardiomyopathy, mild to Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. moderate mental retardation, acanthosis nigricans, and chronic renal Autosomal Dominant Larsen syndrome (LS) is a rare, genetic and liver failure. connective tissue disorder characterized by multiple joint dislocations, Mutations in the ALMS1 gene are detected in 40% of individuals. No distinctive hands and feet, kyphoscoliosis, and a characteristic face. other genes have been convincingly associated with this syndrome. Broad thumbs, cylindrical fingers, short metacarpals, long proximal We report two unrelated Portuguese patients with Alström Syndrome. phalanges, short distal phalanges, and accessory and/or fused carpal Case 1 presented to our clinic at the age of 13, with visual impairment, and tarsal bones also occur. Similar but more severe features occur sensorineural deafness, obesity and acanthosis nigricans. He later in Atelosteogenesis (AO) types I and III. In both LS and AO I/III there developed end-stage renal disease. Case 2 presented at the age of are segmentation anomalies of the vertebrae, with the cervical spine 2 with mild mental retardation, obesity, nystagmus and photophobia. being the most severely involved. The typical face in LS reveals Her mother was already 12 weeks pregnant. Molecular testing of the midface deficiency with a flat nasal bridge, ocular hypertelorism, and patients confirmed mutations in the ALMS1 gene in both cases and occasional cleft palate. In adults, there may be progressive hearing allowed the prenatal diagnosis of the ongoing pregnancy in Case 2. loss in early adulthood, which is preceded by tinnitus during the late The clinical presentation of Alström syndrome at different ages is teens. Sequence analysis of FLNB has revealed heterozygosity for discussed. We also address the issue that this condition probablyClinical genetics 132 remains underdiagnosed. Early diagnosis allows for opportune P0245. Highly tissue specific distribution of the mitochondrial intervention, particularly early recognition and treatment of diabetes tRNALeu(UUR) 3243A>G mutation in a patient with deafness, mellitus, nutritional planning, as well as monitoring of heart, liver diabetes and severe dementia and kidney function. We also emphasize the importance of early A. Schaller1, J. Nuoffer2, S. Gallati1; referral of these families for Genetic Counselling and pluridisciplinar 1Division of Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland, 2Institute of Clinical Chemistry, management. Bern, Switzerland. The 3243A>G mutation in the tRNALeu(UUR) gene of mitochondrial DNA P0243. Genotype-Phenotype Correlation in a Deaf Italian (mtDNA) is associated with a number of different clinical presentations Population: an Interdisciplinary Approach including mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and P. Castorina1, P. Primignani1, F. Sironi1, U. Ambrosetti2, D. A. Coviello1, M. stroke-like episodes (MELAS), progressive external ophthalmoplegia Travi1, F. Lalatta1; (PEO), diabetes and deafness. The routine diagnosis of the 3243A>G 1Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 2Policlinico Hospital IRCCS, mutation in blood is difficult as mutation levels are known to decrease Milan, Italy. in this tissue over time, while in some patients it may be absent. GJB2 mutations represent the first cause of congenital non syndromic Although the noninvasive genetic testing of blood samples is common recessive deafness (NSRD). for some mtDNA disorders, patients with the 3243A>G mutation have The 35delG “frameshift” mutation is very frequent in Caucasian consistently higher mutation levels in postmitotic muscle than blood, population. introducing the potential for reporting false-negative results. Here we Since year 2001 in our Medical Centre a team consisting of audiologists, report the genetic testing of a patient suspicious for a mitochondrial clinical geneticists and molecular biologists is actively working to cytopathy. Analysis of the mtDNA extracted from skeletal muscle improve the etiologic diagnosis and the management of deaf patients. biopsy specimen did not result in the detection of a mutation. However, The multidisciplinary approach is relevant to help the patients to postmortem analysis of the mtDNA isolated from brain parenchym understand the meaning of the molecular results, the clinical picture of revealed the 3243A>G mutation heteroplasmic at a level of 60%. deafness and the therapies that can be offered. Although muscle and CNS are postmitotic tissues and therefore, We analysed audiometric characteristics associated with various types supposed to accumulate mtDNA mutations, our findings may be of GJB2 mutations in a population of 289 Italian patients with prelingual explained by the fact, that embryologically, muscle and CNS are hearing impairment to delineate genotype-phenotype correlations. 107 derived from different germ layers. The ectodermal germ layer gives out of 289 patients (37%) presented homozygous 35delG mutation or rise to the CNS, and the mesodermal layer to muscular and vascular double heterozygous mutations in GJB2, or the association of a GJB2 system. Although, the molecular genetic analysis of skeletal muscle mutation with the GJB6 deletion del(GJB6-D13S1830). is widely acknowledged to the ‘gold standard’ in the investigation of Among the inactivating/inactivating genotype mutations 77% (63/81) patients with suspected mtDNA disease, our findings demonstrate, were associated with profound hearing impairment, 20% with severe that molecular testing of muscle mtDNA still has the risk to yield false and 3% with moderate. For the inactivating/non-inactivating genotype negative results. category 73% were associated with profound deafness, 9% with severe and 18% with moderate. The non-inactivating/non inactivating P0246. Modifier genes in cystic fibrosis: frequency of hereditary category showed a predominant association with mild deafness (66%). hemochromatosis in the Hungarian cystic fibrosis population Based on these results we agree with other studies confirming that M. Garami, K. Németh, K. Staub, G. Fekete; GJB2 related hearing impairment is mostly determined by the specific 2nd Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, mutation combination but there remains phenotypic variability within Budapest, Hungary. genotypes. Objectives: The variable clinical manifestations of cystic fibrosis (CF) suggest the influence of modifier genes. Gene of hemochromatosis P0244. Familial Pulmonary Fibrosis in Newfoundland: Evidence (HFE gene 6p21.3) is a candidate modifier locus for CF based on for a Novel Genetic Cause (1) the suggestion of an association between the HLA loci and CF B. A. Fernandez1, B. Noble1, G. Fox1, R. Batia1, E. Sala1, M. F. Beers2, M. O. phenotypes; (2) the location of the HFE gene near the HLA loci and; (3) Woods1; the similarity between the gastrointestinal manifestations of hereditary 1Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NF, Canada, 2University of hemochromatosis and CF. We have determined the frequency of the Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. C282Y and H63D mutations in a group of 95 CF patients. Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) belongs to the group of idiopathic Methods: Direct mutation analysis: DNA amplification (PCR) and interstitial pneumonias. This disease is limited to the lungs, and is RFLP analysis were used to test for 2 mutations in the HFE gene. usually an adult-onset disorder diagnosed between 50 and 70 years. These mutations account for approximately 90% of individuals with The only treatment that improves survival is lung transplant. Without hereditary hemochromatosis patients. Patients' clinical statuses were treatment, survival ranges from 2 to 4 years. The literature suggests retrieved from the Hungarian CF Registry. that up to 3% of IPF patients have a familial form of the disease Results: Six patients (3.1%) carried the C282Y and 22 patients (11.5%) (familial pulmonary fibrosis or FPF), with at least one other affected the H63D mutations in heterozygous form. Homozigosity for C282Y first or second degree relative. Autosomal dominant mutations in the mutation was not observed, whereas 2 patients carried the H63D Surfactant Protein-C gene (SP-C) on chromosome 8p21 have recently mutations in homozygous form. In one case, we were able to detect been shown to cause familial forms of interstitial lung disease. both mutations (C282Y/H63D). The avarage gastrointestinal score of In Newfoundland, 11 FPF families containing 35 affected individuals CF patients (7.56; n=173) was significantly different from those who have been identified. DNA has been banked from 250 participants, carried the HFE gene mutation(s), too (13.9; available n=21). and cell lines have been established for 234. The study cohort also Conclusion: These data are suggestive of a relationship between the includes 24 sporadic cases. The medical and family histories of each development of gastrointestinal diseases in CF and the HFE gene. participant have been reviewed. All participants have had pulmonary Further study of a larger group of patients is warranted. function testing and a high resolution CT of chest. The average age of diagnosis in our familial cohort is 55.3 yrs. P0247. Mutations and polymorphysms in CFTR gene in patients The SPC gene has been sequenced from 1 affected individual from with reproductive failure each of the families and no mutations were identified. Moreover, R. Gaillyová, I. Valášková, E. Pokojová, P. Ventruba; immunohistochemical staining of SPC on lung biopsies of 7 FPF University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic. patients, all from different families, showed a normal vesicular pattern, Cystic fibrosis is one of the most common serious autosomal recessiv suggesting that the families are segregating a novel locus. Linkage inherited disorders in Czech population. The frequency of the disease simulation studies have been undertaken and have indicated that is around 1/2500 and the carrier frequency is around 1/27. two families are suitable for genome-wide scans using microsatellite In pairs with reproductive failures we recommend the analysis of CFTR markers. gene as a preventive examination. In our laboratory we start with the basic mutation analysis - we examineClinical genetics 133 five mutations which are frequent in Czech population and in men with the central nervous system, which usually carries a bad prognosis. severe oligoasthenospermia the polymorphism IVS8polyT. GCMN occurs sporadically, and has a low recurrence risk. If a mutation in CFTR gene is found for one of the partners, we analyze Follow-up and treatment of affected children is aimed at surgical a set of 36 CFTR mutations for the other partner. excision or curettage of the lesion to prevent melanoma and early This analysis detects about 95% of CFTR mutations in Czech detection of the referred complications. It also provides cosmetic population. improvement, an important issue for patients and their families. 2002-2004 we performed CFTR gene analysis in 1325 patients. We We report two patients with GCMN presenting at birth, from unrelated detected 55 carriers of one mutation in CFTR gene and two men with families. Both had large pigmented lesions involving mostly the trunk. two CFTR mutations. In three families we identified both partners as No other clinical manifestations have been detected so far and cerebral carriers of a CFTR gene mutation. Frequency of CFTR gene mutations MRI was normal in both. Both were referred to Paediatric Surgery in our group is 1/24, 1/41 in women and 1/16 in men respectively. outpatient clinic and keep follow-up in Genetics. It is the reason for us to recommend such preventive analysis of CFTR gene in at least one person of the pair with reproductive failure. Most P0250. Genetic counseling of families with t(7;9)(q36.2;p21.2) effective is the analysis of men. A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk1, E. Kostyk2, M. Debiec-Rychter3, B. Krzykwa2, B. In case of families with reproductive failure and with high risk of Panasiuk1, B. Stasiewicz-Jarocka1, A. T. Midro1; Cystic fibrosis in offsprings we recommend genetic counselling and 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, prenatal diagnostics or PGD. To people carrying CFTR gene mutations Poland, 2Medical Genetic Department, Institute of Paediatrics, Collegium Medi- we recommend the analysis of CFTR gene to be done also for their cum, Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland, 3Center for Human Genetics, relatives. University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. We performed the segregation analysis directly from a relatively P0248. Tackling the diagnosis of sporadic retinitis pigmentosa large pedigree of five t(7;9)(q36.2;p21.2) carriers in a series of ten with a genotyping microarray pregnancies after ascertainment correction according to Stengel- D. Cantalapiedra, M. García-Hoyos, R. Riveiro-Alvarez, E. Vallespin, M. J. Rutkowski and Stene. Pedigree was ascertained by a 5 years-old girl Trujillo-Tiebas, A. Queipo, C. Villaverde, C. Ramos, C. Ayuso; karyotyped because of dysmorphic features and distinct developmental Fundacíon Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. profile and monosomy 7q36.2-qter with trisomy 9p21.2-pter (double- Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is a group of inherited and progressive segment imbalance) was found. The nature of chromosomal aberration retinal dystrophies that lead to blindness. There are more than 150 detected using GTG, RBG was confirmed by multicolor chromosomal loci responsible for these dystrophies. Their genetic characterization analysis, utilizing the commercially available M-FISH KIT (MetaSystem becomes even more challenging, because of their additional allelic GmgH, Altlussheim, Germany). The slide treatment, post hybridization and clinical heterogeneity. Therefore, searching for the genetic cause washes and detection were performed according to the manufacturer’s of the disease is extremely costly and time consuming, making genetic protocol. The image analysis was done using an epifluorescence testing in a clinical setting far from practical, especially in sporadic microscope (Leica DMRB, Wetzlar, Germany) and image analysis cases (SRP), which account for 40% of all non-syndromic forms of software (QUIPS, Vysis, IL, USA). A study of morfological phenotype RP in Spain. of proband according to uniform protocol of clinical and antropological The development of genotyping microarrays, specifically designed traits taken from Munich Database elaborated by Stengel-Rutkowski. to detect all known mutations in every identified gene responsible for Quantitative features analysis showed that a total of 125 out of 807 RP, will be a major breakthrough for the rapid genetic testing of many (15,66%) of catalogued anamnestic and morphological traits was uncharacterized patients. present in our child. Morphological phenotype of our patient compared We have started using the LCA microarray, which detects 293 to quantitative definition of monosomy 7q36.2-qter and to definition mutations in 8 genes known to cause Leber Congenital Amaurosis, for trisomy 9p21-pter separately showed 24 of 125 (19%) features which is a form of severe congenital RP. and 61of 125 (48%) features respectively. The individual probability A total of 27 SRP patients were genotyped with this microarray (23 assessment for unbalanced progeny at birth after 2:2 disjunction with a severe and early-onset form of RP, 3 with moderate RP, and 1 and adjancent-1 segregation were 30±14.5% (high) and 10±9.5% with mild RP). for miscarriages and similar for stillbirth/early death. These values of It detected mutations in 11 individuals (40.7%), of which 43.5% (10 in probability of occurrence of unbalanced progeny at birth and other 23) were severe and early-onset RP, and 33.3% (1 in 3) were moderate unfavorable pregnancy outcomes may be used for individual genetic RP. counseling of carriers with t(7;9)(q36.2;p21.2). Our results confirm that the vast majority of SRP cases are in fact autosomal recessive. P0251. Mutations in CDKL5/STK9 are associated with X-linked Although most of these patients are not yet fully characterized, this infantile spasms and a severe variant of Rett syndrome approach promises to be the tool that could one day become the V. M. Kalscheuer1, J. Tao1,2, H. Van Esch3, M. Hagedorn-Greiwe4, K. Hoff- de facto standard in the diagnosis of RP and many other inherited mann1, B. Moser1, M. Raynaud5, J. Sperner6, J. P. Fryns3, E. Schwinger4, J. disorders. Gécz7, H. H. Ropers1; 1Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Present af- P0249. Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevus: report of two filiation: State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai Institute of Portuguese cases Hematology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical University, Shanghai,, G. Soares1, J. Pinto Basto1, C. Dias1, M. Rocha1, N. Estevinho2, J. Matos3, M. China, 3Center for Human Genetics, Clinical Genetics Unit, Leuven, Belgium, Martins4,1, M. A. Areias4, A. M. Fortuna1, M. Reis Lima1; 4Institute for Human Genetics Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 5Services de Géné- 1Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2Instituto Português de Oncolo- tique -INSERM U316, CHU Bretonneau, Tours, France, 6Department of Pedi- gia, Porto, Portugal, 3Hospital Distrital de Chaves, Chaves, Portugal, 4Materni- atrics, University of Lübeck Medical School, Lübeck, Germany, 7Women’s and dade de Júlio Dinis, Porto, Portugal. Children’s Hospital and The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevus (GCMN) is a rare lesion, with an Recently, we showed that truncation of the X-linked cyclin-dependent incidence of 1/20000 live births. It is defined as a pigmented lesion, kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) gene, also known as serine threonine kinase present at birth, corresponding to a benign proliferation of cutaneous 9 (STK9), caused mental retardation and severe neurological melanocytes, measuring 20 cm or more in largest diameter. Lesions symptoms in two unrelated female patients with balanced X;autosome can be flat or nodular, with variable pigmentation intensity. Very large translocations. CDKL5 is subject to X-inactivation in normal female lesions are usually localised on the trunk, frequently with smaller somatic cells, and is functionally absent in the two patients due to satellite lesions on the periphery. preferential inactivation of the normal X. The two main problems associated with this pathology are the risk of Subsequent screening of a small panel of patients who had been developing melanoma, in the nevus itself or in other locations, and the diagnosed with Rett syndrome (RTT) or a variant of RTT and no risk of occurrence of Neurocutaneous Melanocytosis (MIM: 249400), identified pathogenic mutation in MECP2, led to the finding of two characterized by a proliferation of benign or malignant melanocytes in additional mutations in CDKL5: a cysteine to phenylalanine aminoClinical genetics 134 acid exchange in one patient presenting with early-onset seizures, Our patient is an eleven-year-old girl from the third non-complicated psychomotor development delay and absence of speech, and an pregnancy of her mother. She suffers from torsion dystonia. The arginine to serine exchange in a monozygotic twin pair who exhibit genealogy of this family is complicated: the girl’s grandfather and almost identical clinical features of classic RTT, with a history of early- grandmother have suspected Parkinson’s disease; her grandmother’s onset seizures. Both mutations most likely occurred de novo and affect brother has the same features as our patient. The onset of the highly conserved amino acids which are located within a predicted disease started at age eight with splay gait. Two years after the protein kinase domain. Our results strongly suggest that impaired first focal manifestations the girl started to complain of writer’s CDKL5 catalytic activity plays an important role in the pathogenesis cramp. The patient was evaluated using laboratory and instrumental of this neurodevelopmental disorder. Further studies aim to elucidate investigations: ceruloplasmin, serum and urine organic acids and the specific mechanisms by which CDKL5 alterations lead to impaired amino acids were without pathological changes. MRI of the brain was development. normal. Electromyography showed signs of denervation in both feet, but it was more expressed in the right. A heterozygous deletion 904- P0252. Midline Anomalies in a Boy With Transverse Limb 906GAGdel was detected in the DYT1 gene (in collaboration with Dr. Defects: A New Syndrome or Adams-Oliver Variant? F.A. Hol, Nijmegen). This result confirms the diagnosis of early onset C. Li; torsion dystonia caused by a mutation in the DYT1 gene. University Health Network and The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, The model of inheritance for early-onset generalized dystonia is Canada. autosomal dominant. But only 30 to 40% of those with a mutated DYT1 This one-year old boy was seen in genetics clinic because of multiple gene develop symptoms of dystonia. Due to this variable penetrance congenital anomalies. He was the product a non-consanguineous about 60 to 70% of people who carry the mutated gene will not manifest union of an Italian couple, after a non-eventful pregnancy, without symptoms. maternal exposures to teratogens. He was delivered full term and discharged home within 2 days. At birth, he was noted to have P0255. A New X-Linked Craniofacioskeletal Syndrome with transverse limb defects involving all fingers and toes. Hypospadias Female Expression and Male Lethality was also noted. He subsequently developed feeding issues and was C. E. Schwartz1, E. Spence2, K. Voeller1, R. J. Simensen1, A. J. Clark1, A. Re- noted to be hypotonic. Cranial imaging detected partial agenesis of the iss3, S. Robertson4, R. E. Stevenson1; corpus callosum, abnormal brain stem configuration, a cleft in superior 1Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 2Carolina Medical cerebella vermis and abnormal cerebella grey-white matter junction. Center, Charlotte, NC, United States, 3Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United The family history is non-contributory. On genetics assessment, he States, 4University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. has relative macrocephaly with prominent occiput, with sparse scalp A syndrome with multisystem manifestations has been observed in hair, eyebrows and eyelashes. He has low-set ears and carp shaped three generations of a Caucasian family. The findings in six females mouth. The fingers end abruptly, as in amniotic band sequence, provide a composite clinical picture of microcephaly, short stature, without visible fingernails. The shoulders are slopping and narrow small retroverted ears, hypotelorism, full tip of the nose overhanging with dimples. The toes appeared tapered with rudimentary toenails. the columella, short philtrum, thin upper lip, soft tissue excrescences There was minimal 2-3 syndactyly of the toes. The length of the limbs at the angle of the mouth, small mandible, small hands and feet with was normal. The external genitalia were male with hypospadias, brachydactyly, finger V clinodactyly, flat feet, an excessive number chodee and asymmetric foreskin with high insertion of the scrotum. of fingerprint arches, and mild impairment of cognitive function. Two Neurologically, he is hypotonic with severe global delay. His karyotype males were more severely affected and died in the initial months of life. was of normal male, 46,XY. 7-DH and metabolic workup were also They showed intrauterine growth retardation, broad cranium with wide within normal limits. Genetic testing for Filamin A gene, responsible sutures and fontanelles, cardiac defects, small hands and feet with for oto-palato-digital syndrome types I and II as well as grey matter abnormal digital creases and small nails, and genital abnormalities. heterotopia, is underway. We are also considering subtelomeric FISH. Chromosome analysis, FISH for 22q11 deletion, plasma cholesterol Overall, this appears to be a new syndrome. and 7-dehydrocholesterol levels have been normal. MRI studies of 4 of the females showed reduced total brain volume compared to age- P0253. Deformities of the skull in children: clinical markers of matched controls without a reciprocal increase in CSF. This suggests a the polymalformative syndromes defect in an early neurodevelopmental process. X-inactivation studies T. Marcovici, I. Sabau, I. Simedrea, M. Puiu; show near complete skewing in two affected females, but were not University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. informative in three others. Background: Craniostenosis is defined as a premature closure of The skewing of X-inactivation, the different severity in males/females cranial sutures. The incidence of primary craniostenosis aproximates and some overlap with OPD-II, suggested FLNA as a potential 1 per 2,000 births. The cause may be chromosomial abnormalities, candidate gene. However, no pathogenic alteration was identified. genic anomalies or multifactorial. Most cases of craniostenosis are Based on clinical presentation and the X inactivation data, we believe evident at birth. this family represents a new X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) Matherials and methods: Four cases with congenital deformities syndrome and is a new member of the group of remarkable X-linked of the skull are presented, two males and two females, aged 3-18 syndromes which occur predominately among females. months. Results: By clinical examination, X-ray films and CT scans of the skull P0256. Molecular diagnostics of acute intermittent porphyria in was found scaphocephaly in two cases, turricephaly in one case and Russia right parieto-occipital plagiocephaly in one case. Cortical atrophy and J. V. Luchinina, S. L. Surin, A. V. Luk’yanenko, I. V. Karpova, Y. S. Pustovoit, mental retardation and were present in all cases. Optic atrophy and S. K. Kravchenko; seizures were found in two cases. Facial dysmorphism and kidney Hematological Scientific Centre RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. defects were present in two cases. Heart defects were associated in Acute intermittent porphiria (AIP) is an autosomal dominant inherited one case. Just in one case craniotomy was performed. disorder characterized by a deficiency of porphobilinogen deaminase Conclusions: In 50% of cases the diagnosis was made after 1 year of (PBGD), the third enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway. Clinically, age and just 25% of cases were operated. Without an early diagnosis AIP is characterized as acute neurovisceral attacks that are often and surgical correction of the deformities the growth of skull is inhibited precipitated by exogenous and endogenous factors such as hormones, and brain is serious damaged. drugs, alcohol and others. To date, at least 250 different mutations causing AIP are known. P0254. An eleven year old girl from Northern Lithuania with We inspected 46 unrelated Russian patients affected by AIP. Mutational confirmed early-onset torsion dystonia analysis was performed by direct sequencing using PCR or RT-PCR A. Matuleviciene1, V. Kucinskas2,1; gene or cDNA PBGD fragments, containing all functionally important 1Medical Genetics Centre, Vilnius university hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Dept. gene regions, including exons, exon-intron junctions, promoter and Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. poly(A)-signal. We identified 34 different mutations including 22 novel,Clinical genetics 135 which have not observed in world literature before. Found mutations P0259. Particular features of the Congenital Heart Defect in represent 15 splicing mutations, 10 missense mutations, 5 deletions, Children over more than a decade 3 nonsense mutations and one small insertion. 53delT (5 cases) and G. Doros, M. Puiu, A. Popoiu, M. Gafencu, M. Serban; Arg173Trp (5 cases) were the most frequent mutations among our University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. patients. Family-specific mutations were screened among relatives of The aim of the study is to present the evolution of the congenital heart 25 studied patients by restriction heteroduplex or sequencing analysis. defects(CHD) in children from Timisoara, over a period of 11 years, Among 85 studied individuals 31 were asymptomatic carriers of AIP. time in which we felt the consequences of the nuclear accident in Early diagnostics for mutations of PBGD gene allow to decrease the Chernobyl-Russia and the war in Yugoslavia, country nearby.The number of AIP cases which lead to severe complications, physical study was done on a cohort of 1113 children with CHD, classified in two inability and lethal outcomes. groups: 226 children between 1990-1994 and 887 children between 1995-2001.The number of CHD between first and second group arise P0257. An inherited inversion of chromosome 6 and its clinical 3,92 times; the noncyanotic CHD arise 4 times and the cyanotic CHD phenotype arise 3 times.From the noncyanotic CHD, left to right shunts arise 3,5 V. Christophidou Anastasiadou1, A. Kotti1, E. Spanou Aristidou2, C. Sismani2, times, complex malformations arise 7,5 times and obstructive CHD K. Kleopa2, P. Patsalis2; 5,4 times. In the first group, 90,7% were noncyanotic, 9,3% were 1Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus Institute cyanotic.The noncyanotic CHD were composed of: 83,40% left to right of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. shunt, 8,30% complex CHD and 8,30% obstructive CHD. From the This is the report on a family with two out of three siblings and their left to right shunt malformations, the dominant were: ASD (55,12%), father presenting with the same neurological phenotype and an VSD (20,48%) and PDA (7,8%).In the second group, 92, 67% were inherited chromosomal aberration. noncyanotic and 7,32% were cyanotic.The noncyanotic CHD were The young daughter of the family sought genetic counselling as she composed of: 72,99%, left to right shunt, 15,69% complex CHD and was concerned that the tremor and shaking that she had was inherited 11,32% obstructive CHD.The dominant left to right shunts were: ASD taking into account the fact that her father and brother also had similar (40,75%), VSD (19,82%), and PDA (12,40%). The number of CHD symptoms. arise 3,9 times in the second period vs the first one, most of the cases The proband, her brother and father presented with involuntary registered between 1997-2000.The noncyanotic CHD were dominant movements, abnormal body posture, dysarthria and squint. There was in both groups.The most important rising in complex CHD were in the history of learning difficulties in the father and brother and evidence second group, as a result of the teratogenic factors to which Romania that they had mild mental retardation. The proband had no history of was exposed. significant learning difficulties. Chromosomal analysis revealed an abnormal karyotype with an P0260. Prognostic importance of complex abnormalities of inversion of chromosome 6p23q12 in all three patients. caryotype in patients with myelodysplatic syndrome The clinical phenotype, full investigations family and medical history I. S. Martynkevich, M. P. Ivanova, L. S. Martynenko, S. V. Gricaev, M. V. Mos- (including data on their general health and other aspects of their life) kalenko, K. M. Abdulkadyrov; are discussed in this report. Researh Institute of Mematology and Transfusiology RAMS, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. P0258. Inherited ulcero-mutilating neuropathies CMT2B and Determination of caryotype in patients with myelodysplatic syndromes HSN1 in Czech families. (MDS) during any leukemic transformation and cancer progression P. Seeman1, R. Mazanec2, J. Boehm3, P. Ridzoň4, L. Baránková5, C. Windpass- is an important prognostic factor. Intensification of MDS treatment is inger6, M. Auer-Grumbach7; connected with a diversity of complications, therefore determination 1Child Neurology, DNA laboratory, Praha 5, Czech Republic, 2Charles Univer- of prognostic risk groups becomes more amd more actual goal. It is sity Prague, Praha 5, Czech Republic, 3Charles University Prague, 1st Faculty well known that chromosome abberations are distinguished in 60% of Medicine, Praha 2, Czech Republic, 4Thomayer Memorial Hospital, Dept of of initially diagnosed patients with MDS approximately, complex Neurology, Praha 4, Czech Republic, 5Charles University Prague, 2nd Faculty abnormalities are observed in 10-30% of patients. of Medicine, Praha 5, Czech Republic, 6University Graz, Dept of Human Gen- 150 patients with MDS were examined, complex abberations were tics, Graz, Austria, 7University Graz, Dept of Neurology, Graz, Austria. observed in 21 patients (14%), age median of them was 55 years. Inherited ulcero-mutilating neuropathies are rare axonal Cytogenetic analysis revealed quantitative abnormalities of caryotype polyneuropathies with prominent sensory loss, foot ulcerations and in 17 patients (81%) from 21 (17/21). Changes affected chromosomes usually autosomal dominant inheritance. 5, 7, 8, 10 and 21. Among structural anomalies, observed in all patiens, Mutations in the RAB7 gene cause CMT2B neuropathy and mutations abberations of chromosome 1 - 4/21 (19%), del5q 4/21 (19%), del7q in the SPTLC1 gene cause HSN1. Only few such families were 6/21 (28,5%), different abberations of 12p13: t(3;12), del12(p13) and reported so far worldwide and no such cases have been reported from add12(p13) 3/21 (14%) - were found more often. Anomalies of 8q - Czech Republic. del8(q13), t(8;17)(q24.1;p13) and t(8;18)(q24;q23) were observed in 4 We describe two Czech families one with CMT2B and one with HSN1. patients from 21 (19%). Such rare abberations as dic(1;11)(p36;p15), In the CMT2B four-generation family we studied two patients from t(11;22)(p14;p10), dic(5;11)(p15;q25), t(2;5)(p24;q23), two generations. The disease presented by painless foot injuries and t(16;17)(q24;q12), der(14;14)(q10;q10) and der(13;14)(q10;10). prolonged and difficult healing in the middle of the second decade. An application of immunosupressive therapy by cyclosporine A and Motor deficit presented with distal muscular weakness of legs in the standard schemes of PCT (polychemotherapy) was uneffective in third or fourth decade. Legs were earlier and more affected than hands. 19 patients (90%) from 21, 16 patients (76%) have died. Obtained Tendon reflexes were absent in one patient and well preserved in the data point on very negative clinical course of MDS with complex other. Electrophysiology showed prominent axonal polyneuropathy abnormalities of caryotype that is probably caused by unstability of more pronounced in the legs and mild in arms. A previously reported genome and particular biological features of cells of patients with mutation L129F in the RAB7 gene was detected in both patients. MDS. In the HSN1 four-generation family we studied eight affected patients from three generations. The age of onset was in the third to fifth decade. P0261. Study of the phenotype of unrelated patients (males and Two persons underwent amputations in the legs in the sixth decade. females) with premutation and intermediate alleles of FMR1. All affected patients showed prominent sensory loss predominantly in I. Fernandez1, B. Lopez1, M. J. Alonso1, J. J. Telleria1, N. Navarro1, R. Velasco1, temperature and pain and only mild in vibration. EMG showed axonal R. Palencia2, F. Ramos3, A. Blanco1; neuropathy with unexcitable nerves distally in the legs. Some patients 1Universidad-IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Universidad-Hospital Clinico, Valladolid, presented increased patellar tendon reflexes. A previously reported Spain, 3Universidad, Zaragoza, Spain. mutation C133Y was detected in all eight affected patients of this The physical characteristics and behavioural phenotype of full mutation family. patients with fragile X syndrome are well stablished, while carriers of Supported by IGA MH 1A8254. premutations and intermediate alleles of FXS are traditionally regardedClinical genetics 136 as being clinically unaffected. suffered from oligozoospermia. Ecute cardiovascular insufficierncy Recent reports suggest that carriers of premutation and intermediates caused exitus lethalis of proband’s father aged 40yr. His parents were alleles may show phenotypical features: physical, psychological, not consanguineous. At birth proband weight was 3100g, his length speech-language problems, premature ovarian failure (POF) in women was 51cm, head circumference was 35cm, chest circumference was and a neurodegenerative disorder, fragile X associated tremor/ataxia 34cm. At the age of 13 years his length was 162cm, his weight was syndrome(FXTAS) in older adult carriers. 80900g, testes 2ml and 2,5ml, penis 4,5x1,8cm. Test with human Patients attending the Neurological and Gynecological clinics were chorionic gonadotropine was positive. Attacks of severe headache evaluated and when FXS was suspected, they were sent for molecular (fronto-parieto-temporal areas), blood hypertension (150/100; 160/120 analysis. Informed written conset was given by the families. mmHg), nasal and ear haemorrages were the symptoms of his disease. Southern blot analysis and PCR were carried out to establish the exact Decreased levels of LG and testosteron were shown. Osteoporosis of number of CGG repeats. hand more severe in distal parts, structure disturbance of radius were We have found 14 premutation (12 females and 2 males) and 7 observed with X-ray investigation. Proband karyotype was found to be intermediate alleles (5 males and 2 females). Protein expression was 46,XY,t(11;22)(q23.3;q11.2). This point of breakage is situated closely studied in all, and it was within the normal range. to Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS, MIM231200). Authors assume In this study of unrelated patients with premutation and intermediate relationship between some clinical features like BSS and nature of alleles, males and females (ages between 3 -12 years old) showed chromosomal abberation. similar features: language impairment in concentration skills and /or distractibility, attention deficit, anxiety, communication disturbance, P0264. Clinical and molecular findings in 41 Belgian patients speech and language problems (difficulty with generating and ordering with Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum words in sentences) and all presented delayed early language P. J. Coucke, O. Vanakker, B. P. Leroy, P. Van Acker, A. De Paepe; acquisition. Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium. Despite the limitations of the study, our findings suggest that CGG Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum (PXE - MIM#264800) is a hereditary repeat lengths do not permit predictions about clinical features in connective tissue disorder comprising cutaneous, ophthalmological patients with premutation and intermediate alleles, and therefore other and cardiovascular manifestations. It is caused by mutations in the studies must be established. ABCC6 gene (31 exons) located on chromosome 16p13.1, encoding a transmembrane transport protein of which the function and substrate P0262. Molecular analysis of SMN gene of SMA Tunisian patients are presently unknown. M. Gribaa1, D. Hmida1, M. Yacoub2, S. Tilouch2, A. Saad1; We present phenotypical and molecular data on 41 patients with 1Department of Cytogenetic, Biology of Reproduction and Molecular Genetic, biopsy proven PXE. Farhat Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Paediatric Unit, Farhat Hached Hos- Great variability in severity of the cutaneous lesions was observed, pital, Sousse, Tunisia. while ocular involvement was consistently present. A significantly Introduction: With a prevalence of 1/6000 to 1/10000, Spinal muscular higher incidence of peripheral vascular complications and stroke were atrophy (SMA) represents the second most common fatal Autosomal found, whereas coronary and valvular symptoms were much less recessive disorder after cystic fibrosis. SMA is characterised by common then suggested in the literature. degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord resulting in Mutation analysis of the ABCC6 gene identified at least one mutation progressive symmetric proximal muscular weakness. in all but one patient (98%), with R1141X being the most prevalent. In this study we report molecular screening of 5 patients clinically Fourthy-eight percent of mutations were observed in exon 24, and diagnosed as SMA. 22% were localised in exons 29, 28 and 18. Material and method: The most commonly used method to confirm Patients homozygous for R1141X (exon 24) had a significantly genetically the diagnosis of SMA is a qualitative PCR-RFLP assay to higher incidence of peripheral vascular disease then those with at detect the homozygous absence of SMN1 (Survival Motor Neurone). least one N-terminal mutation. This difference might be explained by Two highly homologous survival motor neurone genes, SMN1 and the observation that N-terminal exons do not code for the important SMN2, are present at the same locus. The detection of the homozygous Nucleotide Binding Folds. deletion of exon 7 of SMN1 gene, which is present in 90% to 98% of We conclude that exhaustive clinical examination prior to mutation the patients, takes advantage of the base difference in this exon to analysis results in a high mutation detection rate in this variable distinguish SMN1 from SMN2. disease. Since analysis of 4 ABCC6 exons identifies 70% of all Results: Within those 5 patients, 4 are carriers of a homologous mutations, a two-step method can be used, analysing these four prior deletion of SMN1. to the rest of the gene. Only one, despite clinical diagnosis of SMA, doesn’t show any deletion. P0265. Genetic factors modifying CADASIL phenotype? Discussion: This qualitative method can be used to determine whether M. Junna1, K. Mykkänen1, S. Tuominen2, S. Tuisku3, M. Pöyhönen4, M. Vii- an individual lacks both copies of SMN1 exon 7, but can not distinguish tanen5, H. Kalimo6; carriers with one copy of SMN1 from normal individuals with two 1University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland, copies of SMN1. To identify SMA carriers necessitates a quantitative 3Keski-Pohjanmaa Central Hospital, Kokkola, Finland, 4Family Federation of approach. Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 5Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Helsinki Conclusion: The clinical diagnosis of SMA can be problematic, University and University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. therefore genetic testing is ordered to identify patients and deliver a Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and directed genetic council. leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is an inherited systemic vascular disorder causing recurrent brain infarcts and leading to subcortical P0263. Clinical phenotype of a boy with karyotype 46,XY,t(11;22) vascular dementia. The onset, duration and clinical symptoms of the (q23.3;q11.2) disease are highly variable. The defective gene is NOTCH3 and over N. A. Gladkova1, L. A. Khitrikova2, M. V. Prozorova2, O. P. Romanenko2, M. O. 100 different pathogenic mutations have been identified. In Finland Mkheidze1; (population 5 millions) we have so far diagnosed 21 CADASIL families 1Medical Academy for postgraduate training, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- with over 100 patients sharing the same NOTCH3 mutation, R133C. tion, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. Despite this uniform mutational background the phenotypes vary We report on a boy with rare set of sings and abnormal karyotype. For significantly. This indicates additional genetic or environmental factors the first time we examined the proband aged 13 yr. Initial diagnosis was modify the phenotype. hypogonadism, hypothalamic disfunction, neurovegetative dystonia We selected two groups of patients having the same mutation (R133C): (hypertensive type), obesity (moderate type), macrosomia (disharmonic one group of patients with early onset and severe symptoms and type). Proband was born after the second gestation prolonged to another group with late onset and mild or no symptoms. 28-yr-old healthy female by spontaneous vaginal breech labor. The Seven intragenic NOTCH3 polymorphisms causing a change in the first pregnancy ended in spontaneous abortion.. Proband’s father amino acid were tested in both groups. None of the polymorphismsClinical genetics 137 correlated with the phenotype and therefore do not affect the clinical P0268. Tumor necrosis factor β gene polymorphism in variation. Myasthenia Gravis patients from Bashkortostan, Russia. Apolipoprotein E allele ε4 is a known risk factor in Alzheimer’s disease. A. Ishmukhametova1, I. Khidiyatova1, R. Magzhanov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; In several studies it is also suggested to have an effect on vascular 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Acad- dementia. Thus our two patient groups were genotyped for APOE emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, gene. Results of this analysis will be presented. Ufa, Russian Federation. Myasthenia Gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disorder mediated by P0266. New polymorphic microsatellites provide a quick, cheap autoantibodies against the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) of and reliable method to detect common and atypical duplications neuromuscular junction. The genetics of the autoimmune response in and deletions of the 22q11.2 region MG are not well understood, although different polymorphic sets of L. Torres-Juan1, A. Perez-Granero1, M. Bernues1, N. Govea1, M. Juan2, J. genes are currently under study. TNFB is the candidate gene as it Rosell1, D. Heine-Suñer1; encode cytokine TNFβ that play an important role in the regulation of 1Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2Hospital Son the immune response through the induction of genes such as MHC Llatzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. genes and the activation of immune cells. The aim of our study was to Low copy repeats (LCRs) are the cause of most duplications and analyze the association between alleles of the TNFB NcoI restriction deletions in the 22q11.2 region, causing the 22q11.2 duplication and fragment length polymorphism with MG and the disease subgroups in deletion syndromes. The del22q11.2 syndrome is the most frequent 98 MG patients and 78 healthy controls. Comparison of phenotype, genomic syndrome with an incidence of 1/4000 births. The most allele and genotype frequencies of TNFB polymorphism did not reveal frequent deletion has a size of 3 Mb and is flanked by two LCRs any significant difference between patients as a whole and controls. (LCR22-2 and LCR22-4). However, less frequent atypical deletions Allele frequencies of TNFB gene polymorphism in patients and in and duplications are also in most cases flanked by other LCR22s of healthy controls for allele TNFB*1 were found to be 30,7% and 30,8%, the same region (LCR22-3, LCR22-5 and LCR22-6). There is a total correspondingly. However, when patients were subgrouped according of 5 intervals flanked by LCRs spanning approximately 6 Mb. We have to clinical forms of the disease, the frequency of the TNFB*1 allele developed a strategy that provides a reliable, quick and cheap method was found to be statistically significant decreased in patients with to detect deletions and duplications caused by these LCRs. This is the ocular form (4,5%) compared to patients with the generalized based on the typing patient’s DNA extracted from blood or uncultivated form (35,0%; p=0,0052) and healthy control (30,8%; p=0,0091). No amnyocytes with a panel of 9 highly polymorphic microsatellite markers TNFB*1/1 genotype were observed in patients with ocular MG. Thus, that are distributed over the 5 intervals that could be duplicated or allele TNFB*1 and genotype TNFB*1/1 are negatively associated with deleted by LCR-mediated illegitimate recombination. Heterozygous the ocular form of the disease. Our results confirm the hypothesis that microsatellites demonstrate the absence of a deletion or a duplication the MG is a heterogeneous disease with the complicated pathogenic (that would show 3 alleles in most cases).With this first screening mechanisms. we are able to rule out deletions and duplications in over 85 % of patients. If microsatellites are non-informative within one LCR-flanked P0269. Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl syndrome- case region, microsatellites of a second panel are typed. Intervals with no presentation informative microsatellites will be suspect of harbouring a deletion and M. Gafencu, G. Doros, M. Puiu, I. Micle, A. Popoiu, M. Serban; further analysis will be required (linkage analysis with parental DNA or University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. MLPA or FISH). Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl syndrome has as principal abnormalities: obesity, mental deficiency, polydactyly and/or syndactyly, retinitis P0267. Craniofacial anomalies associated to camptodactyly and pigmentosa, genital hypoplasia or both, and has an autosomal chest deformity : Teebi-Shaltout syndrome or new entity. recessive transmission. We present the case of a 16 year old boy, who H. Chaabouni1,2, M. Chaabouni1, M. Trabelsi1, F. Maazoul1, L. Ben Jemaa1, R. was admitted to our clinic because of cyanosis, especially on effort, M'rad1,2; dyspnea and fatigue. On clinical examination, we noted an obese 1Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Medical school of Tunis, Tunis, Tuni- child, grade III, 82 kg, with cyanotic congenital heart defect, Fallot sia. disease, oxygen saturation 64%, polydactyly (of the 1st metacarpal We report the case of a Tunisian boy with unusual face, marked flat and phalanges) of the left hand, and radio-cubital synostosis of occiput, camptodactyly, chest deformity ,normal thrive and normal the same hand, with reduction in pronation-supination movement, intelligence. He was born to consanguineous parents. moderate mental deficiency (IQ 69), anterior hypospadias, bilateral He had brachycephaly with marked flat occiput, flat supraorbital ridges, cryptorchidism, hypoplastic scrotum, micropenis with hypogonadism, hypertelorism , epicanthal fold and bilateral ptosis. The palpebral and hirsutism. The insulin level was normal; FSH and LH hormone fissures were short and downslanting. He had depressed nasal bridge, were much than normal, and the testosterone levels corresponded with broad nasal tip with wide nostrils. The philtrum was long with thin upper Tanner Stage 4. The boy did not have retinitis pigmentosa, only myopic lip. He had maxillary hypoplasia , high and narrow palate , oligodontia astigmatism. We considered the possibility of a diagnosis of Holt Oram and dental malocclusion . His ears were stickled with severe lobule syndrome, but all the associated abnormalities, except the skeletal hypoplasia. The hair was normal and his neck was short . He had and cardiovascular ones, are found mainly in Laurence-Moon-Bardet- thorax asymmetry, pectus excavatum and depressed low sternum . Biedl syndrome. In conclusion, complex abnormalities needs complex He presented moderate restrictive lung disease . We noted bilateral investigations and collaboration between the specialities, under the camptodactyly of all fingers, and multiple cutaneous nevi.There was cover of the genetic consultation, early in childhood, to prevent and no other abnormality ,neurological examination was normal, and there correct problems as far as possible. was no clinical features of visceral malformation. He had normal psychomotor evolution and intelligence was normal. A P0270. Homozygous M34T mutation of GJB2 (CX26) gene skeletal survey was unremarkable except skull roentography showing associates with a recessive nonsyndromic prelingual hearing deformity. The karyotype was 46 XY. A part form ptosis , ophthalmologic loss in several families with a clinical finding of a 2 kHz examination was normal. There was not hearing loss. The mother impairement in the audiogramm presented moderate left ptosis , unilateral left deafness and she had T. Löppönen1, M. Väisänen1, H. Valtonen2, A. Kosunen2, J. Ignatius1, H. Löp- abnormal teeth position but normal teeth number. His grand parents, pönen3; uncles and ants were phenotypically normal. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, 90029 Oulu, Finland, 2Department of Oto- Tthis phenotype may match with Teebi-Shaltout syndrome previously rhinolaryngology, 70100 Kuopio, Finland, 3Department of Otorhinolaryngology, described, but some features are lacking such as hypotrichosis, 90029 Oulu, Finland. hypohidrosis, frontal bossing, prominent occiput. Mutations in the gap junction beeta 2 (GJB2) gene are the most Does this observation corresponds to Teebi-Shaltout syndrome or a common cause of congenital nonsyndromic hearing impairement new entity. (HI). More than 80 GJB2 mutations have been reported and one specific mutation, 35delG, accounts for 60% - 70% of the cases. TheClinical genetics 138 controversial allele variant 101T>C (M34T) has been proposed to clearcut predictors between FA and non-FA groups. cause autosomal dominant or recessive nonsyndromic HI or act as a nonpathogenic polymorphism with no clinical significance. P0273. Acromicric Dysplasia versus Geleophysic Dysplasia: In our routine GJB2 mutation screening of patients with HI performed report of a portuguese patient by direct sequencing, we found thirteen patients homozygous for the M. Reis-Lima1, J. Pinto-Basto1, G. Soares1, C. Dias1, A. Fortuna1, M. Martins1, M34T mutation in northern and eastern Finland. They came from C. Godinho2; seven families with prelingual nonsyndromic sensorineural HI. In five 1Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital de S.Miguel, Oliveira families, where the fenotype of the M34T could be followed from all de Azeméis, Portugal. the affected and healthy family members, the HI segregated with the We report a girl, fourth child of consanguineous parents in fourth genotype M34T/M34T. degree, with normal stature, and no relevant family history. She We have analyzed the audiological data from the six families both was referred to us at 6 months age because of severe prenatal and from the affected persons and the family members. Out of the twelve postnatal short stature, peculiar face with narrow palpebral fissures, children homozygotes for the mutation M34T, there was a significant long eyelashes, short and wide nose, small and stubby hands and finding of a 2 kHz impairement of moderate to severe degree in nine of feet with very short distal phalanges with redundant skin. She had mild them and in two child the impairement was at 3 kHz. In one child the dorsal kyphosis, short neck and thorax and joint limitation. The mitral impairement was not as clear. valve had a subvalvular anomaly and a L-R shunt, which required Our findings give evidence that the M34T mutation is clinically significant surgery. Mild squint and hypermetropy was diagnosed. Neurological showing recessive mode of inheritance. Furthermore, a specific shape examination was normal. X-ray study showed severe carpal bone age of the audiogramm with an impairement at 2 kHz was associated with delay, very short and coarse second and third phalanges, femoral homozygous M34T mutation in the families studied. heads looked normal. No other anomalies were detected. She is now 8 years old and shows severe short stature, contractures P0271. A new case of 3M syndrome are still evident, hands and feet remain very short and stubby, facial F. Maazoul, M. Trabelsi, M. Chaabouni, H. Chaabouni; appearance is very appealing, there is no hepatomegaly, cardiac status Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia. remains stable. She is very shy and has a few learning problems. Three M syndrome is an extremely rare syndrome. About fifty cases All other investigations were normal (brain MRI , EEG, abdominal are reported in the literature. The syndrome was first described in 1975 US, immunological and endocrine tests, karyotype, LCFA , GAGs , by Miller and al. Common clinical features are : low birth weight, short metabolic screen). stature (dwarfism), craniofacial malformations, bone abnormalities, Although the phenotype could be compatible with Geleophysic and hypogenitalism. The syndrome is thought to be inherited as an Dysplasia and the parental consanguinity suppports this, the lack of autosomal recessive genetic trait. The differential diagnosis with evidence of accumulation features leads us to classify this patient as other dysmorphic dwarfisms such as the Silver-Russel syndrome, the Acromicric Dysplasia. Once more, this case stresses the progressively Mulibrey dwarfism and the fetal alcohol syndrome . The cause and the accepted phenotypic overlap between these two diseases. molecular basis of this syndrome are still unknown. We report the case of a 9 years old dwarf Tunisian male. He was born P0274. Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia associated with joint from consanguineous parents, both have short stature. He was very laxity and multiple dislocations, mental retardation, retinopathy small at birth, and he had characteristic craniofacial features with and deafness dolichocephaly, triangular-shaped face, pointed chin, high forehead, J. Pinto-Basto1, J. Ramos-Alves2, G. Soares1, C. Dias1, M. Martins1, A. For- anti-mongoloïd palpebral fissures, long philtrum, proeminent lips, tuna1, M. Reis-Lima1; high narrow palate, and large ears. He had a short neck, pectus 1Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital S.João, Porto, Portu- excavatum, lumbar hyperlordosis, clinodactyly of the 5th fingers, joints gal. hyperextensibility, genu valgum, and flat feet. He had a hypogenitalism The term spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD) embraces a and normal intelligence. Radiographs showed a spina bifida L4-L5, large group of disorders, distinguished on the basis of clinical and the vertebral bodies were tall, with a wide spinal canal; congenital radiological features. dislocation of the hip, and a delayed bone age were noted. The We report the first and only son of a consanguineous couple (first hormonal investigation (GH, IGF1, TSH, FT4) showed normal levels. cousins), referred to us at 33 months of age for confirmation of The karyotype was 46, XY. Treatment with growth hormone is attempted bone dysplasia. He showed severe short stature of prenatal onset, in order to allow the child an eventual increase of his final size. severe kypho-scoliosis and a skeleton x-ray compatible with a The inheritance pattern and of the pathogenesis of this syndrome are spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia. He also presented with congenital discussed. hip dislocation, joint laxity and multiple dislocations. Large eyes with blue sclera, and short neck were noted, but no real facial dysmorphism. P0272. Evaluation of clinical and cytogenetical criteria presets Mild mental retardation and bilateral sensorineural deafness were for the diagnostic approach in a large group of Fanconi anemia first noted at age 5. He also had astigmatism, mild optic atrophy and cases retinitis pigmentosa diagnosed at age 6. T. Tuncali, E. Baboglu, N. Kutlay, R. Akcay, K. Yararbas, F. Sadeghi, I. Akalin, All the investigations performed thus far were negative (karyotype, H. G. Karabulut, A. Tukun, I. Bokesoy, H. I. Ruhi; metabolic screen, LCFA, lisosomal disorders screening, brain MRI, Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. abdominal US and echocardiogram). Fanconi anemia (FA) was originally described as an autosomal disorder The father has a similar face appearance, joint laxity with multiple characterized by a progressive pancytopenia, diverse congenital dislocations, but no short stature or other anomalies. abnormalities and increased predisposition to malignancy. Growth It is very difficult to establish a clear mode of inheritance in this family, retardation, abnormal skin pigmentation and thumb anomalies are since SEMD with multiple dislocations has an autosomal dominant the typical manifestations along with some rather rare morphometric pattern and SEMD with joint laxity an autosomal recessive one. On and systemic abnormalities found in FA patients While neither of these the other hand, the association MR, retinopathy and deafness lead clinical presets are adequate, cytogenetic analysis should always to mandatory exclusion of a mitochondrial disorder in dispite of be carried out following the clinical stigmatas and be acknowledged consanguinity. for the diagnosis of the disease. The current method of choice in We believe this patient may represent a unique form of cytogenetic analysis depends on the comparison of spontaneous spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia associated with other anomalies. versus diepoxybutane (DEB) induced chromosomal breakage for To our knowledge, the only similar previously reported patient was also diagnosis. Here we present a data accumulated during last 15 years of Portuguese origin (Liberfarb RM et al., 1986). from the patients refered to our medical genetic department with FA prediagnoses. Out of 181 cases 103 were confirmed as FA after DEB induced analysis. Multivariate logistic regression was utilized for modelling the effects of clinical and cytogenetical findings and revealedClinical genetics 139 P0275. Floating Harbor syndrome : report of 6 new cases This reveals genes on p arm of chromosome 13 have association s. sigaudy, c. missirian, n. philip, a. moncla; with mental status and fertility aspects and is essential to define Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Timone EnfantMarseille cedex 5, pathogenetic significance of chromosome 13p deletion. Molecular France. investigations showed normal Y chromosome. Studies are in progress Floating Harbor syndrome is a rare genetic disorder. Only about thirty to narrow down the region of chromosome deletion breakpoint and patients have been reported since first description in seventies. To map the candidate gene(s) for the cause in this region. Thus allows date, genetic bases are unknown. Clinical diagnostic is based on understanding the possible mechanisms by which deletion might affect characteristic facial dysmorphism including triangular face, deep set meiosis in spermatogenesis and lead to infertility. eyes, prominent nose, large columella, short philtrum and thin lips, Hypothetically, altered fertility rate observed among males in the four proportionate short stature with delayed bone age and expressive generations follows position-effect variegation (PEV) phenomenon. langage delay. Most cases are sporadic but two patients with affected Sequence blast analysis of breakpoints in deletion region of parents have been reported suggesting an autosomal dominant mode chromosome 13p in affected individuals showed 85% homology with of inheritance. One case of recurrence in sibs could be due to gonadal Yq region. Molecular characterization is currently underway to annotate mosaicism. We report 6 new patients aged from 4 to 31 years. Four underlying sequences with Yq region. This would further find novel were sporadic cases and there was a familial transmission from father relationship between autosomal aberrations and testicular dysgenesis to daughter. All displayed typical facial dysmorphism and short stature. or spermatogenesis arrest and map corresponding regions on each In addition, two patients had congenital cardiac defects (pulmonary autosome in regard to recorded aberrations accompanying these stenosis and atrial septal defect), two boys presented hypospadias and disturbances. two girls developed epilepsy. As psychomotor development is normal or midly retarded and associated malformations not usual, patients are P0278. Clinical presentation of mitochondrial encephalomyopathies generally refered to paediatricians because of growth retardation J. Pilch1, E. Marszal1, M. Kajor2, E. Jamroz1; P0276. Autosomal dominant perniosis maps to chromosome 3p 1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Po- M. Linné1, M. Gong2, H. Schulz2, M. Meurer3, E. Schröck1, M. Gahr4, N. Hüb- land, 2Department of Anatomopathology, Medical University of Silesia, Kato- ner2, M. A. Lee-Kirsch1; wice, Poland. 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Ger- Mitochondrial diseases are a very heterogeneous group of congenital many, 2Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany, respiratory chain defects. Their diagnostics is difficult because of the 3Klinik für Dermatologie, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, diversity of clinical presentations. The authors report four children 4Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Technische Universität Dresden, Dres- with mitochondrial diseases based on clinical picture and muscle den, Germany. pathomorphology. In the youngest patient with miopathic presentation first symptoms appeared at the age of 7 months. The next two boys Familial perniosis is a novel autosomal-dominant genodermatosis. presented with rapid fatigue associated with physical exercise and The clinical picture consists of painful purple-red inflammatory lesions recurrent vomiting were observed at the age of 9 and 12 years. in acral locations such as fingers, toes, nose, and cheeks induced by The mother of one of them is suffering from MELAS. In the last boy a combination of cold temperature and moisture. The lesions may external progressive ophthalmoplegia was observed since the age of ulcerate and may be associated with arthralgias. Histologically, lesions 9 years. All patients had hyperlactatemia. MRI of the head revealed are characterized by unspecific vasculitic changes with deposits abnormal disturbed myelination in three cases. Only in two patients of complement and immunoglobulin and absent hyperkeratosis. myopathic pattern in EMG was noted. Based on the muscle tissue The disease onsets in early childhood and tends to improve in late pathomorphology the ragged-red fibers were not found only in the adulthood. Thus, the clinical and histological findings are consistent youngest patient, but in that case the diagnosis was confirmed by with either perniosis or Chilblain lupus, a rare cutaneous form of lupus the presence of structurally abnormal mitochondria. At all of them erythematodes. Extensive investigation of 3 affected individuals of a COX activity was negative and the respiratory chain enzyme activity multigenerational nonconsanguineous German kindred could exclude was decreased. Nowadays, the molecular analyses of mtDNA are in the presence of antinuclear antibodies, complement deficiency, progress. cryoglobulinemia, cold agglutinins, infections, traumatic injury, keratolytic winter erythema, or lupus pernio. P0279. Cerebral, cerebellar and colobomatous anomalies in Whole-genome linkage analysis was carried out on 25 family members three related males: sex-linked inheritance in a newly recognized including 16 affected individuals using the Affymetrix GeneChip syndrome with features overlapping with Joubert syndrome Human Mapping 10K Array version Xba131. PedChek was used to detect Mendelian errors. Parametric linkage analysis was carried out H. Y. Kroes1, R. A. J. Nievelstein2, P. G. Barth3, P. G. J. Nikkels4, C. Bergmann5, with SimWalk 2 using a stepwise analysis of non overlapping marker R. H. J. M. Gooskens6, G. Visser7, J. K. Ploos van Amstel1, F. A. Beemer1; sets covering 25-100 SNPs at a time. Assuming a fully penetrant 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The autosomal-dominant trait the disease gene was localized within a 15 Netherlands, 2Department of Radiology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The cM interval on chromosome 3p21-3p14 with a maximum location score Netherlands, 3Dept. of Pediatric Neurology, Emma Childrens Hospital/Univer- of 4.7 for SimWalk 2 analysis. sity Medical Cente, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Pathology, Identification of the gene responsible for familial perniosis may shed University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 5Dept. of Human Genet- light onto the pathogenesis of common forms of collagen vascular ics, Aachen University of Technology, Aachen, Germany, 6Department of Child disease such as vasculitis or lupus erythematodes. Neurology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 7Department of Metabolic diseases, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands. P0277. 13p and Yq homology have anything to do with male We present a so far unrecognized X-linked mental retardation infertility status: A novel familial inheritance of 13p deletion syndrome with features overlapping with Joubert syndrome. L. Rao1, A. Babu1, K. Murthy1, M. Deenadayal2, L. Singh1; Two brothers showed hypotonia, mental retardation, retinal 1Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India, 2Infertility Institute colobomas and a breathing pattern compatible with Joubert and Research Centre, Hyderabad, India. syndrome. Neuroimaging revealed cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and ventriculomegaly. A tentative diagnosis of Joubert syndrome was Answers to deviations regarding the decline in fertility rate, and altered made, and autosomal recessive inheritance considered most likely. fecundability have gradually focused on individual genetic make up. In a subsequent pregnancy that occurred after artificial donor The natural transmission of microdeletion syndromes is occasionally insemination, ultrasound in the 22nd week revealed a Dandy-Walker reported. We present an interesting finding in a family with four males malformation and hydrocephaly. At autopsy at 34 weeks of gestation, and two females with inheritance of p arm deletion of chromosome the male infant showed cerebellar vermis aplasia and abnormalities 13 for the past four generations. This defect is predominant in males of the brainstem and cerebral cortex. He was considered to have the of the family, with oligoasthenoteratozoospermia and low intellectual same disorder as his two half-brothers. This renders the pedigree abilities, whereas females with the defect are normal. The deletion highly suggestive of X-linked inheritance. was confirmed with G banding and fluorescence in situ hybridization.Cytogenetics 140 The clinical symptoms of this syndrome resemble Joubert syndrome. tenegro, 3Department of Biology, Faculty of Veterinary medicine, University of However, the absence of the molar tooth sign, the presence of Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. supratentorial abnormalities, and the X-linked inheritance do not Premature centromere division (PCD) is an uncommon cytogenetic support Joubert syndrome. We propose the name X-linked cerebral- abnormality characterized with chromatides distinctively separated cerebellar-coloboma syndrome to distinguish the two disorders. before anaphase movement. PCD or out-of-phase centromere division Molecular analysis of several genes for X-linked syndromal mental is found in ageing cells, Alzheimer disease (AD), various chromosome retardation and Joubert syndrome is currently being performed. instability syndromes and cancers. It is also been proposed to be an Differentiation of the two disorders is especially important in genetic important mechanism of aneuploidy (i.e. chromosomes 21 and X in AD counselling, where artificial donor insemination may be considered as patients). It is known that chromosome 18 separates first in metaphase a means of reducing the recurrence risk, or when female relatives of - anaphase transition of the cell cycle. FISH analysis revealed that the the patient are concerned. aneuploidy in AD cells is not appearing only at chromosome 21, but at least chromosome 18 may exhibit trisomy as well. P0280. Oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia with rare associations The aim of this study was to estimate occurrence of PCD of M. Vishnuvardhan Reddy1, K. Jamil2, N. Satish Chandra Reddy2, K. Siva chromosome 18. Peripheral blood lymphocytes were analysed in 6 Sankar2; AD patients (age 69.8±7.2) and 6 control subjects (age 69.8±7.5). 1Osmania Medial College, Government E.N.T Hospital, Hyderabad, India, FISH analysis for the alpha-centromeric probe of chromosome 18 on 2Department of Genetics Bhagwan Mahavir Medical and Research Center, interphase nuclei has revealed that chromosome 18 expresses PCD in Hyderabad, India. 2.59% in control group and 5.18% in AD patients, which is statistically A case report of three year old female child whose parents are of non significant (p<0.05) increase. Using FISH on interphase nuclei, our consanguineous origin, who are not consistently exposed to any of results show that PCD can occur earlier that metaphase of mitosis, the potent mutagens during pregnancy and so the role of any of the i.e., in interphase of the cell cycle, immediately after replication. mutagens on the phenotype is not clear and the karyotype analysis of Our results showed a significant increase in hiperploidy (7.18% and the proband appears to be normal (46,XX) with contracted gall bladder, 4.23%) and hipoploidy in Alzheimer patients compared to control doubtful chloeseatoma, fusion of fourth and fifth cervical vertebrae along subjects (8.21% and 5.08%), suggest that out-of-phase centromere with various defects, mentioned in oculoauriculo vertebral dysplasia separation can be seen as a manifestation of chromosome instability or goldenhar syndrome which includes hemi vertebrate, facial palsy, which may lead to aneuploidy. limbal dermiod cyst, sensory neural hearing loss, microtia and middle ear anamolies. The impact of pathogenesis of oculoauriculo vertebral P0283. Cytogenetic and FISH analysis in female patients with spectrum might be the genes involved in notch signaling pathway, primary amenorrhea which plays an important role during somitogenesis are reviewed. S. N. Kokkinou, A. Varouta, I. Fotopoulou, D. G. Eliopoulos; Cytogenetic Unit, Halandri Athens, Greece. P0281. Trisomy 8p syndrome: A case report and review of Sex determination and development in humans is a very complex clinical features process. S. Totian1, F. Mahjoubi2, S. Kareeme2; Many genetic or chromosomal events can alter the process and result 1IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of in sex reversal. Iran. XY females can become from an abnormal interchange between the X Duplication of the short arm of chromosome 8, de novo or resulting and Y chromosomes or from a mutation in SRY gene. from parental translocation, associated with craniofacial defects (high Cytogenetic analysis was carried out on 5 cases with primary forehead, frontal or parietal bossing, carp mouth, full cheeks, and amenorrhea, culturing peripheral blood lymphocytes and using GTG round face), brevicollis with redundant skin folds, mental retardation, banding technique. Their age ranged from 17-37y.Chromosomal sexual absence of the carpus callosum, multiple minor skeletal abnormalities assignment was established as 46,XY in 1 phenotypically female. One , and other abnormalities. pt.had 46,XX / 47,XXY, while the rest had a female karyotype 46,XX. Here, a one month old male baby is described with duplication of All the pts received hormone-replacement therapy and therapy for 8p as the result of a maternal balanced reciprocal translocation. His induced osteopenia as well. karyotype was ascertained as Using FISH technique,we used the LSI SRY(Yp11.3) s.o.and CEP X 46,XY,der(13)t(8;13)(p11.2;p12). The father had normal karyotype. s.g./ CEP Y (alpha satellite) s.o.probes(VYSIS). The mother had an apparently balanced translocation involving The results confirmed the diagnosis of sex reversal in the younger pt. chromosome 8 and 13 (46,XX, t(8;13)(p11.2;p12). Four pts with CEP X /CEP Y probe confirmed their female sex, but Our case had macrocephaly with subtle changes in facial appearance. with probe LSI SRY, specific for SRY gene at Yp11.3 region., it was Pethosis of the left eye and micrognathia were also detected. The case found that about 30% of the interphase nuclei and more than three had probably cortical blindness. The patient did not show any response metaphases had a positive signal. to voice. The right parietal bone was prominent but not the left one. We believe that in our pts there is material of Y-chromosome carrying Right and left coroner artery in their origin and Aorta were dilated as the SRY gene and even more that this is responsible for their primary detected by echocardiography. Brian CT scan showed agenesis of amenorrhea. carpus callosum. We support the recommendation that FISH analysis with SRY probe This case represents typical features of duplication 8p syndrome in females with primary amenorhea should become part of the routine reported in the published cases. It should be noted that the phenotypic investigation . expression is related to the length of the duplicated segment. Furthermore, phenotype of dup8p resulting from a translocation is P0284. Ring Chromosome 4 Proven by FISH Study in a Child much more variable, probably because of different breakpoints. With Cleft Lip and Palate, Iris Coloboma, Mid-Gut Malrotation, These findings, together with those reported cases with dup (8), define Hypospadias and Corpus Callosum Hypoplasia a syndrome that emphasizes the importance of genes on the 8p region S. Balci1, O. Engiz1, D. Aktas1, I. Vargel2, M. S. Beksac3, K. Mrasek4, T. Liehr4; for development of brain and heart especially. 1Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Kirikkale University, Deptartment of Plastic and Reconstructive Sur- P0282. Detection of chromosome 18 centromere instability and gery, Kirikkale, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, Department of Obstetrics and aneuploidy in Alzheimer patients by using Flurescent in situ Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Institute für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, hybridization Jena, Germany. L. P. Zivkovic1, B. M. Spremo-Potparevic1, V. Bajic2, N. J. Djelic3; We report a 16-month-old mental and motor-retarded male patient 1Department of Biology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Belgrade, Serbia with ring chromosome 4 and multiple congenital anomalies such as and Montenegro, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 2Institute for Biomedical unilateral cleft lip and palate, iris coloboma, microcephaly, hypospadias Research, Galenika a.d., Serbia and Montenegro, Belgrade, Serbia and Mon- and double urethral orifices. Peripheral chromosome analysis of the patient showed 46, XY, (r4) de novo. Multicolor FISH study wasCytogenetics 141 also performed and according to multicolor banding (MCB) a r(4)(:: P0287. Cryptic subtelomere chromosomal rearrangement p16.3->q34.3~35.1::) was found in all metaphases. Subtelomere 4p screening in 19 patients with mental retardation / malformation was present but subtelomere 4q was absent. Cranial MRI showed syndromes hypoplastic corpus callosum ; delayed myelinization; cortical atrophy. M. Stefanova1, B. Dimitrov2, I. Ivanov1; Chromosomal analysis of both parents were normal. Amniocentesis 1Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. for the second pregnancy revealed a normal 46,XY karyotype. Background: Mental retardation affects 2-3% of the general Phenotypically normal baby was delivered. Phenotypic features of population, with an unknown cause in more than 50% of the cases. ring chromosome 4 cases change according to deleted part of the Cytogenetically undetected chromosomal imbalances have been chromosome 4 although severe growth retardation , microcephaly, indicated as an explanation. In recent years, due to the development of cleft lip and palate are consistent features. Midgut malrotation as seen molecular cytogenetic techniques, it became possible to identify cryptic in our case was only reported in a mosaic form of ring 4 associated rearrangements involving the ends of chromosomes. Subtelomeric with short bowel and dextrocardia. In conclusion, the first ring 4 Turkish aberrations have been identified as a significant cause of mental patient stressed that ring 4 chromosome anomaly should be suspected retardation and/or malformation syndromes. Material and methods: in every case with severe mental and motor retardation, microcephaly, Here we report a subtelomere fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) hypertelorism, cleft lip and palate, corpus callosum hypoplasia and study of well-selected group of 19 unrelated children with mental duodenal or midgut malrotation. retardation (MR), dysmorphic features, and a normal karyotype. The preliminary ascertainment checklist comprises evaluation of MR or P0285. Evaluation of DNA damage induced by spilled Prestige developmental delay, dysmorphism, growth defect, and abnormal oil exposure in a group of volunteers by means of comet assay pedigree. Recognized dysmorphic syndromes have been excluded R. Fraga, B. Laffon, B. Pérez-Cadahía, E. Fernández, E. Pásaro, J. Méndez; from the study. Results and discussion: Our study has found two University of A Coruña, A Coruña, Spain. de novo subtelomeric rearrangements, deletions of chromosome After Prestige accident, in November 2002, about 63000 tons of 4ptel and chromosome 13qtel, and one normal polymorphic variant of mixtures of fuel-oil and sea water reached Galician coast, and more chromosome region 2qtel, a maternally transmitted deletion of 2q37. than 200 beaches (150 Km of coast) were seriously affected. As a Clinical findings of patient 1 covered a well-defined Wolf-Hirshhorn consequence, birds were contaminated with the oil. As many as 10000 syndrome features although the del(4)(p16.3) is cytogenetically died, and 2500 were taken to the two centres for bird recovery in Santa undetectable. Patient 2 showing del(13)(q34) demonstrated growth Cruz (Oleiros) and O Campiño (Pontevedra), where they were cleaned and mental retardation, microcephaly, slopping forehead, bird-like and cured. nose, small chin, large ears, long fingers with wide terminal phalanges, In this work, peripheral leukocytes from a group of young biologists heart defect, ventral location of the anus. Conclusion: Our findings involved in the cleaning of contaminated alive birds and in making showed 10.5% incidence rate of subtelomere rearrangements, which is the autopsies of dead birds were analysed by means of comet assay, comparable with previous reports on subtelomere abnormalities. This in order to determine the DNA damage associated with exposure study highlights the importance of searching for cryptic subtelomeric to the oil. A group of non-exposed students were used as controls. rearrangements in non-syndromic mentally retarded patients. Additionally, volatile organic compounds were analysed in the ambient air of the work rooms by means of a gas chromatography coupled to P0288. Phenotypic and cytogenetic spectrum of chromosome 9p ion trap mass spectrometry technique. trisomy Results obtained showed significantly higher DNA damage in the A. M. Mohamed, S. A. Temtamy, A. K. Kamel, S. Ismaieel, N. A. Helmy, M. El group of exposed individuals, with comet tail length increasing with Gammal, M. El Ruby, M. Aglan; time of exposure. Individuals from O Campiño showed higher DNA National Research cetre, Cairo, Egypt. damage than those from Santa Cruz, probably associated to their In this study we investigated three cases with de novo short arm higher mean exposure time. No effect of protective measures (gloves, duplication of chromosome 9. masks, overalls) has been detected, due to the low number of exposed The aim of this study was to identify the genotype / phenotype individuals that did not use them. correlations and to use molecular cytogenetics to identify the exact duplicated part. Using GTG, DAPI stain, Whole chromosome paint , P0286. Cytogenetic evaluation in a group of individuals exposed cetromere, telomere and 9p21 specific locus probes demonstrated that to Prestige oil during autopsies and cleaning of contaminated in case one trisomy was due to translocation between chromosome birds 9 and 13 and duplication of 9p giving i(9p), the second case due to J. Méndez, R. Fraga, B. Pérez-Cadahía, E. Pásaro, B. Laffon; free 9p trisomy and the 3rd case due to duplication of whole short arm University of A Coruña, A Coruña, Spain. and part of the long arm ( partial 9 trisomy). This study suggests the In November 2002 the oil tanker Prestige, loaded with 77000 tons of presence of hot points for chromosome 9 breakage at proximal 9q. crude oil, broke up in the Northwest coast of Spain, spilling more than Although both patients 1 and 2 had the same trisomy involving 9p , 63000 tons into the sea water. This ecological disaster unleashed a Case one with i(9p) exhibits the classical clinical manifestations of great mobilisation of volunteers to carry out the labours of cleaning 9p trisomy such as mental retardation, ear anomalies, hypertelorism, beaches, sea, contaminated birds, etc. The Prestige oil is classified as bulbous nose, down-turned corners of the mouth, and hand feet fuel oil No. 6 by the USEPA, and the IARC regards this grade of oil as anomalies, while case 2 had overlapping features with Coffin -Siris possible human carcinogen (group 2B). syndrome . The significance of such observation may point to possible In order to determine if exposure to Prestige oil causes cytogenetic gene location to Coffin -Siris syndrome on 9p. Case 3 had additional damage, micronucleus (MN) test has been performed in peripheral manifestations more than those typical of trisomy 9p. This could be lymphocytes from a group of volunteers that cleaned alive oil- due to duplication of 9q21 region. Each case had unique clinical contaminated birds and made autopsies of dead birds, and results and cytogenetic manifestations, this may be due to different gene have been compared with a control group. involvement according to the molecular site of the breakage point. No significant difference has been obtained between MN frequencies in the control and exposed groups, even at the higher time of exposure. P0289. Small supernumerary marker chromosomes Moreover, no effect of gender, age or smoking habits has been characterized by multicolor FISH techniques: database of observed. These results suggests that protective measures adopted Belarussian Registry of Chromosomal Abnormalities during the handling of birds have been suitable, at least to avoid any A. D. Polityko1,2, N. V. Rumyantseva1, H. Starke2, T. Liehr2; cytogenetic damage. 1Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus, 2Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. Marker chromosome is structurally abnormal chromosome in which no part can be identified (ISCN, 1995). Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) differ depending on chromosomal origin, euchromatic DNA-content, degree of mosaicism, possible ofCytogenetics 142 uniparental disomy presence. sSMC occur in about 0.045% of the heteromorphisms is still unclear. Connection with reproductive failure, human population (72/161536 newborn infants) (Liehr, 2004 http://mti- mentally retardation, schizophrenia, the Walker-Warburg syndrome, n.mti.uni-jena.de/~huwww/MOL_ZYTO/sSMC). the oculo-auriculo-vertebral (Goldenhar) spectrum and even with The characterization of sSMC is the important task of prenatal and cancer predisposition were suggested throughout the literature. The postnatal cytogenetic diagnostics and genetic counseling, therefore a now available possibility to distinguish by FISH between the different variety of special FISH approaches have been developed for that. heterochromatic patterns hidden behind the cytogenetic finding of Totally 45 cases with SMC in constitutional karyotype were registered a ‘heterochromatic variant of chromosome 9’ will lead to a clearer in Belarussian Registry of Chromosomal Abnormalities among the genotyp-phenotype correlation of chromosome 9 heteromorphisms in individuals who were cytogenetically examined in Republic Genetic future. Supported by the Dr. Robert Pfleger-Stiftung. Service during 1983-2004 years. Comprehensive molecular cytogenetic methods were used for P0291. Three families with a chromosome 5 inversion diagnostics of all available cases: M-FISH, cenM-FISH, microdissection V. Nedomova1, N. Jencikova1, Z. Zemanova2, G. Kreckova1, D. Raskova1, M. of sSMC with subsequent reverse painting, acro-cenM-FISH, Louckova1; centromere-near BAC probe using, etc. 1Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Center of Oncocytogenetics, 1st Medical We present data of origin, structure and mosaicism status of 20 School, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. prenatal/postnatal sSMC cases diagnosed, describe the significant We present three familiar occurrences of the chromosome 5 inversions. and rare clinical findings, and discourse the productivity of approaches Routine prenatal cytogenetic analysis by G-banding was indicated by used. positive screening results in one case and advanced maternal age in two other cases. There were no spontaneous abortions registered in Karyotype Phenotype any of these families, only a vanishing twin syndrome was identified in one pregnancy. 47,XX,+inv dup(15) Normal Paracentric inversions: inv(5)(q23.2q33.3) and inv(5)(q22q35.2) in 47,XY,+inv dup(15) Normal two families and a pericentric inversion: inv(5)(p12q13.2) in the third 47,XY+inv dup(15) Normal family were found. Breakpoints were verified by multicolor banding, 47,XX,+inv dup(15)/47,XX,+r(15)/46,XX Normal supported by grant GACR 301/04/0407. Father was a carrier of the 47,XX,+inv dup(15)* Normal inversion in all of the three families. We also try to investigate karyotypes of other family members. 47,XY,+inv dup(15) mat* CA The results of the investigations can be effectively used in 47,XX,+inv dup(15) CA prenatal cytogenetic analysis at prospective pregnancies in other 47,XY,+inv dup(15) CA consanguineous relatives. 48,XXX,+inv dup(9p)/47,XXX CA 47,XX,+inv dup(12p) (neocentromeric) CA P0292. Comparing different molecular cytogenetics methods for detecting subtelomeric rearrangements 47,XX,+inv dup(12p)/46,XX CA A. Erjavec- Skerget, S. Stangler-Herodez, A. Zagorac, B. zagradisnik, N. Ko- 47,XY,+inv dup(18p) CA kalj-Vokač; 47,XX,+inv dup(22) CA Maribor Teaching Hospital, Maribor, Slovenia. 48,XY,+der(19),+der(19) CA The subtelomeric regions are interesting from a genomic perspective, as 47,XY,+der(21) Normal they are gene rich and often involved in chromosomal rearrangements. 47,XY,+der(14)t(11;14)(p15;q11.2) CA Most telomeres stain light with G-banding, and small rearrangements are therefore difficult to detect. Due to the development of molecular 47,XX,+der(21)t(11;21)(q21;q22) mat CA cytogenetic techniques, it is possible to identify cryptic rearrangements 47,XX,+der(22)t(11;22)(q23;q11) pat CA involving the ends of chromosomes. Screening method generally used 47,XX,+der(22)t(11;22)(q23;q11) CA for detection of subtelomeric rearrangements is multiprobe telomere 47,XY,+der(22)t(11;22)(q23;q11) mat CA fluorescent in situ hybridization (T-FISH). With T-FISH and other two methods, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and *- mother and son comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) we analyzed subtelomeric CA- congenital abnormalities regions of five patients, where the subtelomeric aberrations with T- [Supported in parts by DAAD 325/2003, DFG WER 17/01/04 and Dr. FISH were find. Among them we found two de novo subtelomeric Robert Pfleger-Stiftung]. deletion: del(X)(ptel) and del(9)(ptel) and three unbalanced subtelomeric rearrangements (two among them were consequences P0290. The different heteromorphic patterns in chromosome 9 of familial translocations): t(10;13)(qtel;qtel)-de novo; t(8;21)(qtel;qtel); pericentric region - towards a better understanding rec(X)(qtel;qtel). MLPA confirmed all five subtelomeric rearrangements. T. Liehr1, U. Claussen1, H. Tönnies2, H. Starke1; With CGH we screened the whole genome of patients to find possible 1Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany, 2Institut für deletion or amplification. This technique confirmed previous founded Humangenetik Charité Campus, Berlin, Germany. subtelomeric anomalies which were bigger than 8 Mb. Among the non-acrocentric human chromosomes, chromosome 9 Our study was used to determine the feasibility of these three presents with the highest degree of morphological variations. Variants, methods for clinical testing on patients with mental retardation and/or also called heteromorphisms, like 9qh+, 9qh- or inv(9)(p11q13) are developmental disabilities. We concluded that T-FISH and MLPA are common findings in routine cytogenetics. In a previous study we both very useful and interchangeable methods with some exceptions. characterized in summary thirteen molecularcytogenetically different The choice of either method can be influenced by the technical heteromorphic pattern of the pericentric region of chromosome 9 conditions of the laboratory. (Starke et al., 2002; Eur J Hum Genet 10:790-800). In that study we used a set of three fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) probes: a P0293. The first experience of bone marrow karyotyping in the chromosome 9 specific alpha satellite probe, a chromosome 9 specific private laboratory of Lithuania classical satellite III DNA probe and a microdissection probe specific D. Jakiuniene; for 9p12/9q13-21.1. This probe set was enlarged in the meantime Biomedical research center, Vilnius, Lithuania. by so-called subcentromeric BAC-probes located in 9p12 and The culturing of bone marrow and karyotyping is a very popular and 9q13, respectively (probes are specified in Starke et al., 2003; Hum helpful method in diagnostic of hematological disorders. In Lithuania it Genet 114:51-67). Thus, we were able to characterize 3 additional, was used in only a small area - for detecting of Filadelphia chromosome. previously unreported heteromorphic pattern of chromosome 9 and The “Biomedical research center” is a private laboratory in Lithuania, to describe variants like ‘9ph+’ (acc. to Starke et al., 2002) in more first started in last year to perform a full karyotyping on bone marrow. detail. The biological and/or clinical significance of chromosome 9 In period from 2004 Jun to 2004 12 was performed 36 karyotypes fromCytogenetics 143 bone marrow of patient with different age and diagnosis. The material her almost normal intelligence. Although an assessment of their verbal was send from largest hematological clinics of Lithuania. The bone performance is in progress, we hypothesize that a dosage-sensitive marrow was cultured according to standard methodic (direct and gene, responsible for speech disorders, is located in the very distal overnight culture; in some cases a more long culturing depending on 15q. preliminare diagnosis). In about 2/3 off all cases an abnormal karyotype was detected . P0296. The evaluation of genotoxic potential of Tc-99m O- in 4 lymphocyte culture of patients with thyroid disease P0294. Detection of numeric chromosomal aberrations using M. İkbal1, M. Yildirim2, B. Seven2, M. Keles3, H. Dogan1, E. Varoglu2; multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification 1Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Dept of Medical Genetics, Erzurum, Tur- B. Zagradisnik, S. Stangler Herodez, A. Erjavec Skerget, A. Zagorac, N. Kokalj key, 2Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Dept of Nuclear Medicine, Erzurum, Vokac; Turkey, 3Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Dept of Internal Medicine, Er- General Hospital Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. zurum, Turkey. Numeric chromosomal aberrations are usually identified with The genotoxicity study of Technetium-99m pertechnetat (Tc-99m cytogenetic analysis. A variety of other methods can substitute O-) was carried out on human lymphocyte chromosomes using 4 karyotyping to detect aneuploidy but all have downsides; some are chromosomal aberrations (CA) and micronucleus (MN). Exposure to time-consuming, labor-intensive, some require high quality DNA, etc. ionizing radiation may result in DNA damage giving rise to chromosome Recently, a method, multiplex ligation-dependent amplification (MLPA), alterations and complex chromosome rearrangements. Cytogenetic was described which can be used to detect the correct number of all tests play an important role in the detection of biological effects of low chromosomes in the small amount (50ng) of genomic DNA in a single doses of radiation in patients exposed to ionizing radiation. CA and reaction by measuring the gene dosage differences. The method relies MN were measured before, 1 hour and one month after Tc-99m O- 4 on amplification and quantitation of probes added to the test sample. In administration. A statistically significant increase was observed in the this study, MLPA was compared with cytogenetic analysis of cultured SCE and MN frequencies 1 hour after Tc-99m O- administration could 4 fetal tissues. be described. It has been obtained any significant difference in CA Genomic DNA was extracted from 24 samples from spontaneously and MN frequencies one month after Tc-99m O- administration. The 4 terminated pregnancies routinely sent to cytogenetic analysis. All results of the study suggest that Tc-99m O- might moderate genotoxic 4 samples were cultured and when possible karyotyped. The MLPA potential. analysis was performed with the subtelomeric kit from MRC-Holland which includes one specific probe per chromosomal arm in a single P0297. Balanced chromosomal rearrangements in couples with reaction. reproductive failure The cytogenetic analysis confirmed the chromosome number V. Belengeanu1, S. Farcaş1, K. Rozsnyai1, C. Popa1, C. Gug1, E. Bernad2, M. established with the MLPA analysis in 17 samples. Several common Craina2, I. Cioată2; numeric chromosomal aberrations were detected. Lack of cell growth 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, precluded karyotyping in 7 samples where only MLPA results were Timişoara, Romania, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of obtained. Medicine and Pharmacy, Timişoara, Romania. The MLPA analysis can be successfully used to detect the correct Balanced chromosomal rearrangements are known to be a risk number of chromosomes and is therefore suitable as a diagnostic factor for both recurrent pregnancy loss and infertility, not only method for numeric chromosomal aberrations. Also it can provide by predisposing to meiotic malsegregation of chromosomes and partial information on karyotype of a tested sample when cytogenetic imbalanced gamete formation, but the abnormal meiotic configurations analysis is not possible because of lack of viable cells or when only a arisen by homologous pairing of translocation chromosomes may also small amount of template DNA is available. disrupt gametogenesis, mostly in males. We carried out cytogenetic analysis in 130 couples referred P0295. deletions and duplications of distal 15q: low/tall stature for recurrent spontaneous abortions and 40 infertile couples. and speech abnormalities Chromosome examinations were performed on cultured peripheral F. Cavallin1, M. Arra1, G. Gregato1, S. Gimelli1, T. Pramparo1, S. Giglio2, G. blood lymphocytes, using GTG-banding. In the group with repeated Fioretti3, A. Salvatoni4, V. Calcaterra5, D. Larizza5, F. Stanzial6, F. Castellan6, A. miscarriages we detected a simple translocation t(4;12) in a woman, Hoeller7, G. Arrigo8, P. Maraschio1, O. Zuffardi1; two reciprocal translocations: t(2;11) in a woman and t(4;16) in a man; 1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Osped- an insertional translocation involving chromosome 3 in a female. We ale Meyer, Firenze, Italy, 3Ospedale Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy, 4Clinica Pediatrica, identified three carriers of a robertsonian translocation (two women Varese, Italy, 5Clinica Pediatrica, Pavia, Italy, 6Genetica Medica, Bolzano, Italy, and a man), three pericentric invertions of chromosome nine (two in 7Citogenetica, Bolzano, Italy, 8Citogenetica, Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano, the female and one in the male partner, respectively) and a paracentric Italy. inversion of chromosome 15 in a woman. In the group referred We defined at BAC level through array-CGH six cases with different for infertility we found four carriers of a balanced chromosomal distal 15q deletions/duplications. rearrangement: a t(4;X), a t(7;14) in mosaicism and a pericentric Age ranges 18-38 years but a 8-years-old girl. Cases 1-5 have a 2.2- inversion of chromosome 10 in the female partners and a pericentric 4.8 Mb deletion secondary to a ring. All have mild mental retardation, inversion of chromosome 9 in a male. speech delay, articulation difficulties, obesity, stature <3rd centile. Case In our study the overall frequency of balanced chromosomal 6 is tetrasomic for the distal 4.5 Mb due to an invdup analphoid marker. rearrangements was 7.6 % among the couples with recurrent She has a borderline intelligence but suffers from severe dysarthria abortions, affecting the female partner in 5.3 % of the cases. The (inability to pronounce some consonants and difficult-to-understand high proportion of female carriers in the infertile group suggests that speech), stature >97th centile. balanced structural anomalies would frequently lead to impairment of Both low and tall stature are reported in distal 15q imbalances and gametogenesis in females as well. attributed to dosage effect of the IGF1R gene. Missense and non-sense IGF1R mutations result in intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation. P0298. A Greig Syndrome patient with 46,XY,t(7;10)(p13;q11.2) In cases 1, 2, 5 IGF1R was included in the deletion whereas in cases karyotype 3, 4 the deletion breakpoint was at 500 kb from the IGF1R 3’ where a Z. Yilmaz1, M. Gokdemir2, I. Ocak3, M. Derbent4, F. I. Sahin1; regulator of IGF1R expression might be located thus explaining the low 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An- stature of cases 3, 4. Case 6 marker contains two dosages of IGF1R. kara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, These cases suggest that IGF1R is dosage sensitive and that the final Konya, Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Radiol- stature is strongly influenced by haploinsufficiency or tetrasomy for ogy, Konya, Turkey, 4Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of this gene. Most distal trisomy 15q cases are reported with overgrowth Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey. further supporting the hypothesis. All the subjects suffer from speech- A nine month-old male patient, the second child of a non- articulation disorders. This was especially evident in case 6 because of consanguineous couple was referred to our laboratory for cytogeneticCytogenetics 144 analysis because of polysyndactyly of hands and feet and minor helps to alleviate concerns about recurrence risk in future pregnancies. dismorphic facial findings. Chromosome analysis results revealed In many cases, monitoring of future pregnancies can lead to the birth that the patient had an apparently balanced translocation involving of a healthy baby. Reciprocal translocation in one of the partners is one the short arm of chromosome 7 and the long arm of chromosome 10. of the most frequently observed structural chromosomal abnormalities The karyotype was reported as 46,XY,t(7;10)(p13;q11.2). The parents’ as one of the major causes for repeated fetal loss. karyotypes were found to be normal. As the 7p13 region contains the A young healthy couple (Syrian) with history of 3 first trimester GLI3 gene, the patient was reevaluated for GLI3 gene associated abortions was investigated. Karyotype of the husband showed normal phenotypes. Differential diagnosis was made relying on the absence 46, XY. A balanced reciprocal translocation, 46, XX, (6;15) (q23;qter) of corpus callosum agenesis and normal neuromotor development. was observed in the spouse. Family history revealed several repeated abortions (7 times) in her two elder sisters and two abortions in her P0299. Detection of t(13q;14q) in a man with primary infertility mother, and history of a living male child among close relatives, with O. Ozalp1, Z. Yilmaz1, E. B. Kilicdag2, F. I. Sahin1; mental retardation suggesting familial translocation. Translocations 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An- involving chromosome 6q and 15 are very rare. Prenatal diagnosis kara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Obstetrics and PGD options were explained to the couple. The pathogenesis of and Gynecology, Adana, Turkey. trisomy 6q and monosomy 6q resulting meiotic segregation of parental Robertsonian translocations are one of the balanced structural balanced translocation will be presented. chromosome abnormalities in infertile men. They present usually without an abnormal phenotype for the carrier. In men, they may result P0302. Partial trisomy 11q with a rare paternal inheritance in abnormal sperm production. Both morphological and numerical E. Bora1, O. Giray1, A. Ulgenalp1, T. Bui2, D. Ercal1; abnormalities in sperm have been reported in t(13q;14q) carriers. A 34 1Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey, 2Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Swe- year old men with primary infertility due to azoospermia was referred den. to our department for cytogenetic and Y chromosome microdeletion An eight year-old male was refered to our department with the analysis. We detected the karyotype as 46, XY, t(13;14)(q10;q10). complaints of mental retardation, inability to walk and speak. He was Y chromosome microdeletion was not detected in the screened the second child of the non-consanguineous parents and having a 16 regions. Pathological examination of testis biopsy specimens years old healthy brother. His examination revealed low frontal hairline, revealed incomplete spermatogenesis. t(13q;14q) has been reported anteverted prominent ears, arched eyebrows, epichantus, thick alae to be together with abnormal spermatogenesis. Sperm production is nasi, beaked nose, prominent nasal bridge, cripthorchidism, narrow affected by chromosomal pairing in meiosis and the sex vesicle affects feet and wide spaced 1st - 2nd toes, pes planus and equinovalgus the sperm morphology. The patient was informed about the condition deformity. He had severe mental and motor retardation and hardly walk during genetic counselling. only when supported in ante-flex position, and he has stereotypic upper extremity movements. The cytogenetic evaluation of the case and the P0300. Molecular Cytogenetic Analysis of inv parents revealed unusual rearrengements which were confirmed with dup(15)Chromosomes Observed in Two Patients with Different FISH. His karyotipe was 46,XY,-3,+der(3) dir ins(3)(3;11)(p13;q23- Clinical Manifestations q24). The karyotype of the mother was normal and the father has N. A. Helmy, A. M. Mohamed, A. K. Kamel, S. I. Ismail, M. O. El Ruby, M. I. 46,XY,ins(3)(3;11)(p13;q23-q24) chromosomal constitution. As he was Shehab; a rare case of the medical literature with paternally inherited insertional National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. translocation, his phenotypic features and cytogenetic findings are Supernumerary marker chromosomes (SMCs) of chromosome 15, presented. designated “SMC(15)s,” are the most common SMC in humans, accounting for as much as 50% of all those observed. In this study P0303. Mining novel oncogene rearrangements in leukemia- we report two cases with de novo large SMC(15) (inv dup 15 including lymphoma cell lines PWACR), both cases were referred for delayed physical and mental R. A. F. MacLeod, S. Nagel, D. Anders, M. Kaufmann, H. G. Drexler; milestones but had different phenotypic manifestations. Our aim is to DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany. clarify the genotype-phenotype correlations. Conventional cytogenetic Many oncogenes have been ascertained by molecular analysis analysis of their peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed the presence of of chromosome translocations recurring in patients with specific SMC in all cells (47,XY,+mar). FISH analysis using whole chromosome neoplasms, mainly leukemia-lymphoma (L/L) but only rarely in paint 15 showed that SMCs were derived from chromosome 15, Using derived cell lines. The DSMZ has collected well characterized cell centromeric 15 and SNRPN specific locus probes in 15q11-13 showed lines established from L/L patients, subjecting these to cytogenetic that the marker in both of them had two copies of chromosome 15 breakpoint analysis using tile-path clones, supported by gene- centromere and two copies of SNRPN locus. So the marker could expression analysis. In addition to “standard” translocations, such be described as idic(15)(pter,q13). Both cases were males of non as t(9;22)(q34;q11) in chronic myeloid leukaemia, several novel consanguineous marriage, clinically they exhibited microcephaly, rearrangements juxtaposing known with unknown or rare oncogenes profound mental retardation, convulsions, and behavioural changes, have been found. These include: t(6;7)(q25;q36) with HLXB9/MYB and they showed no clinical manifestations of Prader-Willi or in acute myeloid leukaemia; t(14;17)(q21;q32) with HOXB5/IGH, Angelman syndromes. Although both cases had similar markers, one t(3;7)(q27;q32) with FRA7H/BCL6, inv(3)(q25q27) with MBNL1/BCL6, case showed no dysmorphic features, while the other had marked t(8;9)(q24;p15) with PAX5/MYC, and t(9;14) with PAX5/VRK1 in B-cell craniofacial anomalies and neurological manifestations. This clinical lymphoma; and t(5;14)(q35;q32) with BCL11B/NKX2-5 in T-cell acute discrepancy might be due to different breakpoints involved. lymphoblastic leukaemia. Apart from t(8;9), none of these translocations has been described previously. Interestingly, most breakpoints coincide P0301. Repeated spontaneous abortions due to balanced with highly conserved, non-coding DNA sequences associated with reciprocal translocation, 46,XX ,t(6;15)(q23;qter) - Pathogenesis transcriptional regulators which may be disrupted by the associated of duplication/deletion of chromosome 6q : A case report and translocations. Several independent lines of evidence suggest that brief review the same rearrangements occur in vivo. First, all changes are either D. S. Krishna Murthy, M. Susan, T. Faisal, M. Naveed; cryptic or documented at early passage; second, all novel oncogenes Canadian Specialist Hospital, Dubai, United Arab Emirates. have close homologs involved in other tumor types; and finally, the first Pregnancy loss, particularly early miscarriage, is a common problem of these rearrangements discovered - t(5;14), has now been detected that affects many women and their partners. Most spontaneous clinically. Thus, in addition to illuminating novel aspects of tumor miscarriages are caused by an abnormal karyotype of the embryo. At biology, molecular cytogenetic analysis of L/L cell lines may inform least 50% of all first-trimester SABs are cytogenetically abnormal. Many diagnostic analysis. couples are anxious to understand why miscarriage has occurred and are hesitant to pursue another pregnancy until they understand more about the cause of their loss. Cytogenetic evaluation of the couple oftenCytogenetics 145 P0304. Differential replication of the Y chromosome: study of the analysed cells showed a ring chromosome composed of both the different regions by FISH. long and the short arms , r(7) (p22q36). In the remaining metaphases, S. Dubé1,2, R. Fetni3, N. Lemieux1,2; we found a double ring chromosome 7, a monosomy 7, and two 1Département de pathologie et de biologie cellulaire de l'Université de Montréal, normal cells with 2 chromosomes 7. The girl had a developmental Montréal, PQ, Canada, 2Département de pathologie et Centre de recherche de delay (growth retardation) and skin lesions. l'Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal, PQ, Canada, 3Département de pathologie de Karyotype of the parents were normal confirming de novo origin of the l'Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal, PQ, Canada. ring chromosome formation. Recent studies have shown that replication timing reflects gene To our khnowlege, these uncommun cytogenetic abnormality have not expression. A gene replicated early in S phase will be expressed in been previously reported with LMMC. the cell, whereas a gene replicating late will not be expressed. Also, actively expressed genes seem to have a loose chromatin structure as P0307. Importance of cytogenetic investigation of 165 severely opposed to inactive genes which show a more condensed chromatin infertile men candidates for intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) organization. To date, few loci have been studied according to these two aspects. We hypothesize that a correlation between replication O. Kacem1, I. El Kamel1, N. Bouayed Abdelmoula2, A. Zhioua3, M. Zribi1, R. timing and chromatin condensation exists. The first objective of this Smiti1, F. Telmoudi1, F. Zhioua4, A. Amouri1; study is to determine the replication timing of different regions of the 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Y chromosome. To reach this goal, we are using a FISH replication Sfax, Tunisia, 3PMA Unity, Aziza Othmana Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 4Service of assay and bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) probes covering the Y Gynecology, Aziza Othmana Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia. chromosome. This variant FISH technique can determine the replication Cytogenetic alterations represent a major cause of severe time of a DNA sequence in interphase nuclei of unsynchronized normal spermatogenic impairment leading to male infertility. The incidence of lymphocytes. We found a majority of late replicated BAC sequences chromosomal abnormalities was estimated between 7 and 14%. The and only a small proportion of BACs showing early replication risk of transmission of chromosomal diseases by ICSI is therefore very timing. It seems that late replicated sequences contain either only high. one ubiquitously expressed gene, genes exclusively expressed in We report here the results of cytogenetic analysis of 165 infertile testis, or no gene. Instead, early replicated BACs include more than men with severe oligospermia, oligoastheno or oligoasthenotératos one ubiquitously expressed gene, and the presence of two adjacent permia and azoospermia referred to our laboratory of Cytogenetics ubiquitously expressed genes seems to define an early replication time of the Pasteur Institute of Tunis from April 2002 to Decembre 2004. zone. With this project, we want to establish the existence of replication Chromosomal analysis was performed from peripheral blood domains and correlate these data with chromatin structure and DNA lymphocytes cultures using RHG and fluorescent in situ hybridization rearrangements. Supported by RMGA-FRSQ and the Fondation de (FISH) and and karyotyping done using the Image Analyzer. l’Hôpital Sainte-Justine. In 20 (12%) cases, chromosomal abnormalities was found. Whereas the 47,XXY chromosome complement was the commonest, the following P0305. Value of karyotype in the exploration of couples with abnormal karyotypes were also found: 2 XX men, a deletion of the recurrent spontaneous abortions long arm of the Y chromosome, chromosomal translocations found in I. El Kamel1, O. Kacem1, N. Bouayed Abdelmoula2, M. Zribi1, R. Smiti1, F. Zhi- 5 cases (Robertsoniennes translocations in 4 cases and a balanced oua3, A. Amouri1; reciprocal translocation in the last) and a chromosomal inversion. 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Faculty of Medicine, All men with chromosomal abnormality were referred for genetic Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service of Gynecology, Aziza Othmana Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia. counseling. Recurrent spontaneous abortion ( RSA ) is defined as the occurrence These results show that cytogenetic screening and counselling are of two or more consecutive foetal losses. It represent 0,94 % of all highly recommanded in infertile males before referring to assisted pregnancies and 9,78 % of spontaneous abortions. At the present reproductive techniques (ART) to avoid transmission, persistence, or time, cytogenetic analysis has been gained an important place in the even an increase of genetic defects in future generations. etiological screening of RSA. In this study, we report the cytogenetic findings of 39 couples with the P0308. Should chromosome breakage studies be performed in all patients referred for aplasic anemia? history of first trimester repeated miscarriage (2 to 6). From May 2002 until December 2004, karyotype of 78 subjects has been performed F. Telmoudi1, I. El Kamel1, F. Mallouli2, T. Ben Othman2, S. Hdiji3, S. Ladab2, O. in our Pasteur Institute's Cytogenetic Laboratory. The frequency Kacem1, M. Zribi1, R. Smiti1, M. Elloumi4, A. Amouri1; of chromosomal abnormalities was found to be 7,6 %, i.e.6/78 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 2CNGMO, Tunis, individuals, equally divided into autosomal structural rearrangements Tunisia, 3Hematology Service, Hedi Chaker Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Hematol- (reciprocal translocation, inversion ) and sex chromosomal mosaicism ogy Service, Hedi Caker Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia. ( Turner's syndrome, Klinefelter's syndrome ). No correlation between Aplastic anemia (AA) is referred to situations in which bone marrow the distribution of the chromosome abnormalities and the number of fails to generate blood elements. This entity is composed of several abortions was observed. different diseases and syndromes such as Fanconi anemia (FA). In conclusion, we insist on the advantage of systematically performing Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal recessive disease a karyotype in the case of RSA, consisting on the detection of characterized by congenital abnormalities, progressive bone marrow chromosomal abnormalities. Therefore, genetic counselling should failure and cancer susceptibility. The lymphocytes and fibroblasts of be offered to these couples and investigations conducted on their FA patients show increased sensitivity to alkylating agents such as extended families. mitomycin C (MMC) and Diepoxybutane (DEB), generating increased chromosome breakage. P0306. De novo ring chromosome 7 with LMMC In this study we have investigated cytogenetically 43 patients referred A. A. Amouri1, I. El Kamel1, N. Bouayed Abdelmoula1, O. Kacem1, L. Aissaoui2, for AA. Mitomycin C with 2 different M. Zribi3, R. Smiti1, F. Telmoudi1, B. Meddeb2; concentrations (50, 80 ng/ml) and/or DEB have been applied to the 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, PasteurInstitute, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Hematology Service, lymphocytes of the patients and normal controls. Aziza Othmana Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Insti- According to the criteria of MMC (and /or DEB) sensitivity only 7 cases tute, Tunis, Tunisia. were classified as FA patients. All these cases showed the pattern of breakage characteristic for FA ( Ring chromosome 7 is an unusual chromosome anomaly. >70% of aberrant cells). Here we describe a 5 year old patient with ring chromosome 7 who The diagnosis of Fanconi anemia being of importance for genetic was referred for aplastic anemia. Subsquent cytogenetic techniques counseling and early therapeutic intervention in patients, we demonstrated a monosomy 7 with trisomy 8 in cultured bone marrow conclude that chromosomal breakage studies should be performed in cells, while the lymphocyte culture showed 3 kinds of cells: a cell line aplastic anemia especially if the child also present skin pigmentation with large ring chromosome replacing one of the normal chromosomes abnormalities, growth retardation, microcephaly or dysmorphism. 7 resulting in partial monosomy in the majority of cells, 80% percent ofCytogenetics 146 So, the diagnosis of FA can be made unequivocally by combining P0311. Cytogenetics Results in 151 Iranian Patients with Mental both the clinical data and the cytogenetic evaluation of chromosomal Retardation breakage induced by DEB or MMC. F. Behjati1, K. Kahrizi1, Y. Shafeghati1, P. C. Patsalis2, S. Ghasemi Firouz- abadi1, R. Karimi- Nejad3, I. Bagherizadeh1, S. Abedini1, S. Esmaeeli Nieh1, Z. P0309. Cryptic Chromosomal Abnormalities in Children with Zahedi1, S. Tootian4, R. Vazifehmand1, H. Najmabadi1; Mental Retardation Using Subtelomeric FISH 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation O. Cogulu1, C. Gunduz2, E. Karaca1, H. Onay1, C. Ozkinay3, F. Ozkinay1; Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The Cyprus Institute of Neurology 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Bornova-Izmir, and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Karimi-Nejad / Najmabadi Pathology &Genet- Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, ics Centar, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Iranian Blood Transfusion Center, Bornova-Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Medical Genetics, Bornova-Izmir, Turkey. Mental Retardation(MR) has heterogenous aetiology, mostly with genetic Final diagnosis in mental retardation (MR) could be reached in causes. 7-8 percent of all MR patients and 50-60 percent of severe approximately one third of all cases, and no diagnosis is achieved in type have chromosome abnormalities. 151 MR patients were referred the rest of the patients, which is followed by repeated laboratory tests to Genetic Research Center for cytogenetics investigation. Standard and a long time exhausting both parents and the patients. Recent Cytogenetics techniques using high resolution and GTG banding was studies have established that chromosomal abnormalities comprise carried out on all patients. The overall chromosome abnormality rate 30-40 % of moderate to severe MR; and nearly 30 % of mild MR. was 15 percent. The chromosome abnormality rate other than trisomy Subtelomeric rearrangements account for a significant proportion (2.2- 21 was 6 percent. The abnormalities include a balanced reciprocal 23%) of cases with undiagnosed MR because of high concentration translocation between chromosomes 4 and 10, maternally inherited; of genes in this region. The aim of this study is to screen a selected an abnormal Yp; add(9)(p34); del(18)(p11); inv(1)(p33p35) and partial group of children with idiopathic MR for subtelomeric abnormalities deletion of 10p. The significance of these chromosomal findings in using FISH. mental retardation aetiology will be presented. A total of 30 children aged 3-16 years with idiopathic MR and normal karyotypes were included in this study. The children whose parents had P0312. Chromosome instability in children with thyroid consanguineous marriages were excluded from the study. All cases pathology born to irradiated parents due to Chernobyl accident were evaluated using the scoring system published by de Vries et al. M. A. Pilinskaya, S. S. Dibskiy, Y. V. Shemetun, Y. B. Dibskaya; Terminal deletion of chromosome 9p in a case was detected by FISH Research Centre of Radiation Medicine, Kyiv, Ukraine. (3.3 %). Higher resolution G-banding showed the same abnormality We examined two groups of children with and without thyroid pathology as well. born to parents irradiated by iodine owing to the Chernobyl accident In conclusion the frequency of subtelomeric abnormalities in our study who lived in the territory of Ukraine with high level of food contamination group was lower than the frequencies reported in other studies. Higher by Cs. Chromosome aberrations in peripheral blood lymphocytes were incidence of consanguineous marriages resulting higher frequencies studied after 48 and 144 hours of culture by conventional preparation of mutant allels for autosomal recessive disorders may be the reason and G-banding. With short-term cultivation and conventional for this result. The scoring criterions were not found to be convenient cytogenetics the means did not differ significantly between the to select the patients for subtelomeric FISH. High-resolution G-banded groups. In both groups simple aberrations mainly of chromatid type analysis in those cases and more effective selection criterions for FISH were dominant. Mean-group frequencies of unstable exchanges are suggested. (dicentrics and centric rings) corresponded to their age norm, but mean-group frequencies of stable chromosome aberrations (abnormal P0310. Ambiguous ISCN 1995 nomenclature causes problems monocentrics) were significantly elevated above the spontaneous with karyotypes - a CyDAS based analysis level. G-banding cytogenetics in short-term cultures increased the B. Hiller1, H. Rieder2,1; detection of chromosome aberrations (terminal and interstitial deletions 1Philipps-Universität Marburg, Institut für Klinische Genetik, Marburg, Germany, and translocations) especially in children with thyroid pathology. The 2Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Institut für Humangenetik und Anthro- increased frequency of stable aberrations can be considered as a pologie, Düsseldorf, Germany. bioindicator of accumulated internal irradiation as well as a biomarker of Thorough analysis of grammar, syntax and meaning of ISCN elements transmissible chromosome instability. The latter have been confirmed and their combinations was required during development of a software in long-termed cultures from children with chronic thyroiditis, in which system for the analysis of ISCN data. Though ISCN 1995 allegedly significantly increased levels of both chromatid (single fragments) was developed with considering computerized analysis, some and chromosome (abnormal monocentrics) aberrations have been inconsistencies and features exist which lead the user of ISCN to established. We assume that delayed cytogenetic effects expressed errors. in children born to irradiated parents under short-term cultivation and Designating bands involved in rearrangements is optional and G-banding cytogenetics as well as under long-term cultivation and bands are included in an extra pair of brackets separated from their conventional cytogenetics may be one of the factors which promote chromosomes. Thus chromosomes and bands may be put into non- the development of thyroid pathology. consistent positions, causing hardly detectable errors. The use and positioning of multiplicators is purely chaotic, sometimes P0313. Case Report: A child with Rubinstein-Teybi phenotype they precede the aberration, sometimes they follow the aberration and partial deletion of short arm of chromosome 10 with a multiplication sign inbetween, sometimes the aberration is to be S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, F. Behjati1, Y. Shafeghati1, I. Bagherizadeh1, H. shown twice or their duly use remains unclear. Najmabadi2; The short nomenclature is often regarded as the ideal solution, but it is 1Genetics Research Center,University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- severely incomplete from a mathematical point of view. All its operators ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Research Center, University (the symbols describing aberrations) actually expect non-derivative of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. chromosomes as input, and short nomenclature boldly fails as soon as A seven year old boy with Rubinstein- Taybi features was referred to an aberration spans a junction in a derivative chromosome. The long Genetics Research Center for Cytogenetics investigation. The clinical nomenclature still copes with most of such rearrangements and its use features included CHD, downslanting palpebral features, protruding ought to be encouraged. tongue, broad thumbs and toes and moderate mental retardation. The description of an involvement of a centromeric fragment in a Standard Cytogenetics techniques using high resolution and GTG rearrangement is totally missing in the ISCN, e.g. duplication of banding was carried out. The karyotype was abnormal showing a pericentric regions or insertion of a centromeric fragment. partial deletion of short arm of one chromosome 10 at p11.2-p13. Both In summary, the project caused a new view on the nomenclature of parents had normal karyotypes. As about only 10 percent of Rubinstein- cytogenetic findings which may lead to an improved ISCN. Taybi cases demonstrate deletion of 16p13.3, this chromosome anomaly could introduce a new candidate loci for this condition. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case .Cytogenetics 147 P0314. Chromosomal rearrangements in Armenian registry of for karyotype analysis were sent by endocrinologists (67.1%) and chromosomal abnormalities gynecologists (16.2%). The oldest patient was 52 years old, for six S. Midyan, L. Nazaryan, T. Sarkisyan; patients monosomy-X was suspected by neonatologist. Center of Medical Genetics of NAS of Armenia, Yerevan, Armenia. A total of 626 cases were investigated for suggested chromosomal P0317. A rare variant translocation t(1;22;9)(p32;q11;q34) in a abnormalities.We have studied a spectrum and clinical data of patient with chronic myeloid leukemia chromosomal rearrangements (ChR) detected by GTG-banding H. Mkrtchyan, S. Ghazaryan, R. Arutyunyan; and FISH methods among couples with reproductive failures (204 Yerevan State University, Yerevan, Armenia. individuals) and patients with malformations, mental and motor Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is genetically characterized by the retardation, amenorea, hypogenitalism (422 children). presence of the reciprocal translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11) in 95% of In the group with reproductive failure carriers with balanced cases, resulting in a BCR/ABL gene fusion. About 5% of cases of CML chromosome rearrrangements were found in 12 cases (6%). These show cytogenetic variants of this aberration. chromosome aberrations include: 2 Robertsonian translocations, In this study we report on a patient with CML with a rare complex including t(13/14), t(14/21), 4 reciprocal translocations and a case rearrangement t(1;22;9)(p32;q11;q34) with BCR/ABL gene fusion on of complex chromosomal rearrangement 46,XX,der(1;2)(p21;p23), der(22). The male patient is 27 year old. His complete blood count inv(9)(p13;q13), 2 cases with inv(9)(p13;q13). Apart from the balanced showed a trombocytosis, a hemoglobin level of 97g/l, a white blood aberrations, 2 cases with del(9)(p13;q13) without any phenotype cell count of 342x109/l, myelocytes 102,6x109/l, bands count of abnormalities were found. The translocation 46,XY,t(4;9)(q26;p23)mat 85,5x109/l, metamyelocytes count of 44,46x109 /l, eosinophiles count has been resulted in unbalanced translocation in the third generation of 6,84x109/l, lymphocytes 6,84 x109 /l, basophiles count of 10,26 with partial trisomy of the region 4q26-4qter. x109/l, polymorphs count of 68,4x109/l, blasts count of 17,1x109/l. Among children with birth defects karyotype abnormalities were found Splenomegaly was also detected. in 73 cases where 11 of them are presented with unbalanced ChR. Cytogenetic studies were performed on 24h unstimulated cultures of Unbalance of autosomes was defined in 42 cases with Down bone marrow cells using standard cytogenetic protocol. Karyotypes syndrome of which 39 cases were represented with regular trisomy of were analyzed according to International System for Human 21, and 3 cases of the syndrome was due to translocation t(14/21)mat, Cytogenetic Nomenclature. Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) combination with inv(9)(p13;q13)pat and full double aneuploidy was done according to standard protocol using probes WCP (Whole 48,XY,+21,+mar. Using FISH analysis it has been shown that this Chromosome Painting) 1, 9, 22 and M-BCR/ABL. marker was excluded to be 13/21 and Y chromosomes. A rare form Conventional cytogenetic investigation detected derivative 22 and of 49,XXXXY have been observed in unbalances of gonosomes. The 1 chromosomes, while chromosome 9 was apparently normal. other structural chromosomal aberrations include: 47,XY,+i(18p); 46,X Application of WCP 1, 9, 22 permitted us to identify translocation i(Xq); 46,XY,t(5;13)(q23;q32); 46,XX,t(9;11)(p24;q12); 46,XX,del(20q); between chromosome 1 and 22. After using M-BCR/ABL probe was 46,XY,inv(6)(p21.1;q21); 46,XY,inv(9)(p13;q13)pat. found chimerical gene BCR/ABL on derivative 22 in 100% cells. Cytogenetic and clinical data will be presented and problems of genetic According to previous literature, despite their genetically complex counseling for families will be discussed. nature, variant Ph chromosome rearrangements do not confer any specific phenotypic or prognostic impact as compared to CML with a P0315. Atypical Down syndrome phenotype in a girl with standard Ph chromosome. translocation trisomy 21 B. Tüysüz1, J. Caferler2, H. Özön2, A. Yavuz1, B. Bağlama1; P0318. Chromosomal investigation of a case initially diagnosed 1İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Genetics as Burn-McKeown syndrome Centre, Deutsches Krankenhaus, İstanbul, Turkey. R. Kariminejad, V. Hadavi, F. Afroozan, T. Delaviz, M. H. Kariminejad; We described a 10 year- old girl with a de novo 21;21 translocation Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, trisomy 21 and an atypical phenotype for Down syndrome. Clinical Islamic Republic of Iran. findings included microcephaly, small stature, coarse facies, Burn-McKeown Syndrome is a rare genetic disorder. Burn et al. epicanthus, hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge, low set ear, pectus (1992) reported five children who presented with bilateral choanal excavatus, lumbal scoliosis, severe developmental delay, seizures, atresia and a spectrum of additional malformations including cardiac and hypertonia. Chromosome analysis from blood lymphocyte revealed defects, deafness, defects of the external ear, eyes and eyelids, and a 46,XX, t(21;21),+21. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis characteristic dysmorphic appearance. Our patient is a boy, aged 1 year confirmed the trisomy 21 translocation. Chromosome and FISH 20 days, born after an uneventful term pregnancy. Positive findings in his analyses were performed on skin fibroblasts. These studies revealed physical exam are membranous choanal atresia, stenosis, hypotonia, mosaicism for a translocation trisomy 21 cell line (53%) as well as chest deformity, short nose, open mouth, prominent forehead, mild low a second cell line consisting of one normal chromosome 21 and a set ears, downward palpebral fissures, high and narrow palate, dental ring chromosome 21 derived from translocation 21q21q (33%) and a delay, low weight. He had growth and developmental retardation. The third line consisting of monosomy 21 (14%). We considered that our family pedigree of this child shows that his parents are distantly related patient which was an atypical Down syndrome phenotype originated with, no other similar family history. from chromosomal mosaicism of the skin and the other tissues that In our lab we performed chromosomal analysis on standard PHA blood were not available for analysis. cultures. GTG banding was applied to air dried slides. The karyotype, 46XY,r(18) showed the presence of a ring chromosome. Interpretation P0316. The Lithuanian collection of 224 Turner syndrome patients. of the banding pattern showed possible breakpoints in p14 and p23. L. Salomskiene, I. Andriuskeviciute, L. Jurkeniene, A. Sinkus; Although autosomal recessive inheritance had been suggested, other Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania. studies (2003) raised the possibility of X-linked inheritance, because all The collection was piled up during 30 years and contains 224 reported patients, except for a female with a similar ring chromosome, karyotypes. One half of the patients (116) had X monosomy 45,X. have been male. The presence of the ring chromosome 18 in our case, Chromosome mosaic 46,XX/45,X was established for 29 patients and one of the initially reported cases suggests the possibility of a (13,0%). The commonest structural aberration was i(Xq), established gene in the deleted region that could produce a phenotype similar to for 42 patients (18,7%). For 16 patients it was the unique clone, for Burn-McKeown syndrome. Further analysis including FISH and CGH others different mosaic variations were found. Ring X chromosome seems to be warranted and are being performed. was found for 19 patients (9,5%) and all of the patients had another cell clone, usually monosomic. Mosaic 46,XY/45,X was found for 8 P0319. A retrospective review of cases with Pericentric inversion Y patients (3,5%), in three of them another chromosome anomalies A. Moshtagh, R. Kariminejad, M. Zanganeh, F. Farhan, M. H. Kariminejad; were established. The biggest established number of cell clones in Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, mosaics was four: 45,X/46,X,r(X)/46,X,i(Xq)/47,X,i(Xq),i(Xq). Two Islamic Republic of Iran. monosomic patients were identical twins. The more often patients In the past 3 years, 31 cases of pericentric inversion of chromosomeCytogenetics 148 Y have been identified in the males being referred for various reasons Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, to our center. In an attempt to recognize or help clarify the significance Islamic Republic of Iran. of the inverted Y chromosome, these cases have been categorized Most series studies of couples with two or more fetal loss or stillbirths according to available clinical data. All chromosomal studies are done show 5-6% chromosomal aberrations. In an attempt to compare the on GTG banded metaphase spreads prepared following culture, data in our center with other centers, we did a retrospective study harvest, spreading and trypsin banding. In all cases at least 5 spreads of the results of 1622 karyotypes of couples referred between 1997- are analyzed, 10 spreads screened and 5 spreads scored. In the 2002 for two or more of the following, abortions, IUFDS, stillbirths, cases, where inversion Y was suspected, C-banding was done for and perinatal death of offspring. Karyoptypes of these couples were confirmation. prepared after routine culture, harvest, spreading, and GTG banding 4 cases were detected in amniotic fluid samples showing male fetuses techniques. In some cases C-banding and NOR analyses were also with pericentric inversions of Y chromosomes. In all these 4 cases, performed. 10-15 spreads were screened and 5-10 spreads were the fathers were also studied and showed to have the same inversion analyzed routinely under the microscope, and in cases of mosaicism Y. Four other cases were male aged 1 to5 years with congenital up to 100 spreads were counted. Five microphotographs were taken anomalies, whose fathers were also examined and found to have the and two karyotypes were done per case. The indications of referral same chromosome Y. were 898(57%) individuals for two or more abortions, 169 (6%) with Two cases had been referred for check up and without prior IUFD, 166(16.3%) with perinatal death of children, 356(18%) with at complaint. least one abortion and another cause, and 33 (1%) with IUFD and The remaining 13 cases had been studied for history of abortions in dead child. The results indicate that chromosomal aberrations in their spouses and/or inviability of offspring. The above findings would couples with two or more abortions, abortion with other problems, appear to confirm that apart from a possible complication that the dead-child, IUFD, IUFD with dead-child were 5.5%, 4.5%, 8%, 3%, inverted chromosome Y has in crossing over with the pseudoautosomal 3%, respectively. Overall, 5.3% had chromosomal aberration, 72% region of the chromosome X, it is associated with no further specific of which were translocations, 17% inversions and 11% numerical clinical significance and occurs with similar frequencies within the translocation abnormalities. Balanced reciprocal translocations were various referral groups. the most frequent, while 10% had Robertsonian translocations. The results of this study are comparable with results from other centers and P0320. Down syndrome due to familial reciprocal translocation emphasize the necessity of chromosomal study in couple with history G. Yesil, B. Bağlama, U. Yanar, B. Tuysuz; of fetal loss or death of non syndromic offspring. Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey. A two-year-old boy had typical Down syndrome clinical findings and P0323. Subtelomeric rearrangements detected in patients developmental delay. The patient was born to a 24-year-old mother with idiopathic mental retardation: Results and a comparison and a 25-year- old man,and he is the first child of the family. His between telomere Multi FISH probes and Multiplex Ligation- karyotyping showed 47,XY,t(2;21)(q23;q11.2),+21. To confirm the Dependent Probe Amplification(MLPA). translocation; flourecent in situ hybridization (FISH) with a 21q22 M. Palomares1, A. Delicado1, P. Lapunzina1, A. Martínez-Bermejo2, J. Arcas2, spesific probe was used and observed signals on both normal 21 D. Arjona3, I. López Pajares1; chromosome and the der. We performed the chromosomal analysis 1Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, of the parents. Maternal chromosomal analysis was normal but the 2Department of Neuropediatrics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, father’s chromosomal analysis revealed a balanced translocation, 3Department of Research, Sequencing Unit., Hospital Universitario La Paz, 46,XY, t(2;21)(q23;q11.2). Down syndrome had occurred as a result Madrid, Spain. of an interchange trisomy following 3:1 malsegregation of the 2;21 Screening of subtelomeres with both telomere Multi FISH probes balanced reciprocal translocation of the father. Down syndrome due to (Cytocell®) and MLPA (MRC-Holland ® ) was performed in 40 patients familial interchange reciprocal translocation is so rare, there is only 24 with idiopathic mental retardation, dysmorphism and/or congenital cases were published. malformations. FISH with multiple subtelomeric probes detected 5 patients (12,5%) P0321. DiGeorge/Velo-cardio-facial syndrome detected by FISH with a subtelomeric aberration (Table I). In addition, 2 patients were M. Zanganeh, R. Kariminejad, N. Miraftabi, T. Delaviz, M. H. Kariminejad; found to carry a polymorphism in 2qter region. All of them were later Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, confirmed by using complementary methods (specific telomere FISH Islamic Republic of Iran. probes and microsatellite analysis) and the origin of the restructuration We are reporting a case of DiGeorge/Velo-cardio-facial microdeletion was established. contiguous syndrome detected by use of Cytocell DiGeorge/VCFS MLPA TUPLE1 probe. The proband is a 2 year old female, second child of results unrelated couple with a 7 year old healthy brother. The only positive Patient FISH results Parents Loss findings are nasal regurgitation and cleft soft palate, cleft upper lip and Gain nasal speech. PHA stimulated lymphocytes from peripheral blood were cultured 46, XY. ish der (2) t (2;10) . Following harvest, some slides were studied routinely, using GTG Paternal 1 (q37.3;q26.3) monosomy 2q/ 2q 10q banding techniques, and two slides were prepared using standard t(2;10) trisomy 10q protocols provided by cytocell probe kit. The diagnostic probe is designed for the q11.2 region of chromosome 46, XY. ish del (2) (q37.3) 22 and the telomeric region as an internal control. The presence 2 2q de novo monosomy 2q of the probe on only one of the chromosomes 22 was compatible with a microdeletion in q11.2 band region, diagnostic for DiGeorge/ 46, XX. ish der (1) t (1;22) Velo-cardio-facial syndrome. In analysis on standard karyotype a 3 (p36.3;q13.3) monosomy 1p/ 1p 22q de novo microdeletion of long arm of chromosome 22 was suspected in 550 trisomy 22q and above band resolution, but was not conclusive. CONCLUSION: Detection of microdeletion such as 22q11.2 band 46, XX. ish del (9) (q34.3) region can be suspected in routine cytogenetic analysis, but requires 4 9q de novo monosomy9q advanced molecular cytogenetic techniques for confirmation. 46, XY. ish der (15) t unde- P0322. Cytogenetics findings in Iranian patients with repeated 5 (15;17)(q26.3;p13) mono- tected unknown fetal loss somy 15q/ trisomy17p 17p M. H. Kariminejad, H. Karimi, M. Rahimi, A. Moshtagh, M. Zanganeh, H. Miri, M. Soleimani, S. Razavi, R. Kariminejad;Cytogenetics 149 The diagnostic capacity of MLPA (salsa PO36) to detect subtelomeric P0326. The application of Array Comparative Genomic chromosomal abnormalities was tested by screening the same patients Hybridization in a routine cytogenetic lab: analysis of a familial previously studied by FISH. MLPA found the same subtelomeric duplication of chromosome 13q. abnormalities in all cases except from patient 5, in which a 15qter J. M. N. Hoovers1, I. B. Mathijssen1, A. N. P. M. Mul1, H. Man1, J. L. Ket2, R. C. deletion was misdiagnosed. Furthermore polymorphisms in 10qter M. Hennekam1,3; were detected in 3 patients and confirmed afterwards. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, AMC Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Depart- MLPA is revealed as a cheaper, less time consuming technique than ment of Pediatrics, Purmerend, The Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatrics, the previously reported methods for telomere screening. It could be AMC Amsterdam, The Netherlands. a reliable technique to detect submicroscopic telomeric copy number A DNA microarray was used with a resolution of 0.6 Mb for the changes, rendering it suitable for routine diagnostic screening in detailed analysis of a partial duplication of chromosome 13 in a family. mentally retarded patients. Nevertheless, all chromosomal aberration Routine cytogenetic analysis (GTG 550 band level) revealed a partial detected should preferably be confirmed by independent methods. duplication of chromosome 13q. In order to provide additional cases to the literature on subtelomeric Six persons in three generations carry the duplication. They have abnormalities and their genotype-phenotype correlations, we present mild mental retardation, behavioural problems, seizures, hearing loss, a summary with the main clinical features of patients in which a strabismus, dental anomalies, hypermobility, juvenile hallux valgus, chromosomal abnormality was detected. and mild dysmorphic features. In order to define the boundaries of the duplication and to get possible P0324. Deletion of distal Xp in a male newborn insight in the phenotype-genotype correlation we constructed a K. Oplestilova1, M. Bradova1, D. Stejskal2, R. Kejkulova2, Z. Zemanova3; 0.6 Mb genomic microarray, based on the 1 Mb BAC clone set of 1Istitute for the Care of Mother and Child, Prague, Czech Republic, 2GENNET the Welcome Trust Sanger Institute. Array Comparative Genomic Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Center of Oncocytogenetics, UKBLD, Gen- Hybridization showed the duplication to span approximately 21 Mb, eral Faculty Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty of Charles University, Prague, ranging from chromosome band 13q21.31 to 13q31.1. The position of Czech Republic. the breakpoints was confirmed by routine FISH. We present a case of a correlation between extremly low unconjugated The region involved harbors about 40 genes (Human Genome Browser estriol (uE3) and a deletion of distal Xp respectively deletion of the UCSC, release may 2004), and an increased dosage of one or more steroid sulfatase (STS) gene. Amniocentesis in 20-year-old woman was of these genes may be responsible for the characteristic symptoms performed in the 21-week of gestation. It was based on the positive triple in this family members. No obvious candidate genes were found in test (repeatedly low maternal serum uE3). In spite of identified normal evaluating function and expression patterns. karyotype 46,XY deletion of distal Xp was assessed by fluorescence The relative mild presentation of this large duplication may be in situ hybridization (FISH) and the same deletion was confirmed in explained by the relative paucity of genes in the chromosome region mother. The pregnancy was complicated with polyhydramnion. The involved. The use of small, chromosome specific microarrays in routine male-infant was born in the 32-week of gestation by Caesarean cytogenetics will allow a more reliable genotype-phenotype correlation section (1490 g, micropenis, cryptorchismus). Chromosome analysis in patients with chromosome abnormalities, when the number of data of peripheral blood lymphocytes proved 46,XY,del(X)(p22.3) karyotype, molecular (cyto)genetic and clinical data increases. which was verified by FISH. The infant died after bleeding in central nervous system at the age of 43 days. P0327. Analysis of aneuploidy frequency in uncultured and Supported by grant GACR 301/04/0407. cultured cells from workers upon exposure by nuclear-chemical industrial factors P0325. Chromosome damage observed in blood samples V. A. Timoshevsky, S. A. Nazarenko; submitted to cell phone radiation Institute of medical genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. C. L. Campanhol1, V. C. O. Franco1, R. M. Rodrigues1, M. G. Lins2, J. K. R. Comparative analysis of aneuploidy frequency of the four autosomes HEINRICH1; (7, 11, 12, and 16) and sex chromosomes in the interphase nuclei of 1CAISM/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2CPqD Foundation, Campinas, Brazil. uncultured and cultured lymphocytes (PHA-stimulated) from workers The impact of the cell phone technology and the increasing number of of nuclear-chemical industry (15 individuals) and clinically healthy users all over the world have raised questions regarding cancer and men (10 individuals) was performed by use of two-color fluorescent other diseases etiology and time of exposure, cumulative exposure in situ hybridization. The total value of numerical aberrations of and age-related trends. Many reports specially out from the REFLEX all six chromosomes was similar in non-stimulated cells of both study group (Europe) showed that the cell phone radiation, called non- groups: 1.84±0.73% and 1.96±0.99% in control and exposed groups ionizing radiation (NIR) might affect the DNA double-helix producing respectively (P=0.73). At the same time the frequency of sex- breaks and other alterations that cannot be repaired by the cell chromosomes losses was higher in the test group. In cultured cells machinery. The object of this study was to investigate chromosome numerical chromosomal aberrations were scored after at least one cell aberrations in blood samples submitted to NIR. Eight healthy donors division in vitro. Frequency of aneuploidy of several chromosomes in were selected and serial blood samples were taken (total of 48 the cultured cells of exposed workers has increased in comparison samples). The samples were cultured in a highly monitored setup with control. Significant differences were found in the incidences of that was designed for this project. Cells were submitted to an average hypo- and hyperploidy of chromosome 12, hypoploidy of chromosome power (SAR values) of 2W/kg (International Limit), 5W/kg and 10 W/kg 11, and hyperploidy of X-chromosome. Intergroup difference between in both AMPS and CDMA technologies. At least 200 cells per irradiation, the total value of numerical aberrations of all the six chromosomes per patient were analyzed. The sham-exposed and the patient controls was found, although it was not significant: 2.26±0.93% in control, showed a frequency of ZERO for chromosome aberrations. Both 2.98±1.11% in exposed individuals (P=0.085). Thus, stimulated cells AMPS and CDMA technologies showed increasing frequencies of themselves introduce basic contribution in intergroup differences of chromosome aberrations per cell according to SAR levels of 2, 5 or numerical aberrations. We suggest that the expression of accumulated 10 W/kg. Acrocentric chromosomes satellite length alterations were in vivo premutagenic damages of spindle apparatus takes place during also highly observed. Although the number of alterations was not high first cell division. These anomalies are manifested during cell division per cell we concluded that the radiation was able to produce DNA and result in numerical chromosomal aberrations. instability in our samples and that these findings should be taken into account on radiation public policies management and to establish safe limits of human exposure. SUPPORT: FUNTTELCytogenetics 150 P0328. Cytogenetic studies in 196 cases of myelodysplastic Sunyer), Barcelona, Spain, 4Servei de Neonatologia, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, syndromes Spain. D. Costa1, A. Carrió1, A. Arias1, A. Valera2, M. Rozman3, F. Cobo4, E. Montser- Mosaicism for structural aberrations is a rare event and the coexistence rat4, B. Nomdedeu4, E. Campo3; of a cell line with duplication and another with deletion of the same 1Unitat d'Hematopatologia. Servei de Genètica, Hospital Clínic. Barcelona. chromosome segment is even more infrequent. We report on a Catalonia, Spain, 2IDIBAPS, Hospital Clínic. Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, 3Uni- newborn male with a mosaicism 46, XY, dup(7q) / 46, XY, del(7q) in tat d'Hematopatologia., Hospital Clínic. Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, 4Servei lymphocytes. The patient is trisomic for region 7q21.1 to 7q31.3 in d'Hematologia, Hospital Clínic. Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain. 90% of analysed metaphases and monosomic for the same region in The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a group of disorders in 10% of metaphases. He is the first child of a 31-years-old mother and which bone marrow dysfunction is caused by both qualitative and was delivered during 32nd week of gestation by Caesarean section quantitative defects of the hematopoietic cells. From January 1997 to because of oligohydramnios and foetal tachycardia. The parents were December 2001, 196 cytogenetic studies on bone marrow cells from unrelated and have normal phenotypes and karyotypes. The newborn MDS were performed in our centre. Based on the WHO classification presented pneumothorax and the main dismorphic features were: the cases were distributed as follows: 5 (2.5%) Refractory anemias microretrognathia, low and displastic ears, short neck, small mouth, (RA), 14 (7%) Refractory anemias with ringed sideroblasts (RARS), 82 cutaneous syndactyly on 2nd and 3rd toes, hip dislocation and long (42%) Refractory cytopenias with multilineage dysplasia (RCMD), 50 fingers with metacarpo-falangeal and interfalangeal articulations (25.5%) Refractory anemias with excess blasts (RAEB), 5 (2.5%) 5q- hyperextensibility. No other anomalies were observed. Due to the syndromes, 37 (19%) Chronic myelomonocytic leukemias (CMML), absence of a normal cell line, we propose that the mosaic is the and 3 (1.5%) unclassifiable. A cytogenetic result was provided in 189 result of an abnormal chromosome recombination in a very early (96%) cases. Ninety six cases (51%) showed an abnormal karyotype, embrionary mitotic division. Child clinical features and survival may with a single chromosomal anomaly in 60 (63%)cases, two anomalies be due to the high proportion of trisomic cells versus monosomic, and in 11 (11%) cases and a complex karyotype in 25 (26%)cases. The were compared with published cases of partial trisomy 7q and partial chromosomal anomalies more frequently found were: del(5q), trisomy monosomy 7q. To our knowledge, no other patient showing mosaicism 8, monosomy 7, del(7q), del(11q), del(20q), trisomy 21 and loss of dup(7q)/del(7q) has been reported. Y. The MDS subtypes with a higher frequency of chromosomal abnormalities were RAEB (71%), RCMD (46%) and CMML (34%). P0331. FRA18C, a new fragile site, possibly associated with in The cytogenetic abnormalities defining a poor prognosis (based on vivo chromosome breakage the IPSS cytogenetic classification) were found more frequently in the K. Debacker1, B. Winnepenninckx1, J. Wauters1, D. Fitzpatrick2, F. Kooy1; RAEB (37%) and RCMD (14%) subtypes, being complex karyotypes in 1Center of Medical Genetics, Wilrijk, Belgium, 2MRC - unit of Medical Genetics, the vast majority of cases. Cytogenetic studies are an useful tool in the Edinburgh, United Kingdom. diagnosis, prognosis and follow- up of patients with a MDS. We are studying a patient with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) This work has been partially supported by James Huntingford and the characterized by overgrowth, loss of IGF2 imprinting and an 18q22.1 grant (V-2003-Redc-07) from the”Instituto de Salud Carlos III” truncation. Interestingly the father of the patient expressed a hitherto unknown fragile site, FRA18C, on chromosome 18q22.1. P0329. The role of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in FISH experiments on metaphase spreads of the patient showed genetic diagnosis of infertile men hybridization of an 18q subtelomeric probe only to the intact A. Kékesi, E. Erdei, I. Lellei, A. Tóth; chromosome 18, indicating that the deletion in the proband is a pure National Medical Centre, Budapest, Hungary. terminal truncation. No abnormalities could be detected when the same Chromosomal abnormalities often lead to infertility. Structural FISH experiment was performed on metaphase spreads of the father, chromosomal disorders are detectable from peripherial blood by excluding the possibility that the de novo deletion in the proband is due karyotyping and metaphase FISH. Carriers of reciprocal translocations to a balanced translocation or other chromosomal rearrangement. We have increased risk of a chromosomally unbalanced offspring. Using cloned the chromosomal breakpoint and showed that the truncation FISH with specific DNA probes we can determine the chromosomal was stabilized in vivo by the addition of repetitive telomeric sequence segregation pattern of the translocated chromosomes in spermatozoa. (TTAGGG). In the other investigated group there are XX sex-reversed males, The breakpoint region contained a lot of AT rich repeats, a feature of where the testicular differentiation can occur in the absence of the Y common fragile sites. We found these AT rich repeats to be polymorphic, chromosome. but no expansion could be detected in the patient or its father. One of Results: We investigated the segregation pattern of the translocated these AT rich repeats resembles the consensus sequence of a common chromosomes in two human male carriers of a reciprocal translocation. fragile site. According to the computer program M-FOLD, this repeat One of them had Y-3 translocation: t(Y;3)(q12;p21). The rate of sequence folds into a hairpin structure, another feature of sequences genetically normal and balanced sperms in ejaculate were only 31%, found in common fragile sites. Using the program Twistflex, we found while the rate of abnormal ones were 69%. The other patient had 1- evidence for the presence of flexibility islands in the breakpoint region. 17 translocation: t(1;17)(p17;q11). The segregation result showed that Together, these data suggest, for the first time, that a common fragile the genetically normal and balanced spermatozoa were 53.7%. We site may be involved in in vivo chromosome breakage. evaluated 3 XX sex-reversed patients by FISH analysis for SRY gene specific and X chromosome specific DNA probes. We detected SRY P0332. Characterization of a der(18) in a female patient with gene in each cases on the X chromosome which caused the male multiple congenital abnormalities using several molecular phenotype. cytogenetic techniques Conclusion: FISH is an informative technique for assessing the C. Wouters1, M. Joosten1, B. Beverloo1, A. de Klein1, J. van Kessel-Hilkmann1, percentage of abnormal sperms in translocation carriers. These results I. Rayen2, P. Poddighe1; ensure more accurate genetic counseling for patients in assisted 1ErasmusMC, Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, reproduction centres. The testis determining factor (SRY) is localised 2Amphia Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Breda, The Netherlands. on the X chromosome in our XX sex-reversed patients, but genes A one-month old girl, born after an uncomplicated pregnancy and responsible for spermatogenesis are missing. In these cases there are delivery to healthy not gametes even in the testis for fertilization, so donor insemination is non-consanguineous parents, presented with failure to thrive and the only way having children. persistent respiratory insufficiency. There were feeding difficulties and protein losing diarrhea. Facial dysmorphic features were present, e.g. P0330. The first reported case of duplication/deletion mosaicism slight frontal bossing, high arched eyebrows and a flat nasal bridge. Her of the 7q(21.1->31.3) region chest was narrow and asymmetrical. A cardiac murmur was detected, C. Morales1,2, I. Madrigal1,3, T. Esqué4, E. Margarit1,3, A. Soler1,3, A. Sánchez1,3; based on pulmonary stenosis. Cardiac hypertrophy was found without 1Servei de Genètica, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundació Clínic, Bar- a detectable mutation in the MyBPC3-gene. At the age of one year the celona, Spain, 3IDIBAPS (Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i girl had developmental age of approximately six months.Cytogenetics 151 GTG banding performed at the age of three months revealed a der(18). P0335. Interstitial deletion of 6q without phenotypic effect. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) showed a partial deletion of K. Hansson, K. Szuhai, J. Knijnenburg, A. van Haeringen, J. M. de Pater; the short arm of chromosome 18 and additional chromosomal material Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. was present. The nature of this additional material was elucidated by Euchromatic interstitial deletions without detectable phenotypic spectral karyotyping (SKY) to be derived from chromosome 1. Array abnormalities are rarely encountered. Identification of these variants is based comparative genomic hybridization (Array-CGH) was used to important for prenatal diagnosis and genetic counselling. determine the size and location of both the deletion in chromosome A 34-year-old woman with normal intelligence was referred for 18 and the additional material of chromosome 1. The breakpoint in karyotyping because of recurrent abortions. With the exception of a 18 was identified in p11.2, the additional chromosome 1 material was bicuspid aortic valve without hemodynamic consequences, which is present from band q42.1 up to qter. A comparison with the literature a common minor anomaly in the general population, no dysmorphic will be presented. features were found on physical examination. Conventional chromosome analysis (GTG-banding) revealed an interstitial deletion P0333. Increasing complexity of a complex (1 ;4) chromosomal in the long arm of chromosome 6. With array comparative genomic rearrangement hybridization (aCGH) the size of the deletion was estimated to be M. Prieur1, H. Dessuant2, J. Lapierre1, D. Sanlaville1, A. Tarrico1, A. Munnich1, between 9.9 and 11.6 Mb and the exact karyotype is 46,XX,del(6)(q2 M. Vekemans1, C. Turleau1; 2.31q23.1). Her son with developmental delay, behavioural problems 1Department of Genetics, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire LCL, Paris, France. and mild dysmorhic features has a normal karyotype and is not a Recently several articles have focused on a high degree of carrier of the deleted chromosome 6. unexpected additional complexity observed using array-CGH to characterize breakpoints and to screen for cryptic imbalance in de P0336. A de novo complex chromosome rearrangement (CCR) novo chromosomal rearrangements. Here we report on an apparently involving chromosome 2, 13, and 14 in a chorionic villus biopsy four breaks rearrangement observed in a 2 years 8 months old boy C. A. L. Ruivenkamp, M. Hoogenboom, K. Szuhai, J. Knijnenburg, M. Bartel- presenting with language delay and poor communication. He had no ings, E. Bijlsma, W. Kroes; facial dysmorphism excepted bilateral epicanthus and strabismus. Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. A combination of classical cytogenetics and chromosome painting Complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCR) are rare structural studies using WCP1 and WCP4 showed a rearrangement between chromosome aberrations characterized by three or more breakpoints chromosome 1 and chromosome 4. The segment distal to 4q28 was located on two or more chromosomes. We report on a healthy 43- translocated to 1p32 ; the 1pter-p33 segment was divided in two parts, year-old G3P1 woman who was referred to our hospital for a chorionic the more distal part was translocated onto 4q28 and the proximal one villus biopsy at 11 weeks of gestation because of advanced maternal was inserted into 4q26. Parents karyotypes were normal. CGH-arrays age. Cytogenetic analysis of G-banded chromosomes demonstrated was performed to screen for cryptic imbalance. A deletion of about 6 a complex rearrangement involving chromosomes 2, 13 and 14 in all Mb was detected at 4q28.3 between BAC 401i19 and BAC 425j20 cells of the short-term and long-term cultures. Fluorescence in situ corresponding to the observed breakpoint on chromosome 4. This hybridization (FISH), using specific probes for chromosome 2, 13, and deletion was confirmed using FISH and metaphase-CGH. However 14, confirmed the complexity of the rearrangement and showed that the the observation of a very dark G band in 4q28 on the der(4) was derivative 13 is composed of 5 distinct segments in the following order: evocative of a duplication rather than a deletion. This inconsistency 13q proximal, 2q, 13q, 14q, and 2q. The derivative 2 consists of the between CGH array and banding is puzzling. It could result from a short arm of chromosome 2 and the distal part of 14q. The derivative duplication or an amplification not detected by the probes used for 14 is derived from 14q and 13q. Parental chromosomes were normal. CGH-array or due to a change in chromatin structure. This suggests Based on FISH and cytogenetic results the karyotype of the de novo that still another type of complexity may be associated with de novo CCR involving 3 chromosomes with 6 breakpoints was written as: 46, chromosomal rearrangements. XY,der(2)t(2;14)(q1?3;q24),der(13)(13pter->13q1?3::2q?->2q?::13q?- >13q?::14q?->14q?::2q2?->2qter),der(14)t(13;14)(q2?2;q2?2). P0334. The incidence of acquired karyotypic aberrations in Counseling was offered to the patient and her husband. At 15 weeks of childhood ALL is influenced by presenting age and cell type gestation the pregnancy was terminated. Postmortem examination of D. R. Betts, A. Reid, L. Seppa, F. K. Niggli; the fetus revealed a mild facial dysmorphism (tall forehead, short bifid University Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. nose with anteverted nares, retromicrognathia, low-set ears) and no Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) represents the most frequent additional external malformations. Tissue culture of cartilage and cord malignant disease in childhood and has a peak incidence between the cells confirmed the CCR. To determine whether the CCR is balanced, age of two and six. It has been generally accepted that a cytogenetically we have performed array-CGH (comparative genome hybridization) abnormal clone will be found in 85-90% of all cases. Over a 10-year and results will be presented. period we have karyotyped a consecutive series of 394 childhood ALL cases at presentation (aged 16 or under). Among these cases P0337. A comparative study on detection efficiency of classical there were 355 with B-cell lineage and 39 of T-cell origin. In all cases cytogenetic and Interphase Fluorescence In Situ Hybridisation in a conventional cytogenetic result was obtained and in 364 (92.4%) the diagnosis of mosaeic form of X chromosome aneuploidies. presence of an abnormal clone could be demonstrated. The remaining S. M. Mohaddes Ardebili1, J. Mohseni2, S. M. Tabatabaei3; 30 had an apparently normal karyotype, but by employing a range of 1Tabriz University of Medical Sciences,Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics FISH probes (including TEL/AML, BCR/ABL, and HOX11L2) a further Unit, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian National Center for Education, 7 were identified as having clonal chromosomal changes. Analysis Culture and Research, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic Azad University according to age and cell type showed significant differences in of Tabriz, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. abnormality rate, 95.5% of B-cell disease showed karyotypic changes, Standard cytogenetics technique is of value in detection of chromosomal while an abnormal clone was identified in only 79.5% of T-cell disease abnormalities. However the detection of chromosomal mosaicism is (p-value = 0.0003). When age was considered 235/244 (96.3%) often difficult due to time constrains and limited number of available of children presenting below the age of 6-years showed a clonal metaphase cells. Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) chromosomal change, whereas only 134/149 (89.9%) of children over can be utilized to study the number of copies of a specific chromosome the age of 6 showed clonal changes (p-value = 0.019). In both age in interphase cells. The technique has valuable application in detection groups T-cell disease constituted one third of the cytogenetically normal of chromosomal mosaicism since, a minimum of 100 cells can be cases. Therefore, these results indicate that a true normal karyotype analysed in a limited time. is a rare event in childhood ALL, but it’s likelihood is influenced by age We employed the GTG-banding assay followed by interphase FISH and cell type. and biotin labelled DXZ1 (Q-Biogene) to enumerate the X chromosome on peripheral blood samples of 88 women demonstrating the clinical features, compatible with X aneuploidies. Thirty-two samples were detected as 45,X and 3 samples as 47, XXX by GTG-Banding methodCytogenetics 152 and confirmed by Interphase FISH. Nine Samples were detected group (416 males) chromosomal anomalies was found in 90 patients. as suspicious 45,X/46,XX and 2 samples as 45,X/46,XX/47,XXX by More frequent was sex chromosome anomalies (78 patient -86,7%), conventional cytogenetic studies and were subsequently confirmed structure of chromosomal anomalies was following: 47,XXY- in 64 by Interphase FISH. Five samples were diagnosed as normal by patients (71,1%), 46,XY/47,XXY- in 8 patients (8,9%), 46,XX/47,XXY- conventional cytogenetic studies, while 4 samples were shown to be in 1 patient (1,1%), 47,XYY- in 1 patient (1,1%), 46,XY/47,XYY- in 1 mosaeic 45,X/46,XX and the fifth sample 45,XX/46,XX/47,XXX by patient (1,1%) and 45,X/46,XY- in 1 patient (1,1%). Y chromosome interphase FISH analysis. Six samples showed structural aberrations macrodeletions was detected in 4 patients (4,4%), 46,X,delY(q11). of chromosome X, which were undetectable by Interphase FISH. The Autosomal translocations was found in 3 patients (3,3%). In 2 case remaining 21 samples were revealed to be normal by both cytogenetic (0,5%) kariotype was 46,XX . and FISH analysis. In oligozoospermia group (300 males) chromosomal anomalies was The results indicate that interphase FISH is a useful and reliable tool in detected only in group of patients with severe oligozoospermia (159 detection of mosaeic form of aneuploidies. However the technique has patient-53%). In 10 cases (6,3%) chromosomal disorders were found. to be used as a parallel to conventional cytogenetic methods, which In 7 cases (4,4%) sex chromosome abnormalities was shown with the allows detection of structural chromosome abnormalities. following kariotypes: 47,XXY- (1), 47,XYY- (1 ), 46,XY/47,XXY- ( 4 ) and 45,X/46,XY- ( 1). In 3 cases (1,9%) autosomal translocations was P0338. Familial dic(4;15)(p16;q11.1) associated with severe detected. psychomotor retardation The FISH method detects SRY gene translocation on X chromosome R. Lasan, L. Letica, K. Crkvenac, I. Tonkovic, D. Muzinic, D. Begovic; in the patients with the kariotype 46,XX. Genetics and Metabolism Division, Pediatrics Department, University Hospital Cytogenetic investigation considered as very important to detect the Center, Zagreb, Croatia. cause of infertility. It is also recommended to perform IVF, ICSI, TESA Translocation of 15q11 on to autosomes is a relatively common event, techniques with the use of preimplantation prenatal diagnostics in the which has no adverse clinical consequence. We report here a case families of infertile men with chromosome anomalies. of familial dic (4;15) associated with a severe phenotypic effect. A female neonate who presented with convulsions and a cardial defect P0341. Molecular analysis of Y-chromosome in XX-males showed a satellited chromosome 4 (46,XX,4ps pat), inherited from V. B. Chernykh, A. L. Chuhrova, N. N. Vasserman, M. E. Karmanov, V. P. her phenotypically normal father. She developed severe psychomotor Fedotov, L. F. Kurilo, A. V. Polyakov; retardation and epilepsy. Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci- The identification of autosomal non-acrocentric breakpoints and the ences, Moscow, Russian Federation. acrocentric donor is often difficult. Combined use of conventional and XX-male syndrome is rare sex determination abnormality characterized molecular cytogenetics allowed the identification of the unbalanced by bilateral testes development in absence of a cytogenetically translocation 46,XX,4ps pat.ish+15,dic(4;15)(p16;q11.1)(D15Z1+, identifiable Y chromosome. D15S10-, SNRPN-, 4p-, D4Z1+). By FISH the satellited chromosome To analyze presence of SRY gene and other Y-chromosome loci we 4 in the proband and her father was positive with centromere 15 and 4, investigated cohort of 19 phenotypic men with karyotypes: 46,XX and negative with probe for Prader/Willi Angelman region and telomere (n=15), 45,X/46,XX (n=3) and 45,X (n=1). 4. Future molecular characterisation is therefore needed in order to Molecular analysis was performed on leucocytes DNA by amplification determine a small tandem duplication of DNA within the subtelomeric of SRY, AMG/AMGL, ZFX/ZFY and seven Yq loci: sY84, sY86, sY615; region, which may have been missed in our case. There is evidence sY127, sY134; sY254, sY255 in two multyplex PCR. Breakpoint that small chromosomal rearrangements involving the terminal bands mapping was carried out for SRY-positive patients by analyzing of of chromosomes are an important unrecognised cause of mental following STSs: sY2062, sY1248, sY211; sY1240, sY716, sY1241, retardation in inherited rearrangements. sY1219, and sY1209. We found SRY gene in 15 (79%) of 19 patients, whereas AMGL and P0339. Two cases of de novo aberrations of 7q Yq loci were absent in all cases. SRY gene was found in all three D. Novotna1, M. Davidova1, M. Malikova1, V. Krutilkova1, M. Holzerova2, D. 45,X/46,XX males and one of two 46,XX males with incomplete Chudoba1, Z. Vlckova1, M. Simandlova1, M. Havlovicova1, P. Goetz1; masculinisation. Breakpoints localized near proximal to interval 1A1B 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, University Hospital Motol, Prague, (class 1 of (Y+)XX males) were revealed in 3 patients including 45,X Czech Republic, 2Departement of Hemato-Oncology, University Hospital, Olo- male. Yp fragments containing intervals I-II (class 2) and I-III (class mouc, Czech Republic. 3) were found in four and eight SRY-positive men, respectively. It is De novo chromosomal aberrations represent a considerable risk to significant that sY1219 and sY1209 were disclosed in all of class 3 their carriers; even in cases of balanced forms they can result in an (Y+)XX males. It may be explained by Yp paracentric inversion. abnormal phenotype. Obtained data confirmed that about 80% XX-males are SRY-positive, The first patient is a 6.5-year old boy who, in contrast to his twin brother, as well as the size of Yp fragment was not correlating with the degree has ectrodactyly affecting both hands and feet (SHSF). This phenotype of masculinisation. Class 3 represents the most common form of SRY- can occur as an isolated anomaly or as a component of multisystem positive XX males resulting from Xp-Yp translocation. Yp inversion syndromes. The SHFM1 locus was mapped to chromosome 7, band predisposes to abnormal X-Y interchange. q21.2-22.1 and SHSF has often been described in patients with deletion or duplication of 7q. In our patient we detected a de novo P0342. Sperm segregation analysis of 4 rare Robertsonian paracentric inversion 46,XY,inv(7)(q21.2q36). His brother’s karyotype translocations is normal. The mother was found to be a low frequency mosaic for F. Pellestor1, K. Moradkhani1, J. Puechberty2, G. Lefort2, T. Anahory3, S. Hama- trisomy X. mah3, P. Sarda2; The second case is a 2-year old girl with lip-palate-maxilla cleft, facial 1CNRS UPR 1142, Montpellier, France, 2Departement of Cytogenetics, Arnaud dysmorphology and mild-to-moderate PMR. Considering that the de Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, France, 3Department of Biology of Repro- karyotype contains two de novo chromosomal aberrations 46,XX,t(1;1 duction B, Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, France. 1)(p31.1;q21),del(7)(q31.3q34), the girl is relatively mildly affected. Analysis of chromosomal segregation in sperm of Robertsonian translocation carriers is of great interest for understanding the P0340. Chromosome anomalies in infertile males mechanisms of translocation transmission and for assessing the risk J. Kristesashvili, N. Kopaliani, N. Shervashidze, T. Gagnidze, M. Chipashvili; of conceiving chromosomally abnormal children. To date, most of the Zhordania Institute of Human Reproduction, Tbilisi, Georgia. sperm segregation studies of Robertsonian translocations have been 716 infertile men were studied with different types of spermatogenesis performed on the most common rearrangements : t(13 ;14) and t(14 disorders for determing type and frequency of chromosome anomalies. ;21). In the present study, meiotic segregation has been analysed in In all patients sperm analyses and cytogenetic investigations were sperm from 4 males heterozygous for rare Robertsonian translocations, provided. From the total number 416 men was diagnosed as an i.e. t(13 ;15), t(13 ;22), t(14 ;22) and t(15 ;21). azoospermic and 300 as an oligozoospermic. In the azoospermia After decondensation, sperm was analysed by dual color FISH, usingCytogenetics 153 either locus-specific probes, or whole chromosome painting probes. for screening subtelomeric regions and present additional evidence A mean of 6,000 sperm nuclei was scored per patient (ranging from that subtle subtelomeric aberrations have important role in the 4,300 to 9,000). The frequency of normal and balanced spermatozoa aetiology of mental retardation. Ministry of Science Croatia supported ranged from 86% to 91%. The incidence of unbalanced complements this work (TP-01/072-01). resulting from adjacent segregation accounted for 9% to 13.5%. When compared, both locus-specific probes and whole chromosome painting P0345. Delineation of a 5q35 microdeletion in congenital heart probes gave similar results for segregation patterns, demonstrating disease: haploinsufficiency of NKX2-5 can cause Ebstein the efficiency of the 2 procedures for sperm study in Robertsonian anomaly translocation carriers. L. A. Larsen1, M. Bækvad-Hansen1, A. Delicado2, V. Kalscheuer3, N. Tomm- This study shows that rare Robertsonian translocations display erup1, Z. Tümer1; segregation patterns identical to the common Robertsonian 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of translocations previously analysed. These data support the existence Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, of similar meiotic behaviour for all the nonhomologous Robertsonian Denmark, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, translocations. Madrid, Spain, 3Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. This study was supported by a french reseach project PHRC (N°7732) Congenital heart diseases (CHD) represent the most common group from the C.H.U. of Montpellier. of inborn malformations, with an incidence of almost 1%. One of the genes associated with CHD is the NKX2-5 gene, which encodes a P0343. De novo 2q3 deletion in female patient presenting with cardiac homeobox transcription factor. Mutations of NKX2-5, which syndromic cleft palate is located at 5q35.1 have been identified in a subset of familial and I. Giurgea1, L. Druart2, J. Steffann1, M. Jambou1, J. Bonnefont1, A. Munnich1, J. sporadic cases of atrioventricular (AV) conduction block associated Amiel1, M. Prieur1; with a spectrum of structural heart defects, including atrial septal 1Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire LCL, Paris, France. defect (ASD) and tetratology of Fallot. Functional studies of NKX2- We report a 3-month-old female patient presenting a de novo interstitial 5 mutations have indicated that haploinsufficiency determines the deletion of the long arm of chromosome 2 [46,XX,del(2)(q32.2q34)] AV conduction block and ASD phenotypes. However, some studies identified on a 400 band chromosomal analysis. The antenatal suggest dominant negative effects and it has not been possible to ultrasonography revealed intrauterine growth retardation and correlate other NKX2-5 phenotypes with a specific mechanism of the oligoamnios at 19 and 36 weeks of gestation respectively. The child mutation due to a small sample size. was born at 39 weeks of gestation (birth weight 2,865 g, crown-heel Here, we present delineation of a microdeletion in a patient with AV length 47.5 cm, head circumference 33 cm). She presented with a conduction block, ASD and tricuspid valve malformation (Ebstein weak cry, failure to thrive, severe hypotonia, and psychomotor delay. anomaly) in addition to microcephaly, scoliosis and pectoral The facial features associated down-slanting palpebral fissures, hypoplasia. FISH mapping of an apparently balanced inversion, hypertelorism, sloping forehead, poorly folded helices, low-set and 46, XY, inv(5)(q13q35)de novo, revealed a 2.2 megabase deletion posteriorly rotated ears, large nose, cleft palate and micrognathia. at the distal inversion breakpoint. This region contains 17 RefSeq Cardiac ultrasonography revealed aortic root dilatation. Cranial genes, including NKX2-5. This case gives therefore strong evidence ultrasonography showed a short corpus callosum without other for haploinsufficiency of NKX2-5 as the cause of Ebstein anomaly. morphological abnormalities. Abdominal ultrasonography and skeletal Microdeletions in the terminal part of 5q are rare and only 12 cases radiography were normal. Parents’ karyotype was normal. Molecular have been published so far. A genotype-phenotype comparison with analysis showed that the deletion occurred on the paternal allele, and previous cases will be presented. was flanked by the D2S364 and D2S147 markers, defining a 23-Mb region containing at least 70 genes. The SATB2 gene, flanked by the P0346. Cytogenetic Findings in Chorionic Villi of Spontaneous deleted D2S318 and D2S311 markers, has already been implicated in Miscarriages isolated cleft palate. The COL3A1 and COL5A2 genes, encoding type- S. S. Cirkovic, M. Djurisic, T. Lalic, D. Radivojevic, M. Miskovic, M. Guc-Sce- III procollagen and alpha2 chains of the type-V collagen respectively, kic, Z. Puzigaca; are also located in this region. The COL3A1 gene is involved in vascular Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Monte- Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (type-IV) with a risk of arterial dissection. negro. The involvement of COL5A2 in classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is still A proportion of spontaneous miscarriages are caused by chromosomal controversial. Interstitial deletions of the middle portion of chromosome abnormalities. The aim of this retrospective study was to evaluate the 2q are rare; clinical and molecular characterisation may allow to draw contribution of chromosomal abnormalities in spontaneous abortions some genotype-phenotype correlations. at 6 -13 weeks of gestation. We report cytogenetic findings seen in chorionic villi samples of 42 miscarriages from August 2001 to May P0344. Subtle subtelomeric rearrangements in children with 2004 in Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia ,,Dr Vukan developmental delay Cupic“. I. Petkovic, I. Barisic; Cytogenetic analysis was performed using direct method for chorionic University Children's Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. villi chromosome preparation, and chromosomes were identified by The prevalence of mental retardation (MR) is 1-2% in general standard banding techniques. According to the sonographic findings, population, and has serious implications for the affected individual, the these spontaneous abortions were characterized as blighted ovum family and society. In course of diagnostic management of the patient and missed abortion. special attention is paid to genetic investigations. Chromosomal Chromosome analyses of GTG banded metaphases showed normal aberration is the most common cause of mental retardation and karyotype in 18 cases (42,86%). Abnormal karyotypes were found in present in 4-28% of affected individuals. The traditional cytogenetics 24 cases (57,14%). 22 abortions had numerical aberrations: 13 were is however unable to detect genomic abnormalities smaller than 5- autosomal trisomies, one was autosomal monosomy, 3 were Turner 10Mb. These small submicroscopic changes of genetic material can syndromes (45,X), one was Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY) and 4 were be detected by molecular cytogenetic methods. In this study we polyploidies (triploidy (69) and ,,near“ diploidy (46±)). Among autosomal performed the screening for subtelomeric chromosome rearrangemets trisomies, extra chromosomes 4, 6, 13, 16, 20 and 22 were present. In with multicolour FISH assay in order to determine the frequency of three abortions structural chromosome abnormalities were found: one aberrations in our group of children with developmental disabilities. This unbalanced t(10;18)(p13;q23) translocation and one deletion 18q21. investigation included 31 child with developmental delay, dysmorphic In our sample of spontaneous abortions, there were 11 blighted features and / or congenital anomalies, and normal karyotype. The ovum abortions and 31 missed. The highest frequency of abnormal analysis was performed using slides obtained by short-term culture karyotypes was found in the casses of missed abortions. Cytogenetic of peripheral blood lymphocytes and multicolour FISH probe panel investigations of spontaneous abortions provide valid informations ToTelVysion (Vysis). Aberrations of subtelomers were detected in 2 as to the cause of abortion and contribute to prenatal diagnosis in (6.4%) of patients. Our results point out the usefulness of FISH method subsequent pregnancies.Cytogenetics 154 P0347. A complex chromosomal rearrangement involving Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Unité de Génétique chromosomes 10, 11 and 12: Cytogenetic, Microarray and Moléculaire Murine, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. Clinical characterisation. The Moloney murine leukemia virus-transformed suspension cell S. Edwards1, A. Male2, R. Palmer1, R. Wang1, K. Woodward2, R. Ekong2, C. line WMP2 is derived from wild mice (Mus musculus) of the WMP/ Langford3, B. Gibbons1, M. Bitner2; WMP strain. These mice carry nine pairs of metacentric Robertsonian 1NE London Regional Cytogenetics Laboratory, Great Ormond Street Hospital, translocation chromosomes. As the chromosomes of the wild-type London, United Kingdom, 2Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Child mouse are all acrocentric, metaphase spreads of the WMP2 cells Health, London, United Kingdom, 3The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cam- seam to be highly suited for physical gene mapping. Here we studied bridge, United Kingdom. the WMP2 line using spectral karyotyping (SKY) combined with new A report of a de novo, complex chromosomal rearrangement involving established mouse specific multicolor banding (mcb) probes for the three chromosomes with four breakpoints. The karyotype was chromosomes X, 3, 4, 6 and 18. SKY revealed that the WMP2 cell line established by GTG banding, and WCP: 46,XY,t(10;12;11)(10qter- developed further four derivative chromosomes. After application of 10p11.2::12q12-12qter;10pter-10p11.2::12q12-cen12-12p12::11p14- mcb five previously unrecognizable intrachromosomal rearrangements 11pter;11qter-11p14::12p12-12pter). A chromosome translocation was with 9 breakpoints were detected for the studied chromosomes: a first diagnosed at amniocentesis for increased serum biochemistry translocation-chromosome including parts of the X-chromosome tests and mild Intra Uterine Growth Retardation. This was reported could now be described as der(9)t(9;X)(?;C); mcb 4 revealed in the as an apparently balanced t(10;12)t(p11.2;q12) and the family were dic(4;6) a deletion and an inversion in those two chromosomes; mcb given a 5% risk of significant physical or intellectual problems. During 18 proved the presence of two dic(7;18) and a dic(8;8)t(8;8;18) and the neonatal period the patient presented with hypothermia and of two different variants of the dic(7;18). Supported in parts by the the hypoglycaemia. Weight and head circumference were on the 3rd centile. DFG (436 RUS 17/49/02 and 436 RUS 17/135/03), the INTAS (2143), Repeat karyotype revealed that the chromosomal rearrangement was and the Deutsche Krebshilfe (70-3125-Li1). The cell line WMP2 was more complex than initially thought, involving a third chromosome, kindly provided by Dr. M. Rocchi (Bari, Italy) and Dr. H. Hameister chromosome 11. As the patient got older it was evident that he had (Ulm, Germany). severe developmental delay, hypotonia with fine and gross motor P0350. 2q Deletion: an unusual association of classic phenotype coordination problems, short stature, severe visual impairment and (Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy 3) with hypothyroidism, sleep disturbance. Moderate facial dysmorphisms were also present epilepsy and multiple bone fractures (prominent nasal bridge, upslanting palpebral fissures, bushy eyebrows, S. Belli1, F. Soli1, B. Pirola2, O. Zuffardi3; widely spaced teeth). In addition, the patient had bilateral sacral pits, 1Genetic Counselling Centre, Trento, Italy, 2Citogenetica Diagnostica e Ricerca flat feet and a small penis. MRI showed hypoplastic optic nerves with a H.S. Raffaele Milano, Milano, Italy, 3Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy. small optic chiasm. There were no other midline abnormalities. Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy 3 (AHO3) is a rare condition Initial microarray studies have been initiated and are currently being characterized by: short stature, stocky build, round face, mental validated by FISH to determine whether the rearrangement really is retardation, brachymetaphalangia and eczema, associated with a balanced. Data will be presented. deletion of chromosome 2q (2q37.3-qter). In this condition, soft tissue ossification and obesity are absent and there are no abnormalities in P0348. Microduplication 22q11.2 syndrome : a cause of cognitive parathyroid hormone and Gs-alpha levels, unlike AHO1 and AHO2. and behavioural problems - report of 3 familial cases We describe a case of a 37 years old woman with mental retardation, W. Courtens1, I. Schramme2, S. Scheers1, R. van Luijk1, W. Wuyts1, J. Wauters1; obesity (76 kg), normal stature (162 cm), slight dysmorphisms (roundish 1University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Centre for Developmental face, frontal bossing, detached earlobes, big and globose tipped nose Disorders, Antwerp, Belgium. with short pinnae, smooth philtrum, thin lips, short neck), hand and foot Microduplications of the 22q11.2 region have only recently been abnormalities, brachydactyly type E, hypothyroidism, epilepsy (normal observed examining interphase cells by FISH with TUPLE1 in patients EEG), and cutaneous eczema. referred for DG/VCFS (Ensenauer et al., 2003): they found a duplication She has had 7 fractures, up to the age of 20 years (2 at wrist, 2 at in 1.5% of unrelated patients. To verify this finding a prospective study ankle, left elbow, 2 at tibia and left perone) without major trauma, and on 200 cases referred for DG/VCFS was performed, in which one epyphisite at right knee at 9 years. Calcemia, calciuria, RMN and patient (0.5%) with three copies of TUPLE1 was found. Since then a cerebral TAC are normal. few patients with microduplication 22q11.2 were described, showing Cytogenetic analysis showed a normal female karyotype, while variable clinical phenotype ranging from mild learning disability to the subtelomeric probes revealed a deletion of the long arm of presence of severe congenital malformations, or some overlapping chromosome 2 (breakpoints under study). The karyotype was: 46,XX. features with DG/VCFS. ish del(2)(qter)(2qtel-). We report on a 8-year-old boy who was sent to us because of This evidence underlines the importance of the terminal region of psychomotor retardation and behavioural problems. The parents chromosome 2 in the determining the AHO3 phenotype. The symptoms were non-consanguineous. There was a family history of mental present in our patient could be explained by a breakpoint different to retardation (both parents had special education) and the father also that described in the literature. had behavioural problems comparable to his son. There was no family history of cardiopathy. The standard karyotype of the patient was P0351. Recurrent 22q13.3 cryptic deletion in two brothers normal 46,XY as well as fragile X syndrome screening. FISH analyses with clinical signs resembling the Clark-Baraitser syndrome 22q11.2 were performed and showed the presence of three signals for phenotype. TUPLE1 probe in all interphase nuclei. FISH 22q11.2 analysis in the E. Tabolacci1, M. Zollino1, R. Lecce1, F. Gurrieri1, V. Leuzzi2, J. M. Opitz3, G. father and in one other brother disclosed the same microduplication. Neri1; Complementary investigations showed that the patient had, in addition 1Istituto di Genetica Medica Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, to his developmental delay and behavioural problems, asymmetric 2Istituto di Neuropsichiatria Infantile Università, Roma, Italy, 3Division of Medical perceptive hearing loss and a small right kidney. Genetics University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. We’ll discuss the clinical phenotype of these patients and compare it A preliminary diagnosis of Clark-Baraitser syndrome was performed with literature data. in two brothers affected with a multiple congenital anomalies/mental retardation (MCA/MR) syndrome, born to healthy parents. They P0349. Molecular cytogenetic characterization of the mouse cell presented with moderate to severe MR, a psychotic personality, line WMP2 by spectral karyotyping (SKY) and multicolor banding obesity, macrocephaly, a characteristic face with square forehead, (mcb) applying murine probes prominent supraorbital ridges, bulbous tip of nose, short philtrum, gap H. Starke1, C. Karst1, V. Trifonov1,2, U. Claussen1, K. Mrasek1, S. Michel1, P. between upper central incisors, large and coarse ears. Genitalia were Avner3, T. Liehr1; normal. They also presented with big hands and feet and advanced 1Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany, 2Institute of bone age. One of them was excessively tall. On brain MRI, lateral ventricular dilatation with cortical and cerebellar vermis hypoplasiaCytogenetics 155 was diagnosed. Chromosomes were apparently normal male. Although 12q24.31 interstitial microdeletion. This observation is of interest for clinical signs were well consistent with the Clark-Baraitser syndrome two reasons. First, these deletions could be a clue in the search of phenotype, a search for subtelomeric cryptic rearrangements was a gene responsible for growth hormone deficiency/midline defects. performed by FISH, according to a general diagnostic policy in Second, it shows the importance of molecular cytogenetics in the familial mental retardation. An isolated 22q13.3 cryptic deletion, study of de novo apparently balanced translocation with abnormal spanning about 3.5 Mb, as established by additional FISH analyses, phenotype. was diagnosed in both patients. Parents had normal 22q telomeres on 200 metaphases. Relevant considerations are the following: 1) a P0354. The 9p+ variant is an amplification of a repeat mapping cryptic 22q13.3 deletion should be checked in patients with Clark- within 9p21, and not a simple 9p11.2-p13.1 duplication. Baraitser syndrome phenotype; 2) the 22q13.3 deletion syndrome is R. Lecce1, M. Murdolo1, G. Gelli2, L. Coppola2, C. Steindl1, I. Mancuso1, G. distinctively associated with overgrowth and macrocephaly; 3) gonadal Marangi1, G. Neri1, M. Zollino1; mosaicism is to be considered in genetic counselling of microdeletion 1Istituto di Genetica Medica Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, syndromes. 2Clinica Sant'Anna, Roma, Italy. Among polymorphisms of chromosome 9, additional C-Band negative P0352. Effect of F cells in the protection of cultured lymphocytes material on the proximal 9p have been rarely reported . They were against DEB-induced chromosome breakage. The influence of described as duplications of 9p11.2-p13.1. GST activity and individual GSTT1 and GSTT1 genotypes We report on three unrelated subjects with a chromosome expansion B. Porto1, C. Sousa2, J. Gaspar3, J. Rueff3, F. Carvalho2, I. Malheiro1; involving the proximal euchromatic region of chromosome 9p: a female, 1Instituto Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Porto, Portugal, 2REQUI- referred because of POF, subsequently ascribed to a premutation of MTE, Departamento de Toxicologia, Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade do the FMR-1 gene, and two adult, healthy males, who were referred after Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Departamento de Genética, Faculdade de Ciências a prenatal diagnosis of 9p+ in the fetus. An unusual chromosome 9, Médicas, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. with an additional homogeneously staining segment on the proximal Red blood cells (RBC) from normal adult individuals can protect cultured 9p, was detected by conventional cytogenetics. lymphocytes against chromosomal breakage induced by diepoxybutane The additional region was R- and C-negative. Molecular cytogenetics (DEB), and the role of the polymorphic enzyme glutathione S- was then performed by using a total of 5 molecular probes spanning the transferase T1 (GSTT1) (expressed in RBC) in the protective effect 9p11.1p13.1 region. We found that the euchromatic 9p+ polymorphism was already described. In the present work, we studied the influence is caused by a great amplification (and not by a simple duplication) of of RBC extracted from umbilical cord blood of neonates (F cells) on an about 1.5 Mb repeat mapping within 9p12. This repeat is identified the frequency of DEB-induced chromosome breakage in lymphocyte by BACs RP11-15E1, proximally, and RP11-402N8, distally, with a ratio cultures from normal individuals. Simultaneously, we determined the RP11-15E1:RP11-402N8 of 2:1. The copy number of the repeat varied total GST and catalase activities of RBC from controls and neonates, between 7 and 14 in individual cases. Based on these observations, and individual GSTT1 and GSTM1 genotypes. Seven control RBC and we conclude that the 9p+ variant is a 9p12 amplification, and not a six neonate F cell samples were used in the study. Phytohemagglutinin 9p11.2-p13.1 duplication, as suggested. This heteromorphism is not (PHA) stimulated lymphocyte cultures were incubated in the presence associated with clinical abnormalities. Important insights are achieved or absence of DEB (0.1µg/ml), with addition of autologous RBC or for the prenatal diagnosis of either a 9p+ variant, or a benign 9p- F cells. The obtained results showed that, although both types of derived extra small chromosome. RBC protected cultured lymphocytes from normal individuals against chromosome breakage induced by DEB, the effect elicited by F cells P0355. Genetic counselling in Tunisian patients with was significantly higher, although variability in the protective effect reproduction failure having balanced chromosome structural among individuals was observed. It was also observed that the higher abnormalities protective potency by F cells can be correlated with an increase in N. B. Abdelmoula1, O. Kacem2, I. El Kemel2, B. Gargouri1, F. Zhiwa3, A. the total GST activity but not with catalase activity; concerning the Amouri2; individual variability in the protective effect, the correlation with GSTT1 1Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Institut Pasteur, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Depart- and GSTM1 genotypes was demonstrated. ment of gynecology Aziza Othmana, Tunis, Tunisia. Carriers of balanced chromosome structural abnormalities are usually P0353. Untreated growth hormone deficiency with extreme short ascertained because infertility, recurrent miscarriages, failure of stature, cleft lip-palate and mental retardation in a 26-year old assisted reproductive technologies (ART), or offspring with unbalanced man with a de novo unbalanced translocation t(1;12)(q24;q24). karyotype and multiple congenital defects. P. Callier1, L. Faivre2, N. Marle1, C. Thauvin-Robinet2, A. Mosca1, A. Danino3, Here we report 13 balanced chromosome structural abnormalities G. Malka3, F. Huet2, F. Mugneret1; ascertained by cytogenetic analysis of 43 couples and 180 infertile 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Dijon, France, 2Génétique médicale, Dijon, men: France, 3Chirurgie maxillofaciale, Dijon, France. inv(9)(p12q12) in two men among couples with miscarriages We report on a 26-year-old patient presenting with extreme short inv(10(p15q21) in a woman with ART failure because absence of stature (height 76 cm, weight 6.5 kg, OFC 42.5 cm) with short cleavage hands, facial dysmorphism with hypertelorism, beaked nose, cleft Reciprocal translocation in two cases: t(7;15)(p22q25) and lip-palate and severe mental retardation. He was the unique child t(1;4)(q34;q26) in 2 women with respectively 5 and 3 spontaneous of non consanguineous parents. Measurements at birth were 43 cm abortions for length and 2100 g for weight. He had severe feeding difficulties inv(12)(p12p12) in a man of a couple with early abortions after ART. requiring enteral nutrition until the age of 3 years. Endocrine studies For the 180 patients with male infertility, we found 4 robertsonian for severe growth retardation revealed severe growth hormone translocations and 3 reciprocal translocations: deficiency, but the child was untreated because of associated t(13;14) was found in two men with severe oligozoospermia and one mental retardation. At 26 years of age, he could not walk or speak azoospermic man and had no puberty. Reinvestigations showed combined pituitary t(14;21) was detected in an oligospermic man hormone deficiency, spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasia with severe Reciprocal translocations were found in 2 azoospermic man osteoporosis, enlarged aorta when indexed to the patient’s size and [t(10;13)(q21;q22) and t(16;22)(p11;p11)] and one oligospermic man: normal cerebral MRI with apparently normal pituitary development. t(4;9)(p15.3;p21). Conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed an apparently balanced In these cases, the central concept in genetic counselling is the de novo translocation t(1;12)(q24;q24). High resolution karyotype estimation of the probability of unbalanced progeny at birth and other showed a 1q24-q25 deletion and comparative genomic hybridisation unfavourable pregnancy outcomes. More ever, the prognosis of studies confirmed the 1q interstitial deletion. FISH studies of the both success of ART is also an important concern because poor embryo breakpoints using PACs and BACs permitted to further characterise development, which may be a result of high segregation abnormalities, the 1q interstitial deletion (1q24.2 to 1q25.2) and also revealed a may negatively affect the outcome of ART.Cytogenetics 156 Estimates of unbalanced progeny at birth and the probability of pluripotent precursors, have been recognized to give rise to osteocytes, poor embryo development are made on basis of theoretical and chondrocytes, endothelial, adipose, and muscle cells. The previously empiric meiotic segregation patterns but these risk estimates varied reported results indicate that MPC chondrogenesis depends on both considerably from translocation to translocation and studies are often TGF-beta 3 and BMP2 signals. The in vitro data have shown that limited. chondrocytic-like cells can be directly derived from fibroblast-like MPC after TGF-β3 and BMP2 treatment. However, during the chondrocytic P0356. Diagnosis of subtelomeric imbalance using MLPA differentiation, the mechanism of these growth factors regulates K. Mann, J. W. Ahn, A. Hallam, C. Mackie Ogilvie; MPC morphological and genetic changes remains to be elicited. The Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital Trust, London, United Kingdom. TGF- β3/BMP2 regulated MPC genes that initiate and govern final Subtelomeric imbalance is an important cause of idiopathic moderate/ cell phenotype remain unknown. To gain molecular understanding of severe mental retardation. Established diagnostic procedures for MPC chondrogenesis, gene expression profiles of MPC treated with detection of subtelomeric imbalance use multiprobe fluorescence in or without TGF- β3 and BMP2 were analyzed using cDNA microarray situ hybridization (FISH), which is labour-intensive and expensive, and representing 11000 mRNAs from the human fetal liver isolated SH2/ therefore only applied for a subset of patients. In contrast, multiplex SH3/CD29/CD140+ cells (CD34/CD117-). The significant alterations ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) can be used to detect in RhoA and RhoA-Rho kinase (RAK) gene expression levels were aberrant copy number at up to 50 loci in a single reaction. confirmed using RT-PCR. Genes that differently expressed in collage A validation study of 271 cytogenetically normal and abnormal samples II/ proteoglycan positive cells were identified. Compared with non- was carried out using commercial MLPA kits (MRC-Holland). Strategies TGF- β3 or BMP2 treated cells, both RhoA and RAK genes were up- for data analysis and interpretation were assessed with respect to false regulated respectively (4 to 7 times respectively). We also found that negative and positive rates. All known abnormalities were detected. A both collagen II and proteoglycan gene expressions increase following total of 23 samples with apparently terminal deletions on G-banded Rho/RAK expression. The up-regulated RAK signal transduction related chromosome analysis were tested using MLPA; in three cases (13%) genes such as DOCK180 and Rac were also detected. Inhibition of duplication of material from a different chromosome was identified, the RhoA and RAK mRNA expression with anti-RhoA/RAK antisenses confirmed by FISH analysis as present on the abnormal chromosome. significantly suppresses the MPC chondrogenesis. This data suggest In 1 of the 23 cases the deletion was found to be interstitial, the MLPA that the RhoA/RAK signaling pathway is critical for MPC differentiation, probe being present in normal copy number. In addition, three cases which will require further functional testing. were tested where G-banded chromosome analysis had found a derivative chromosome containing material of unknown origin. In all P0359. Screening for cytogenetic and molecular chromosome three cases the unknown material was identified; these results were rearrangements in children with conotruncal heart defects and supravalvular aortic stenosis confirmed using single FISH probes. MLPA has now superseded FISH-based subtelomere screening in B. Gargouri1, N. B. Abdelmoula1, I. T. Sahnoun2, A. Amouri3, T. Rebai1; our laboratory. All positive results are followed up using single-probe 1Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Department of Cardiology, Sfax, Tunisia, FISH. As a consequence we are expanding our test population and 3Institut Pasteur, Tunis, Tunisia. have reduced reporting times. Service strategy and results will be Conotruncal heart defects and supravalvular aortic stenosis are the discussed. most cardiovascular malformations that have been associated with chromosomal microdeletions 22q11.2 and 7q11.2 respectively. P0357. Incidence of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome in a selected To estimate frequency and investigate clinical features of these population microdeletions in unselected patients with heart conotruncal defects L. M. Pires1, A. Cabral2, E. Matoso1, A. Jardim1, L. Simões1, S. Sousa3, L. Ra- and supravalvular aortic stenosis, a total of 35 patients originate from mos2, A. Crisóstomo4, C. Pediátrica3, D. Prenatal5, J. Saraiva2, I. M. Carreira1; the south of Tunisia are evaluated prospectively by cytogenetic and 1Serviço de Citogenética, Faculdade de Medicina, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Serviço molecular studies. de Genética Médica, Centro Hospitalar de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Hos- The clinical analysis was performed according to a specific clinical pital Pediátrico, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Hospital de São André, Leiria, Portugal, protocol for the diagnosis of congenital cardiovascular malformations. 5Maternidade Bissaya Barreto, Coimbra, Portugal. All patients harbouring truncus arteriosus, interrupted aortic arch, Almost all cases of DiGeorge syndrome or velo-cardio-facial syndrome tetralogy of fallot with or without pulmonary valve atresia, tetralogy result from a common deletion of chromosome 22q11.2. These individuals of fallot with absent pulmonary valve, ventricular septal defect with have a wide range of anomalies such as: congenital heart disease, malalignement of the conal septum and supravalvular aortic stenosis, particularly conotruncal malformations that are associated with 29% of were included in our study. deletions, palate abnormalities, hypocalcemia, immune deficiency, learning Cytogenetical analysis with RHG and GTG banding was used to detect difficulties and characteristic facial features. chromosome rearrangements. All patients have normal karyotype This syndrome may be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. About 93% 46,XX or 46,XY. of patients have a de novo deletion and 7% have an inherited deletion. Molecular analyses were undertaken by fluorescent in situ hybridization Our goals were to assess the frequency of the deletion in a selected using three probes: LSI Digeorge N25 (D22S75) region probe N25/ population of individuals with specific clinical features, mainly congenital ARSA, LSI Digeorge/VCFS region probe TUPLE1/ARSA and LSI heart defects, and the incidence of a familial transmission. A total of Williams syndrome (elastin gene) region probe D7S486/D7S522. 325 individuals (251 infantile, 40 parents and 34 pregnancies) were Results will be discussed and compared with those of other studies evaluated by FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridisation) using specific performed in the north and the centre of Tunisia. DNA probes (N25 Vysis and TUPLE1 Qbiogene). Twenty of the 285 probands were identified with the deletion. Facial features are present P0360. Can the amplification of MSRV pol sequence be a marker of multiple sclerosis? in all of these cases and congenital heart defects are present in 85%, of these, 65% have a conotruncal defect. Three individuals with M. Zawada1, I. Liwen1, M. Pernak1, D. Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska1,2, K. No- the deletion did not have any cardiac defect, only showing immune wicka1, J. Rembowska1, H. Hertmanowska3, M. Wender4, J. Nowak1; deficiency and hypocalcemia. This supports the need to be aware of 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, less frequent features such as hypocalcemia. In our population 100% 2University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 3Department of Neurology, of the deletions diagnosed were de novo. State Hospital, Poznań, Poland, 4Neuroimmunological Unit, Medical Research Center, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland. P0358. Rho gene expression regulates chondrocytic Multiple sclerosis (MS) is one of the most frequent disorders of central differentiation of mesenchymal precursor cells: a mechanism of nervous system characterized by demyelination foci in the brain and TGF-beta/BMP2 in cartilage formation spinal cord. Pathogenesis of MS is poorly understood. Among etiologic H. Hao, P. H. Wooley; factors some viruses are suggested to play important role. Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, United States. The aim of our studies was the assessment of MSRV pol sequence copy Mesenchymal precursor cells (MPC), an alternative source to provide number in MS patients compared to control individuals. Analysis wasCytogenetics 157 performed on interphase nuclei and chromatin fibers from peripheral Laboratory test (thiroid, immunoglobulines, celiac disease) were blood cells of 56 patients with MS, 8 patients with myasthenia and 20 normal. Also metabolic analysys (aminoacidemia and aminoaciduria, healthy individuals. urine organic acids ) were not significant. For analysis of MSRV pol sequence copy number in the examined Karyotype standard showed normal female set: 46, XX material the FISH with biotinylated PCR product was used. Detection Abdomen ultrasound, ECG, EEG and cerebral MRI were normal. of MSRV pol probe was carried out by reaction with avidin-fluorescein The subtelomeric rearrangements by FISH analysys showed deletion and biotinylated anti-avidin. MSRV pol sequences were found in all of the band 4p16.3: examined persons. However, the copy number of MSRV pol sequence ish del(4)(p16.3) (LSI WHS-). Another studies are in progress to define was significantly greater in MS patients than in myasthenia and normal breakpoints and molecular size of deletion. Deletion band 4p16.3 cause individuals. In addition, the MSRV pol sequence exists as tandem Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) and Pitt Rogers Danks syndrome. repeats on various chromatin fibers. The increased number of MSRV Our case is further contribution to correlation genotype-phenotype. pol sequence has been found on chromatin fibers of MS patients as compared to myasthenia and healthy controls. This finding suggests P0363. Modeling of human minisatellite MS32 somatic instability that MSRV may play some role in pathogenesis of MS. in mouse embryonal teratocarcinoma cell line F9 Grant of State Committee for Scientific Research No 2 PO5A 139 28. N. A. Slominska1, I. Soutchkova1, E. L. Patkin1, U. Rannug2; 1Institute of Experimental Medicine RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, P0361. Trisomy 4 p syndrome: clinical similarities with de Lange 2Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden. syndrome In order to elucidate mechanisms of hypervariable human minisatellite G. Ceylaner1, S. Ceylaner1, N. Danisman2, L. Mollamahmutoglu3; MS32 somatic instability, we transfected F9 cells with construct 1Zekai Tahir Burak Women's Health and Education Hospital, Department of pcDNA3.1/MS32 containing 45 repeated units (29b.p. per unit) of Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Zekai Tahir Burak Women's Health and Education MS32. F9 cells were transfected with the help of ExGene500 and Hospital, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey, 3Zekai selected on resistant to geneticine. Transfection by pcDNA3.1/CAT Tahir Burak Women's Health and Education Hospital, Department of Obstetrics was the positive control. There were obtained only 2 MS32- positive ang Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey. clones due to different transfection approaches (various time of Trisomy 4p is a rare type of chromosomal disorder. Most of reported transfection, DNA/ExGene 500 ratio; by linear and ring vectors). The cases were originated from parental chromosomal rearrangements. efficiency of transfection was about tenfold less when compared with Some of reported cases discussed as the similarities between this the positive control. However cells losing resistance to geneticine syndrome and Cornelia de Lange syndrome. Some of the authors during selection contained MS32 as revealed by PCR. Thus inefficient claimed that there is a chromosomal locus related with de Lange transfection could be a consequence of abnormal expression of syndrome while the others did not support this theory. We are here geneticin resistance gene in transfected cells. It is necessary to note, reporting a new case with partial trisomy 4p. that FISH has not revealed sequences homologous to MS32 in F9 27 years old pregnant woman referred to our hospital as increased cells. However, computer analysis has shown an occurrence of sites risk in triple screening test and history of a terminated pregnancy with different degree of homology to MS32 in mouse genome. Maximal due to neural tube defect. Ultrasonographic examination was homology was revealed in interstitial regions of chromosome 11 (67%, normal. Amniocentesis was offered and was performed due to triple P 0,01) and telomeric regions of chromosome 15 (63%, P 0,01). The test findings. Karyotype of the fetus was revealed an additional MS32 propensity to be unstable could lead to structural rearrangements chromosomal material on chromosome 3. Chromosome analysis during or after integration event. Therefore nonrandom integration of of parents presented maternal reciprocal balanced translocation pcDNA3.1/MS32 into silent areas of mouse chromosomal DNA can 46,XX,t(3;4)(p26;p13) and fetus was diagnosed as partial trisomy of not be excluded as a result of recombination of host and foreign DNA short arm of chromosome 4. Pregnancy was terminated. It was a male repetitive sequences in such areas. Further molecular and cytogenetic fetus with microcephaly, flat face, depressed nose with wide nasal analysis of obtained clones will enable an understanding possible bridge, synophrys and prominent heels. Facial features resembled de reasons and mechanisms of somatic instability of human DNA Lange syndrome but extremity findings and other features of de Lange repetitive sequences. syndrome were not present. While there are some similarities between these two syndromes, P0364. Precise determination of chromosome material and clinical differences are also present. Report of Fryns on two cases with breakpoints in the patient with partial trisomy of short arm of partial trisomy 4p followed till 18 and 24 showed more clear differences chromosome 8 by CGH of this syndrome than same aged cases with de Lange syndrome. We A. D. Cheremnykh, I. N. Lebedev, S. A. Nazarenko, L. P. Nazarenko, O. V. also conclude like Fryns that this locus does not have any relationship Napalkova, E. A. Sazhenova; with de Lange syndrome. Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. We report a patient a 13-year-old girl with dysmorphic features: mental P0362. Subtelomeric cryptic rearrangement: further case of and growth retardation, muscular hypotonia, hirsutism, brachycephaly, deletion 4p16.3 antimongoloid slant of eyes, synophrys, long curly eyelashes, short M. Della Monica1, D. Giardino2, P. Finelli2, F. Lonardo1, E. Valtorta2, G. Scara- nose with anteverted nostrils, prominent philtrum, thin upper lip, no1; downturned angles of mouth, short neck, keeled chest, small hands 1Medical Genetics Unit, General Hospital "Gaetano Rummo" Benevento, Italy, and feet with short fingers, clinodactyly of fifth fingers. Cytogenetic 2Lab. Citogenetica Medica e Genetica Molecolare, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico analysis with GTG of proband revealed gain of chromosome material Italiano Milano, Italy. on terminal part of 9p. Chromosomal in situ supression (CISS) with The propositus, the first child of unrelated parents, was referred to us DNA probe from a specific microdissected chromosome 9 confirmed a because of delay of psycomotor development and growth.. Maternal presence of additional chromosome material on the short arm of one age at delivery was 35 years; paternal age 38. They had the second homologue of chromosomes 9. Comparative genomic hybridization healthy daughter. The family and history was unremarkable. During the (CGH) was applied for identification of additional chromosome material pregnancy UltraScan revealed IUGR .The baby was born at 37 weeks and determination of breakpoint region. CGH-analysis of proband DNA with Cesarean section, birth weight 1750 g (<5th centile), lenght 42 cm revealed gain of chromosome material of the region 8pter→p21.3. (<5th percentile) and head circumpherence 29.6 cm (<5th percentile), Thus, the karyotype of patient was described as 46,XX,der(9)t(8;9)(p2 APGAR score 8 and 9 at the first and fifth minutes respectively. At 1.3;pter). This is a first case of CGH application in clinical cytogenetics 25 months-old age showed weight 5350 g (<5th centile), height 71.5 for determination of breakpoints region and additional chromosomal cm (<5th centile), head circumpherence (OFC) 42.6 cm (<5th centile), material in patient with partial trisomy in Russian Federation. triangular facies, sparse hair, large forehead, up-slanting palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, hypoplastic bulbous nose with rounded tip, short and protruding ears, thin lips, mild retrognatia , short fingers and asymmetric legs, hypotonia.Cytogenetics 158 P0365. A cytogenetic analysis of chromosome complement of abnormalities. The first patient, a two month old female, was initially spermatozoa from patient 45,Xr(Y)/45,X injected into mouse referred with dysmorphic features, short palpebral fissures, overlapping oocytes fingers, a history of poor feeding and possible Williams or Greig I. Fedorova1, T. Kuznetzova1, J. Van Der Elst2, M. Dhont2; syndrome. Chromosome analysis showed an apparently balanced 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federa- pericentric inversion involving bands 7p13 and 7q11.23. FISH revealed tion, 2Infertility Centre, Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University that the 7q11.23 breakpoint had split the BAC RP11-575M4, and may Hospital of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. possibly have disrupted the gene AUTS2. The short arm breakpoint is Structural rearrangements of Y-chromosome are common in infertile between the BACs RP11-21H20 and RP-815D20 in 7p12.3. Further men. Carriers of such anomaly have an increased risk of spontaneous studies are required to determine whether the breakpoint involving abortion and newborns with genetic abnormalities. To assess frequency AUTS2 or the short arm breakpoint accounts for this patient’s abnormal and type of chromosome aberrations in spermatozoa from patient phenotype. The second patient, a seven year old male, presented with 45,Xr(Y)/45,X with severe oligoastenoteratozoospermia heterologous mild to moderate learning difficulties, arrested hydrocephalus, short ICSI fertilisation between mouse oocytes and human spermatozoa was stature and a small head. Conventional cytogenetics reported an applied. The spermatozoa from fresh or cryopreserved-thawed samples insertion of 7q31->7q34 into 7p14 and also suggested that a small were used. Totaly 91 suitable metaphase plates of human sperm deletion had occurred at the 7q31 breakpoint. FISH studies confirmed chromosomes were received. Ratio of X- to Y-bearing spermatozoa and refined the size and position of the 7q31 deletion and revealed was not significantly different from the expected 1:1 (χ2 test, P>0.05). a second cryptic deletion ~1.5Mb distal to the revised breakpoint at Frequency of spermatozoa with abnormal chromosome complements 7q35. These deletions or the breakpoints therefore may account for this was higher in patient 45,Xr(Y)/45,X compared to 108 spermatozoa patient’s abnormal phenotype and studies are ongoing to determine with normal head from men with normal sperm parameters - control the number and nature of the genes involved. group (68,25% and 23,15%, respectively) (φ-Fisher test, P>0.05). Compared to control group in spermatozoa of patient 45,Xr(Y)/45,X P0368. A familial translocation associated with complex partial there was increased frequency of diploidy (4,71% vs. 0%), hyperploidy epilepsy with a breakpoint within the Miller-Dieker syndrome of gonosomes (11,64% vs. 1,85%), hypoploidy (48,24% vs. 12,04%) deletion region on 17p13.3 and frequency of structural aberrations (29,41% vs. 6,48%). There S. Cingoz1,2, I. Bache1, C. B. van der Hagen3, C. Hansen1, B. Baklan4, Z. Tu- was no any interchromosomal effect and frequency of hyperploidy mer1, N. Tommerup1; of autosomes did not differ from the same one of the control group 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of (5,88% and 5,55% respectively). Our data suggest that cytogenetic Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, The Panum Institute, Universtiy of Copen- analysis of spermatozoa from the carrier of structural reorganisation of hagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, chromosome can provide more information about proportion of normal Dokuz Eylul University Medical School, Izmir, Turkey, 3Department of Medical and abnormal spermatozoa that will be useful for genetic counselling. Genetics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Neurology, Dokuz Eylul University Medical School, Izmir, Turkey. P0366. Autistic phenotype associated with a 15q11-q13 maternal Miller-Dieker lissencephaly syndrome (MDS) is a microdeletion triplication syndrome with facial dysmorphism, microcephaly, mental defect, S. Mougou-Zrelli1, D. Sanlaville1, S. Lyonnet1, M. Prieur1, C. Estrade1, M. Le seizures, spastic diplegia/spastic gait, decerebrate posturing and Lorc'h1, D. Genevieve1, M. Waill1, C. Ozilou1, M. Mattei2, M. Vekemans1, T. Attié- lissencephaly (smooth brain) with thickened cortex caused by a Bitach1, S. Romana1, C. Turleau1; cortical migration defect. The 17p13.3 deletions associated with the 1Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2INSERM U491, Marseille, MDS phenotype consistently include 8 known genes, from ABR at France. the telomeric end to SERPINF1 at the centromeric end. This region Here we report on a 4 years old boy with mild developmental delay, includes the LIS1 gene, point mutations or intragenic deletions of which autistic behaviour and a chromosome rearrangement involving the are associated with isolated lissencephaly. Other anomalies of MDS 15q proximal region. A series of 8 BACs was used to characterise appear to be the consequence of deletion of additional genes in this this rearrangement at the molecular level. A triplication was found. region. We have identified a mother and daughter with complex partial The triplicated segment was larger than the typical PWS/AS deleted epilepsy, both of whom carries a balanced reciprocal translocation region. The proximal breakpoint is located within BAC RP11-810K23, t(2;17)(q12.1;p13.3). By FISH mapping we localized the 2q breakpoint immediately proximal to BP1. The distal breakpoint is localised between within the BAC clone RP11-98m17, a region without any known BAC RP11-382B18 and RP11-758N13, located on each side from BP5. genes. In contrast, the 17p13.3 breakpoint mapped within the MDS The middle segment was inverted compared to the distal and proximal region just distal to the 14-3-3-epsilon gene (YWHAE). Patients with segments. Molecular analyses showed that the rearrangement was of deletions including CRK and YWHAE have more severe lissencephaly, maternal origin. suggesting that deletion of one or both of these genes may augment Maternally derived triplication of the imprinted chromosome 15q11- the lissencephaly phenotype (Cardoso et al. 2003). Our finding support q13 region have been reported previously in association with autistic that YWHAE or nearby genes may also be involved in the epilepsy spectrum disorders, cognitive deficits and seizures at least in ten in the present family, and thus, with the epilepsy frequently seen in patients. Three paternally derived triplications were also reported MDS. with a milder phenotype. Our observation confirms that 15q proximal triplication are most often of maternal origin. This rearrangement P0369. A chromosome 10 inversion, inv(10)(q11.22;q21.1), shares with SMC(15) a breakpoint located more distally than PWS/AS associated with mental retardation and autism deletion breakpoint. Presumably, a common mechanism is involved M. Entesarian1, B. Carlsson1, E. Stattin2, I. Golovleva3, N. Dahl1; in all cases of 15q proximal triplication since the middle segment is 1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, inverted in all cases studied at the molecular level. 2Department of Pediatrics, Umea University Hospital, Umea, Sweden, 3Depart- ment of Clinical Genetics, Umea University Hospital, Umea, Sweden. P0367. FISH studies with tiling path clones applied to two Neuropsychiatric disorders in childhood including mental retardation chromosome 7 rearrangements. and autism may be caused by genetic factors. Different strategies V. Maloney1, J. A. Crolla1,2, J. C. Barber1,2, T. Homfray3; can be undertaken for the identification of these genetic factors. 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 2Wessex One approach is based on a detailed mapping of chromosomal Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 3Clinical Genetics, rearrangements associated with specific phenotypes. Candidate St Georges Hospital Med School, London, United Kingdom. genes may subsequently be identified from breakpoint regions. We We report two patients with abnormal phenotypes in which conventional have identified four unrelated individuals with a paracentric inversion cytogenetics had shown de novo chromosome 7 rearrangements. on 10q by conventional high resolution karyotyping. Patient I has FISH studies using tiling path clones http://www.ensembl.org/Homo_ attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Patient II has a mild mental sapiens/cytoveiw) retardation, autistic features and a congenital heart defect. Patient III were undertaken to further refine the nature and structure of the has speech impairments, mild mental retardation and enlarged handsCytogenetics 159 and feet. Patient IV has a mild mental retardation. Fluorescence in situ The first pregnancy in the family ended at 28 weeks of gestation with hybridization (FISH) with chromosome 10 derived BACs in patient I still-born child with malformations. Two sisters from the second and and II confined the chromosome 10 inversion breakpoints to q11.22 the third pregnancy are modarate mentale retarded with dismorphic and q21.1. The inverted segment is approximately 10 Mb. We suggest features, speech delay, short stature. The sister from fourth pregnancy that the phenotype in these individuals is caused by the inversion. We is phenotypical healthy. The boy from fifth pregnancy is sever hypothesize that the normal function for one or several genes in, or mentaly retarded without speech, short stature, dysmorphic features, adjacent to, the inverted region is altered. Further experiments are in cryptorchisms. progress for the characterization of the breakpoints and, to identify candidate genes. P0373. Mosaic karyotype 45,X/46,X,idic(Y)(qter→p11 ::p11→qter) found in an ambiguous genitalia and short stature carrier. P0370. Submicroscopic 1p distal duplication, and monosomy for A. Lungeanu1, A. Arghir2, N. Dumitriu3, K. Miller4; the short arm of chromosome 18 due to a paternal apparently 1"Victor Babes" National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2"Victor Babes"National reciprocal, balanced, translocation Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 3"M.S.Curie" Emergency Children Hospital, Bu- L. Giunti, S. Guarducci, U. Ricci, E. Andreucci, S. Stagi, I. Sani, M. Levi, L. charest, Romania, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany. Carosi, J. Barp, G. Harmelin, E. Lapi, M. Giovannucci Uzielli; The carrier, a 11.6 years old child was referred for cytogenetic University of Florence, Dep of Paediatrics, Genetics, Children's Hospital investigation because of her ambiguous genitalia (a small phallus with A.Meyer, Florence, Italy. hypertrophy of labia majora), short stature for her age, and abnormal We report the study of a patient who carries an unbalanced segregant body proportion (short extremities, big muscles). from a paternal, reciprocal, balanced translocation involving the whole At birth, she had normal weight and length, but obvious genital short arm of chromosome 18, and a submicroscopic region at 1p36.3 ambiguity. She suffered a clitoroplasty at the age of 3, and received band . A five-month-old female was referred for a genetic evaluation, Naposim at age of 7- 8 years. due to pre- and post-natal failure to thrive, global mild psychomotor Karyotype was established in peripheral blood lymphocytes by delay and multiple dysmorphisms. GTG, and CBG-banding. There were found two cell lines : first, Preliminary cytogenetic analysis showed, in the proband, an apparent with 45 chromosomes in 90% of cells, and the second one, with "pure" whole 18p deletion. 46 chromosomes in a frequence of 10%. GTG-banded karyotypes Analysis of the parental chromosomes showed the father to carry an revealed monosomy X in hypodiploid cells, and a isodic(Y)( qter→ apparently balanced t(1;18)(p36.3;18p11.2). FISH with several probes, p11::p11→qter ) in pseudodiploid cells. The Y origin of isodicentric was and MLPA technique allowed to identify the reciprocal translocation, confirmed by CBG-banding and FISH using SRY probe. with submicroscopic distal 1p duplication, and the whole 18p deletion, Both parents, revealed normal karyotypes in their peripheral blood. in the proband. The phenotype/karyotype correlation is the result This strongly suggests that the errore occurred during gametogenesis of the overlapping of both 1 and 8 chromosomes rearrangements. before spermatid stage, or during the first division after fertilization. Chromosome 1p duplications are rare: in the literature, few cases Furthermore, the low percentage of cells carring the idic(Y) may be were reported of isolated 1p duplication, most of which were proximal due to the fact that, both centromeres are functional. The breakpoint or interstitial duplications, while the distal 1p36.3 duplication is on both chromatids seems to be subtelomeric on p arm, because exceptional. This study demonstrates the utility of subtelomeric specific Y euchromatin including SRY was present and active, judging her FISH probes and MLPA methods, for detecting cryptic subtelomeric ambiguous genitalia. rearrangements in subjects with unusual clinical phenotype, without The intraabdominal dysgenetic testis on the right part, and a fibrous rearrangements at the routine cytogenetic studies, or with a clinical structure on the left one was removed surgically. She had a very small spectrum non-fitting with the identified chromosome abnormality. uterus. Monolayer tissue cultures were established from the surgically removed P0371. Understanding infertility and missed abortion genetically: testis, and cytogenetycal investigations are ongoing. Experience on Indian population N. N. Kadam, B. B. Ganguly; P0374. Uncommon variants of Turner syndrome detected before MGM Centre for Genetic Research and Diagnosis, Navi Mumbai, India. puberty Chromosomal analysis was conducted on 2000 couples having A. Stana1,2, M. Bari1, A. Arghir3, A. Lungeanu3; infertility, recurrent pregnancy loss, repeated stillbirth or neonatal 1"Filantropia" Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 2"Titu Maiorescu" Universi- expiry, as an ultimate option, since the reason was unknown after ty, Bucharest, Romania, 3"Victor Babes" National Institute, Bucharest, Romania. investigation of almost all relevant parameters. Classical abnormalities Two ten years old girls was referred for cytogenetic examination were detected by conventional banding techniques as the sole reason because of their features in 6% of the cases in their genome. Variant abnormalities were much of Turner syndrome. One of them had also an additional autistic higher, over 20%. The abnormalities, including balanced translocation, disorder with moderate inversion, deletion, duplication, etc. were observed transmitted to mental retardation. next generation with multiple congenital defects leading to still birth Chromosome studies on peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures, by or neonatal death. Chromosomal study in abortus gives some causal conventional banding techniques, showed that they differ of classical information about repeated failure of reproductive outcome. In many Turner syndrome. instances, abnormalities present in men are causing primary infertility. In the first case, after G- and C- banding, we find a mosaic karyotype Moreover, transmission of such constitutional aberrations results into 45,X/46,XY with very severe clinical expression due to recombination and leads to early chromosome Y detected in 50% of cells. C-staining method revealed onset of malignancy. These aberrations have no cure. Therefore, a a large C- band size chromosome study would be much more cost-effective, not only for the on two third of Yq arm, without ectopic C- heterochromatin in any parents but also for the whole family and future generations to come. autosomes. It is known that, only a proportion of subjects mosaic for Y material exhibit features of Turner syndrome, even in the presence P0372. Three unbalanced offspring from translocation carrier of SRY gene. In the near future, our case must be investigated both family for the presence of SRY gene, and for the evolution of her external G. Kalnberza, Z. Krumina, I. Grivina, R. Kamerade, I. Teilane; genitalia. Latvian State Medical Genetics centre, Riga, Latvia. The second case exhibit a 45,iXq karyotype. A structural abnormality We describe a familial reciprocal translocation between chromosomes such iso Xq is quite common, but the additional autistic disorder is 4p and 10q. Two family members (a father and one daughter) carried unusual in Turner girls. However, different chromosomal disorders a balanced t(4;10)(p15.1; q 26.3) and three family members (two account for less than 5% of all cases of autism, which supports the daughters and son) inherited a partial monosomy 10q 26.3 →qter and hypothesis that the autistic disorder may develop as a consequence of partial trisomy 4p 15.1 →pter and showed an unbalanced karyotype a chromosomal abnormality. der(10) t (4;10)( p15.1; q26.3).Cytogenetics 160 P0375. Two patients of terminal 6q25 deletion XY-subtelomeric loci), X-centromeric and Y-heterochromatine probes. M. Pöyhönen1, P. Isohanni2, C. Tengström3, R. Salonen1; It confirmed the cytogenetic result and determined possible breakpoints 1Dept of Medical Genetics, Väestöliitto, Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, on chromosomes Xp22 and Yp11. Xp- and Yp-subtelomeric (DXYS129) Finland, 2Dept of Pediatric Neurology, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, and SRY regions were not identified on the derivative chromosome. Our Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Rinnekoti Foundation, Espoo, results indicate that the translocation is associated with the deletion of Finland. XpYp-pseudoautosomal and SRY regions. This loss of chromosomal Terminal deletions at 6q25 are rare and about 30 cases have been segments could explain the phenotype of the patient. We suppose that reported. We report two additional patients with 6q25-qter deletions. dyschondrosteosis probably resulted from haploinsufficiency of SHOX Patient 1 was admitted to hospital because of status epilepticus at homeobox gene on the XY pseudoautosomal region. These data the age of 4 months. Brain MRI revealed hydrocephalus due to confirm conclusions of previous reports. cerebral aqueductal stenosis. At 3 years of age he was moderately Our molecular cytogenetic studies were supported by research grant mentally retarded. His facial features were distinct with epicanthic from the Internal Grant Agency, Ministry of Health, Czech Republic folds, strabismus, nose with broad tip, long philtrum, thin upper lip, - IGA NE 6912-4. high and narrow palate, down-turned corners of the mouth, and large ears. Additional anomalies included microcephaly, fetal finger pads, P0378. Combined cytogenetic and molecular evaluation of infertile men hypermobility of the ankle joints, hypotonia, epilepsy and abnormal EEG. The chromosomes (400 bands) detected a terminal deletion of T. M. Sorokina, E. M. Grishina, L. V. Shileiko, V. B. Chernykh, L. F. Kurilo; chromosome 6 at q25. Parental karyotypes were normal. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Patient 2 was floppy as a newborn and cranial ultrasound revealed large Genetic factors are one of common cause male infertility. To lateral ventricles. At the age of 18 months she needed hospitalisation evaluate the frequencies of genetic abnormalities in different sperm because of seizures. At the age of 20 years she was moderately diagnoses we examined cohort of 605 Russian infertile men. Sperm mentally retarded and the parents reported personality problems analysis that performed according WHO recommendations (1999) such as aggressiveness, stubborn temperament and tendency to revealed: azoospermia in 36%, oligoasthenoteratozoospermia withdraw. The face appeared long and slightly asymmetric. She also (OAT) in 35%, asthenozoospermia in 14%, teratozoospermia in 7%, had epicanthus, strabismus, abnormal retinal pigmentation, nose with normozoospermia in 8% patients. Cytogenetic analysis was carried out broad tip, down-turned corners of the mouth, high and narrow palate, on blood lymphocyte metaphases by standard method with G-staining. and large ears. Additional anomalies included microcephaly, pectus Detection of Y-chromosome microdeletions was performed according excavatum, a deep sacral dimple, tapering fingers, bilateral hallux to Laboratory guideline Simoni et al. (1999). Genetic abnormalities valgus, epilepsy and abnormal EEG. Chromosome studies (>550 were found in 44 (20%) azoospermic men: in 26 (59%) - Kleinfelter bands) and FISH techniques detected terminal 6q25.3-qter deletion. syndrome, in 4 (9%) - structure chromosome aberrations, in 5 (11%) Parental karyotypes were normal. - XX-males (de la Chapelle syndrome), in 9 (21%) - AZF deletions. In This report supports the existence of a terminal 6q deletion patients with OAT genetic abnormalities were revealed in 8% cases syndrome. (17 men). At this structure chromosome aberrations (8 cases) are most common (47%). Kleinfelter syndrome was mentioned in 4 men P0376. Rare proximal interstitial deletion of chromosome 4q in a (24%), one XX-male (6%), Y-microdeletions were found in four men girl with severe mental and growth retardation. (23%). In asthenozoospemic men genetic abnormalities disclosed R. Genesio, F. Fabbrini, P. Tedeschi, M. Ferrara, D. Melis, G. Sebastio, A. in 5 cases (6%): structure chromosome aberrations - 4 (11%), one Conti, L. Nitsch; patient with karyotype 47,XYY. Of 40 teratozoospermic men in 2 (5%) University Federico II, Napoli, Italy. cases were revealed structure chromosome aberrations. Between Proximal interstitial deletions in the long arm of chromosome 4 have normozoospermic patients one men (0.5%) had balanced chromosome been reported in about 20 patients. Even though deletions show variable translocation 46,XY,t(Y;14)(q12;p12). extensions spanning from 4q12 to 4q27, they all share the region q21- q22 causing similar phenotypes which include: short stature, cranio- P0379. Satellite association and Ag-NOR staining in lymphocytes from patients with Fanconi Anemia facial abnormalities, limb, skeletal and cardiac anomalies, seizures, hypotonia, developmental delay and mental retardation. Here, we I. Malheiro, B. Porto; report a new case of a girl carrying a small 4q deletion including the Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Porto, Portugal. 4q21 band. The abnormal chromosome 4 was characterised by G- Satellite associations (SA) and silver stained nucleolus organizing banding and molecular cytogenetic methods including comparative regions (Ag+NORs) of acrocentric chromosomes in metaphases genomic hybridisation and two-colour fluorescent in situ hybridisation obtained from lymphocytes of patients with Fanconi Anemia (FA) were with band-specific probes. The girl presented with short stature, severe studied. Peripheral blood samples from seven patients with FA, six mental retardation, normal head circumference, brachydactyly, frontal patients with anemia other than FA (non FA) and six normal healthy bossing, deep-set eyes, anteverted nostrils, thin upper lip, corpus individuals (controls) were used in this study. Phytohemagglutinin callosum hypoplasia, anomalies of the heart inter-ventricular septum (PHA) stimulated peripheral blood cultures were performed, and and fasting hypoglycaemia. Even though her deletion was one of the satellite associations and Ag-NOR staining were determined at day 3 smallest described so far, she shared more than 15 typical signs of of culture. Our results showed that the frequency of cells with satellite the 4q21-q22 deletion syndrome with other patients carrying larger associations, and the number of acrocentric chromosomes involved deletions. It is conceivable that genes in the 4q21 band be responsible in association per cell were significantly decreased in patients with for most of the features of the 4q21-q22 deletion syndrome. FA compared with controls and non FA. Moreover, a significant lower percentage of Ag-NOR positive acrocentric chromosomes was seen in P0377. X;Y translocation associated with dyschondrosteosis FA patients. No significant differences were observed between non FA E. Kocarek1, A. Baxova2, J. Zeman2, P. Kajanova2, M. Krkavcova2, M. Panek1, and controls, both in the frequency of cells with satellite associations J. Hrabakova1, P. Goetz1; and the number of acrocentric chromosomes involved in association 1Charles University 2nd Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Charles per cell. This results may suggest that FA patients have a significant University 1st Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic. decrease in nucleolar organizer activity and that this cytogenetic pattern distinguishes FA patients from patients with other types of We report a case of a 24-years old female with dyschondrosteosis. anemia, which may be considered an additional feature to be used in The basic cytogenetic examination (G-banding) found an abnormal the cytogenetic diagnosis of FA patients. karyotype with derivative chromosome X [46, X der(X)] resulting from X;Y translocation. The C-banding of the abnormal chromosome indicated presence of Yq heterochromatine region on the terminal part. Translocation breakpoints were located on p-arms of both chromosomes. FISH analysis was carried out with locus specific (Kallman, SRY andCytogenetics 161 P0380. Molecular characterization of an inversion duplication of in human coronary arteries. We aimed evaluating whether there is a the long arm of chromosome 4 phenotypic commitment of tissue factor expressing cells within the M. de Blois1, A. Goldenberg2, I. Desguerre3, J. Chassevent4, D. Sanlaville1, M. atheroma and whether a nuclear involvement of chromosome domains Vekemans1, S. Romana1, M. Le Lorc'h1; occurs. 1Cytogenetics laboratory, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2De- Material and Methods. Different cell types were grown out from partment of medical genetics, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, explanted ACS and SA plaques. Total mRNA was extracted and 3Department of neuro pediatrics ,Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, Real Time PCR was performed to assess the expression pattern France, 4Pediatrics department, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Poissy, of Tissue Factor (Chromosome 1p22-p21) and its inhibitor WISP3 Poissy, France. (Chromosome 6q22-q23). In situ RT-PCR followed by FISH analysis Here we report on a 7 years old boy, first child of healthy non with chromosome painting were performed on fixed cells to asses the consanguineous parents, with psychomotor developmental relationship between the F3 expression and chromosomal positioning delay, dysmorphic features and neurobehavioral problems. Facial within the nucleus. dysmorphism is characterized by a long face, macrocephaly, a broad Results. We found that vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) were nasal bridge, narrow palpebral fissures, a very little mouth and little the major source of intra-atheroma F3. Moreover, tissue factor from squared ears. The hands are short. Behaviour is characterized by an ACS VSMCs was 68 times more expressed than in SA plaques extreme aggressiveness. Clinical follw up showed sinusal bradycardy (p<0.01). FISH analysis revealed two distinct mutually exclusive and persistence of behavioural problems. Cytogenetic analysis arm domains for both Chromosome 1 and 6 being the two clustered showed an abnormal long chromosome 4q. Parental caryotypes were together in ACS and apart in the SA plaques. The expression of F3 normal. To characterize this de novo chromosome rearrangement at was enhanced when the two chromosomes were closer to the nuclear the molecular level, FISH studies were performed. The subtelomeric periphery. Thus we demonstrated a cell-specific orchestration of gene probeRP11-173M11 located on 4q35.2 was deleted whereas probe activity in SA and ACS via nuclear remodelling. RP11-294M24 and RP11-90E13, located respectively on 4q34 and 4q33 showed an inverted duplication of this region. A series of 15 P0383. Balanced translocation breakpoint mapping with BAC- BACs were used to characterize the size of the terminal deletion (9.2 FISH in patients with normal phenotypes. Mb, from the BAC clone RP11-783P19 located on 4q34.3 to 4qter) J. Baptista1, N. P. Carter2, K. Porter2, E. Prigmore2, R. Curley2, P. A. Jacobs1, J. and the extent of the inverted duplicated segment (11Mb, from the A. Crolla1; BAC clones RP11-243F3 located on 4q33 to RP11-783P19 located 1Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 2The Well- on 4q34.3). the mechanism of this rearrangement and the behavioural come Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. disorders are discussed Imbalances or disruptions of genes at chromosome breakpoints have been found in recent studies to be the underlying cause of the P0381. Peculiarities of pericentromeric heterochromatin association in some patients between a clinically abnormal phenotype replication pattern of chromosomes 1, 9, 16 in embryonic and and an apparently balanced de novo reciprocal translocation (Gribble extraembryonic tissues of human fetuses et al J Med Genet 42:8-16 2005). Our hypothesis that translocation A. V. Vorobyeva1, A. A. Pendina2, T. V. Kuznetzova2, V. S. Baranov2; breakpoints in normal individuals would neither disrupt genes nor 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott's have imbalances was tested by analysing the breakpoints in 13 Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa- phenotypically normal individuals incidentally ascertained with tion. familial balanced reciprocal translocations. The breakpoints were The investigation of DNA replication is an awarding approach for refined by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using tiling path analysis of chromosome functional organization. Replication time (S) BACs to identify breakpoint-spanning clones. Array CGH (1 Mb) was is strongly correlated with chromatin transcriptional activity. Therefore also performed to identify imbalances not directly involved in the the analysis of replication pattern of heterochromatin regions in breakpoints. No breakpoint associated imbalances were identified metaphase chromosomes from embryonic and extraembryonic in any of the 13 cases, but in the majority, Ensembl mapping data tissues at different stages of embryonic development allows indirect suggested that the breakpoints might disrupt a gene at one or both estimation of heterochromatin role in differentiation of embryonic cells breakpoints. In two cases, breakpoints which clearly disrupt pathogenic and chorionic villi. The technique of immunofluorescent detection of genes were identified, i.e. the genes were physically larger than the BrdU with monoclonal anti-BrdU antibody was applied for analysis BACs which were split by the breakpoints. By array CGH, one of the of replication pattern in metaphase chromosomes of chorionic villi patients had a de novo deletion in a chromosome not involved in cells as well as of tissues fragments from 8 human embryos at 5 the structural rearrangement. Further detailed FISH studies showed and 13 weeks of gestationt. The number of G-bands, replicating one translocation to be non-reciprocal. This study confirms that simultaneously with heterochromatin regions of 1q12, 9q12 and patients with a normal phenotype and apparently balanced reciprocal 16q11.2 in cytotrophoblast cells gradually decrease in all samples from translocations do not have FISH detectable breakpoint-associated 5 to13 week. A high level of asynchronous replication (22% - 55%) imbalances, but may have genes disrupted and possibly inactivated of homologues regions (1q12, 9q12, 16q11.2) in both embryonic and by a breakpoint(s). extraembryonic tissues was revealed. Time changes in the replication pattern of relevant heterochromatin regions most probably reflect some P0384. De novo rearrangements in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: unknown peculiarities of their functional activities in embryonic and characterization, parental origin and parental 4p16.3 inversion extraembryonic tissues at different stages of embryonic development. polimorphism. M. Murdolo1, I. Mancuso1, O. Zuffardi2, R. Lecce1, G. Marangi1, D. Orteschi1, G. P0382. Gene regulation in coronary atherosclerotic plaques Neri1, M. Zollino1; from patients with stable angina pectoris and acute coronary 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, syndromes via nuclear remodeling 2Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Università degli Studi di Pavia, Pavia, M. L. Rossi1, N. Marziliano2, P. Merlini3, P. Presbitero1, E. Arbustini2, D. Ardis- Italy. sino4; Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a contiguous gene syndrome 1Istituto Clinico Humanitas, Rozzano, Milan, Italy, 2IRCCS Policlinico San Mat- caused by partial 4p deletion, with genomic rearrangements teo, Pavia, Italy, 3Ospedale Niguarda, Milan, Italy, 4Ospedale Maggiore, Parma, representing a de novo event in most cases. Italy. We analysed a total of 59 WHS patients. Genetic analyses included: Introduction. Thrombus formation over a ruptured atherosclerotic a) conventional and molecular cytogenetics (4p-specific probes and plaque in a coronary artery is the key event leading to myocardial all telomeres; c) microsatellite segragation analysis; d) multiple colour infarction and unstable angina. Tissue factor (F3) has been found FISH for the 4p16.3 inverted polymorphism in parents. We observed more abundant in coronary atherosclerotic plaques from patients with that: a) the basic genomic rearrangements were de novo events in 54 ACS with respect to those experiencing SA thus suggesting that its out of 59 patients (91.5%); b) they were isolated deletions in 43/54 content may determine different thrombotic response to plaque rupture patients (80%); unbalanced translocations in 7 (13%), consisting ofCytogenetics 162 t(4p;8p) (5 cases), t(4p;11p) (one case), t(4p;7p) (one case); dup/del in of signals in the 3-dimensional nucleus by chi-square goodness-of- 3 (5.5%); double intrachomosomal rearrangement in one (1.5%). fit test. Localization of chromosome 18 in all (euploid + aneuploid) A total of 27 families were simultaneously tested for type of cells was significantly (P=0,001) different from the theoretical model rearrangement, parental origin and parental 4p16.3 inversion with shift to the periphery. A significant (P=0,007) shift to periphery polymorphism. We found that: was also found for chromosome 18 in aneuploid compared to euploid 1) Rearrangements were paternal in origin in 22 out of 27 cases (80%). blastomeres. Such shift was not found for other chromosomes including Nearly the totality of them were isolated deletions (21/22), with the 18 in euploid and X in XX blastomeres. These findings indicate that only exception of a dup/del rearrangement. The 4p16.3 inversion aneuploidy might alter gene activity of other chromosomes by the shift polymorphism was absent in both parents in each case. to nuclear periphery. We have not found X inactivation accompanied 2) Rearrangements were maternal in origin in the remaining 5 cases by peripheral localization of X chromosome in XX blastomeres. (20%). They all were unbalanced translocations: t(4p;8p) (4 cases) Supported by grants: Copernicus-2 ICA-2-CT-2000-100012, IGA- and t(4p;7p) (one case). MZCR NR/7962-3 A maternal 4p16.3 inverted polymorphism was detected in 3 out of 4 WHS associated t(4p;8p) translocations, it was absent in one case of P0387. Quantitative fluorescence PCR examination of parental t(4p;8p) and in the case of t(4p;7p). and meiotic origin of trisomy 21 in Ukraine, Russia and Central Relevant considerations are discussed. Europe M. Zámečníková1, M. Broučková1, M. Libik1, A. Krebsová2, K. Sperling2, S. P0385. Sperm chromosomal aneuploidies in 421 severely Vorsanova3, S. Kutsev4, T. Zerova5, S. Arbuzova6, M. Petersen7, M. Macek Sr.1; oligozoospermic men with and without constitutional genetic 1Center of Reproductive Genetics, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, alterations who are candidates for intracytoplasmic sperm Charles University - 2nd School of Medicine, University Hospital Motol, Prague, injection Czech Republic, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Charité, Universitaetsmedizin, C. Foresta, M. Ferigo, M. Menegazzo, D. Fortini, A. Ferlin; Berlin, Germany, 3Molecular Cytogenetic Laboratory, Institute of Pediatrics and Department of Histology, Microbiology, and Medical Biotechnologies, Padova, Children Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Centre of Italy. Clinical Morphology and Genetics, Rostov State Medical University, Ministry of Concerns have been raised regarding the potential of intracytoplasmic Health, Rostov, Russian Federation, 5Genetic Department of Institute of Medi- sperm injection (ICSI) to facilitate the transmission of genetic diseases. cal Improvement, Kiev, Ukraine, 6Interregional Medico-Genetics Centre, Cen- Sperm of severely infertile men might carry genetic alterations either tral Hospital Clinic No.1, Donetsk, Ukraine, 7Institute of Child Health, Athens, because a constitutional abnormality is present or because only sperm Greece. are altered as a result of mitotic or meiotic errors due to impaired We have studied parental and meiotic origin of free trisomy 21 in 102 spermatogenesis. We studied 421 severely oligozoospermic men nuclear families from different regions of Ukraine, Russia and Central (sperm count below 5 mil/mL) for sperm sex chromosome aneuploidies Europe using quantitative fluorescence PCR on ABI Prism 310 by 8 by means of FISH. They included: 7 patients with complete (47,XXY) and STR markers. The aim of the study was to find out possible impact 3 with mosaic (47,XXY/46,XY) Klinefelter’s syndrome, 4 with reciprocal of different lifestyle, load of exogenous noxious agents including or Robertsonian translocations, 11 with Yq microdeletions, and 9 with radiation from Chernobyl accident. The proportion of maternal non- CFTR mutations. Patients with complete Klinefelter’s syndrome had disjunction was 77.3% in Germany, 93.8% in Ukraine and 92.3% in a significantly lower percentage of normal Y-bearing sperm and an Russia, whereas the paternal origin was disclosed in 13.6%, 6.2% higher percentage of XX- and XY-disomies (6.1+1.0% and 13.3+2.2% and 7.7% respectively. In different regions of Eastern Europe the respectively, p<0.001). Patients with Y chromosome microdeletions prevalence of meiosis I errors was 84.4% of maternal origin, 3.1% of had a significantly lower percentage of normal Y-bearing spermatozoa, paternal in Ukraine and 77.1% of maternal origin, 2.9% of paternal and an increase in nullisomic sperm and XY-disomy (10.4+1.5% and origin in Russia. The disorders in meiosis II occurred in 9.4% or 14.3% 4.1+1.2%, respectively, p<0.001). Subjects with CFTR gene mutations of maternal and 3.1% or 5.7 of paternal non-disjunction in Ukraine and showed no alterations, confirming that spermatogenesis proceeds Russia respectively. regularly in these patients. No significant difference was found in men Our findings are consistent with published data and the differences with mosaic Klinefelter’s syndrome or translocations due to the low are not statistically significant as followed from homogeneity test in number of subjects. The analysis in idiopathic patients revealed an contingence tables and chi-quadrate test. increased percentage of genetically abnormal sperm with a significant If these observations are confirmed by further analyses of 150 Russian increase in XX-, YY-, and XY-disomies (0.6+0.8%, 0.6+0.8%, and and Ukraine nuclear families with trisomy 21, it would suggest, that 1.4+1.8, respectively, p<0.001). Our findings may explain the higher different life style, noxious exogenous factors load and Chernobyl prevalence of congenital anomalies in children conceived by ICSI and radiation exposure have no impact on proportions of parental and in particular in children conceived to oligozoospermic men. meiotic origin of trisomy 21. It might be due to the negative selection of trisomic embryos in the early phase of their embryonal development. P0386. Localization of chromosomes 13, 16, 18, 21, 22, X and Y Supported by Copernicus 2 ICA 2 CT 2000 100012 and IGA MZ CR in nuclei of human preimplantation embryos NR/7962-3 grants. J. Diblík1, M. Macek Sr.1, C. Magli2, R. Krejčí3, L. Gianaroli2; 1Center of Reproductive Genetics, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, P0388. Variant translocations and the forms of BCR/abl Charles University - 2nd School of Medicine, University Hospital Motol, Prague, rearrangement in chronic myeloid leukemia Czech Republic, 2S.I.S.Me.R., Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Genetics and V. A. Djordjevic1, J. Jovanovic1, B. Todoric2, Z. Magic2, K. Krtolica3, D. Bos- Microbiology, Charles University – Faculty of Science, Prague, Czech Republic. kovic1; The aim of the study was to find a possible correlation between 1Clinical center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 2Military Medical chromosomal constitution of blastomeres from preimplantation Academy, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 3''Vinča'', Institute of Nuclear Sci- embryos and nuclear localization of chromosomes with regard to the ences, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. known peripheral localization of chromosome 18 and inactive X in The Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome arises from a reciprocal female somatic cells. Screening for aneuploidy of chromosomes 13, translocation, with c-abl oncogene from 9q34 fused to the breakpoint 16, 18, 21, 22, X and Y was performed in 98 blastomeres from human cluster region (BCR) locus on chromosome 22q11. In 5-10% of patients embryos in 22 IVF cycles. Vysis Multivision PB and CEP X + CEP with CML, Ph chromosome originates from other rearragements Y Alpha probes were used. Relative distances from the center and differentnfrom classical t(9;22)(q34;q11). A simple Ph-producing the edge of nucleus of 1173 FISH signals were exactly measured in translocation involves chromosome 22 and other chromosomes digitized microscope images. We compared localization of signals of than 9, while a complex variant translocation involves three or more all analyzed chromosomes from euploid and aneuploid (all types of chromosomes. In almost all cases with ''variant'' Ph chromosome, the aneuploidy of studied chromosomes) blastomeres by homogeneity BCR/abl rearrangement can be detected at the molecular level or by tests in contingence tables. The actual signal localizations were in situ hybridization. compared with a theoretical model describing a random distribution In this study, variant translocation in 19 patients with newly diagnosedCytogenetics 163 CML, was presented. Cytogeneric analysis was performed on bone Germany, 2Department of Human Genetics, Charite Universitaetsmedizin marrow cells after direct preparation, according to modified method Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute of Molecular Genetics, Berlin, of HG-banding. Two (2/19) patients had simple variant Ph-producing Germany. translocations, and other (17/19) patients had complex variant Genome imbalances are a major cause of developmental delay and translocations. congenital anomalies. Cytogenetic techniques for the study of genomic Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for diseases include karyotyping and comparative genomic hybridization detection of the expresion of BCR/abl sequence in eight CML patients (CGH). Novel high resolution whole-genome technologies such as was performed. BCR/abl rearrangement was found to be expressed array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) have in b3a2 form in six (6/8) patients, but in b2a2 form in one (1/8) recently been developed. Array-CGH significantly improves the patient. Using RT-PCR analysis in one (1/8) CML patient with simple detection rate of submicroscopic chromosomal abnormalities. Using variant translocation, we found that BCR/abl rearrangement was not a tiling resolution array consisting of 14.000 BAC clones covering expressed. the entire human genome, we studied 15 patients with chromosomal Results of cytogenetic and molecular investigations in cases of abnormalities including unbalanced translocations, deletions and ''variant'' Ph chromosome CML reviewed in this study cleary indicate duplications. All patients have previously been analysed by other that variant translocations of chromosomes 9 and 22 are great research cytogenetic techniques like conventional CGH and/or FISH. Overall, challenge, especially in case of rearrangement forms of BCR/abl hibrid good concordance was shown between array-based CGH and gen that can be different from each other and different from specific conventional CGH. The regions of copy number change were correctly rearragements (b2a2, b3a2) for CML. identified by array-CGH in a one-step experiment. The higher resolution of array-CGH allows us to more precisely define the size of the P0389. Cytogenetic Abnormalities in the Lymphocytes of Iranian deletion or duplication. In addition tiling resolution arrays enable us to Breast Cancer Patients assign breakpoints within single BAC clones. This method is therefore r. mirfakhraie1, g. javadi1, p. mehdipour2; becoming a powerful tool for the rapid and accurate detection of genetic 1Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic Re- disorders associated with genomic copy number abnormalities. Array- public of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic CGH in combination with conventional cytogenetics will significantly of Iran. improve clinical genetic diagnosis. Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women. Several factors are involved in initiation and development of breast carcinoma, P0392. Detection of submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances but epidemiologic evidence point to two areas: Environment and in patients with learning disability and dysmorphic features by Genetics. Cytogenetic studies in breast have revealed chromosomal array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) alterations in tumor cells. Most breast tumor cytogenetics studies C. J. Shaw-Smith1, L. Rickman1, S. Gribble2, E. Prigmore2, S. Cumming3, L. thus far reveal complex chromosomal alterations, and hence it Willatt3, K. Porter2, R. Curley2, C. Dunn3, H. V. Firth1, L. Wilson4, M. Bobrow1, N. has not been possible yet to associate breast cancer with specific P. Carter2; chromosome aberrations, although some specific anomalies are 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust beginning to emerge. Blood cultures from breast cancer patients also Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Department of Cytogenetics, have revealed chromosomal changes which are similar to those of Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Great Ormond Street tumor cells. Such similarities may be very interesting, since it indicates Hospital, London, United Kingdom. that factors causing alterations in tumor cells may also operate in The underlying causes of learning disability and dysmorphic features human lymphocytes. In the present study we have observed such in many patients remain unidentified despite extensive investigation. similarities. Routine karyotype analysis is not sensitive enough to detect subtle chromosome rearrangements (less than 5 Mb). We previously P0390. Cytogenetic Analysis of Reproduction Problems investigated the presence of subtle DNA copy number changes in O. Pidgorna, T. Pokanevych, O. Timchenko; patients with learning disability and dysmorphism by array-CGH, Institute of Hygiene and Medical Ecology, Kiev, Ukraine. employing a DNA microarray constructed from large insert clones We investigated 501 married couples with reproductive disorders spaced at approximately 1 Mb intervals across the genome (Shaw- of different origins. Cytogenetic diagnostics was performed on Smith et al, J Med Genet, (2004) 41:241-8). We have now studied preparations of metaphase and prometaphase chromosomes (G and a total of 100 patients and identified 23 copy number changes in 22 C banding). We analyzed 24 thousand of metaphase plates and 2 patients (one patient had two large imbalances on different autosomes). thousand of prometaphase plates. All of these imbalances have occurred in distinct genomic regions; These results were systemized according to the etiology of reproductive none of them was detected by routine karyotype analysis. Nine of the loses. Abnormalities and chromosome variants occur in all groups of copy number changes were de novo occurrences, whereas five were men and women with primary infertility. It was detected that women shown to have been inherited from phenotypically normal parents. with primary infertility have more high frequency of chromosome Studies are in progress to determine the origin of the remaining nine abnormalities then women with secondary infertility and spontaneous imbalances. Five of the imbalances involved a single clone from the 1 abortions of different etiology (7,2±2,5 % against 2,2±0,9 %, p<0,05). Mb array; all of the remainder involved two or more consecutive clones. It was found that 23,8 % of men has variants of chromosome in One patient with the phenotype of atrioventricular septal defect and group of primary infertility, and only 7,1 % - women (p<0,001). Men behavioural difficulties was found to have a de novo deletion at 8p23.1. with the primary infertility have more higher inversion-frequency of This deletion narrows the critical region for behavioural difficulties at heterochromatic region of chromosome 9 then women of the same chromosome 8p23.1. On the basis of these results, we anticipate that group (8,7 % against 1,6 %, p<0,05). Chromosome variants of array-CGH will become a routine method of genome-wide screening kariotype were found among women with spontaneous miscarriages for unbalanced rearrangements in patients with learning disability. and primary infertility in anamnesis and equal 20,0±4,0 %, 7,1±2,3 % correspondingly (p<0,05). Among men and women with secondary P0393. Evolution of the cytogenetic techniques: follow up of a infertility and spontaneous miscarriages of different genesis 29,4 % case through out 20 years of kariotype disorders were met within men and 19,7 % - women.The M. Rodriguez de Alba1, R. Sanz2, A. Bustamante-Aragonés1, D. Diego-Alva- results have been used for choosing infertility treatment tactics. rez1, F. Infantes1, I. Lorda-Sanchez1, C. Ayuso1, C. Ramos1; 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Complejo Hospitalario Donostia, San P0391. Accuracy of array-based CGH in genome-wide detection Sebastian, Spain. of submicroscopic chromosome aberrations: comparison with In 1984 a couple was refered to our unit due to recurrent miscarriages. conventional CGH A cytogenetic study was performed and the karyotypes obtained E. Klopocki1, H. Tönnies2, F. Erdogan3, F. Trotier1, H. Neitzel2, K. Sperling2, H. were 46,XY and 46 XX, t(14;21)+mar. The female parents were Ropers3, S. Mundlos1, R. Ullmann3; then studied and it was found out that both the translocation and the 1Department of Medical Genetics, Charite Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, marker chromosome were inherited from the father and previouslyCytogenetics 164 from the grandparent. Since the FISH technique was not available it aunt and in grandmother, but also in the 5-years-old cousin, who was suposed that the marker chromosome was derivative from the showed overlapping phenotypical features (severe mental retardation, robertsonian translocation. epilepsy, microcephaly, hypotonia and minor facial dysmorphisms). In 1985 the woman got pregnant and underwent a prenatal diagnosis We performed the constitutional karyotype at high resolution, adding (PD) resulting in a carrier female of both the translocation and the WCP1 and 15, FISH screening for subtelomeric rearrangements, marker chromosome. The follow up after birth revealed a normal STS analysis to exclude UPD for chromosome 15 and an extensive development. Afterwards she had two consecutive misgarriages and work up for mosaicism. The results allowed identifying a 2% trisomy in 1987 she underwent a new PD where the karyotype obtained was 15 mosaicism in peripheral blood: mos47,XX, t(1;15)(q12;p11)mat 47, XX, + mar. At birth it was noticed vesicoureteral reflux and mild +15/46,XX; t(1;15)(q12;p11)mat. The cytogenetic polymorphisms of microcephaly, so a new cytogenetic study was performed revealing a the supernumerary chromosomes 15 exclude with confidence an in 47,XX,+mar/48,XX,+mar,+mar2 karyotype. vitro mitotic error. At eleven years old learning dificulties were observed, with no major Unfortunately, the proband’s cousin was suddenly dead. developmental delay. The FISH analysis showed that the origing of the Fryns reported a 2-3% additive risk for congenital abnormalities and family marker was chromosome 15. mental retardation in the heterozygous children of healthy translocation The result from FISH analysis of the secondary marker was D1Z7/ carriers. This risk may be overestimated, however many mechanisms D5Z2/D19Z3+ and D1Z5-. After a review of the literature we have can be put forward to explain an increased risk: upd, position effect, decided to perform the analysis of chromosomes 5 and 19 with the cryptic unbalanced defect and postzygotic loss of a supernumerary QF-PCR in other to ascertain the parental origin of this chromosomes chromosome, with only partial rescuing from a tertiary trisomy and dicard a parental disomy. This study is actually being performed. resulting in trisomy mosaicism.We discuss this latter, in particular for translocations with high probability of 1:3 segregation, as expected P0394. Molecular cytogenetic characterisation of terminal from pachytene configuration. chromosome 2q37 deletion in patients recruited through the A.C.L.F. telomere network. P0396. De novo mosaic 46, XX, dup (11)(q13q25)/46,XX in a M. Doco-Fenzy1, N. Leporrier2, L. Taine3, M. Holder4, A. Schneider1, N. Bed- patient with trigonocephaly nareck1, P. Sabouraud1, M. Mozelle1, M. Khoury5, B. Delobel6, J. Motte1, M. Z. N. Al-Hassnan, M. Faden, M. Al-Owain, M. Iqbal; Goossens7, D. Lacombe3, S. Briault8, D. Gaillard1; King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 1CHU , UFR medecine, Reims, France, 2CHU, Caen, France, 3CHU, Bor- The most common form of dup(11q) is associated with 11q/22q deaux, France, 4CHU, Lille, France, 5CHG, Laon, France, 6Hopital St Antoine, translocation, and in almost all reported cases, it is inherited Lille, France, 7Hopital Henri-Mondor AP-HP, Créteil, France, 8INSERM, Tours, through a carrier parent. Here we report on a 2-year old female with France. trigonocephaly and multiple congenital anomalies. She was born to Studies have ascertained associations between autism or Albright first cousin parents with unremarkable family history. Pregnancy ended hereditary osteodystrophy-like phenotype and terminal 2q deletion at term with normal birth weight. She was noted to have microcephaly, with the breakpoint within 2q37.3. Furthermore subtelomeric 2q37.3 trigonocephaly, upslanting palpebral fissures, prominent nasal root, thin deletions are often detected with FISH subtelomeric screening and upper lip, and micrognathia. Echocardiogram revealed VSD and PDA. most of those 2qtel deletions are considered polymorphisms as they She also had horseshoe kidneys, congenital dysplasia of the hips, and are also observed in the parents. However some of them are de moderate developmental delay. Blood chromosome analysis revealed novo terminal deletions associated with an abnormal phenotype. We two cell lines. Based on 50 cells examined, duplication 11q (q13q25) collected 14 observations from 10 new families through the A.C.L.F. was observed in 24% of cells and normal 46,XX in the remaining cells. (French Speeking Cytogenetician Association ) telomere network, in Parents chromosome analysis was normal. order to better characterise the different length of the 2q37 deletions This case presents several unusual findings. It is a de novo chromosomal observed. We analysed for each patient and his parents when available, aberration while the vast majority of reported cases with dup(11q) the size of the deletion by molecular cytogenetic and molecular biology inherited the anomaly through a carrier parent. The mosaicism of this with STS markers. The size of the deleted segment was determined particular karyotyping is another extraordinary finding. The duplicated by mapping the region with specific BAC and PAC clones from 2q36 region (q13-q25) includes the more commonly reported duplication breakpoint to the subtelomeric 2q end, and with different polymorphic seen in the unbalanced segregants of t(11;22) carrier. Finally, it is markers from D2S125 to D2S2585. the first reported case of trigonocephaly in association with 11q The children were aged from 18 months to 14 years. They were all duplication, in contrary to the well-known association of this specific investigated for developmental delay. They had all facial dysmorphic type of craniosynostosis with the 11q23 deletion syndrome. However, features but looked different from each other. At least 4 of them FISH analysis using an MLL (11q23) DNA probe showed only two presented multiple malformations including, cardiac malformation, signals with loss of signal of the proximal MLL gene on the duplicated coloboma, syndactyly, brachydactyly , cryptorchydy, ano-rectal chromosome while it was present at the distal 11q23. malformation, or cleft palate . None of them were referred for Albright osteodystrophy-like phenotype, and one had autistic behaviour. P0397. Molecular study of miscarriages with unbalanced We present the clinical, chromosomal and molecular cytogenetic and reciprocal translocations. genetic findings of the affected children and their parents investigated, D. Diego-Alvarez, A. Bustamante-Aragonés, M. Rodriguez de Alba, R. Car- comparing our results with the literature data. (Study supported by the dero, C. Ayuso, J. Diaz-Recasens, C. Ramos, I. Lorda-Sanchez; CHU-Reims-AOL 2003). Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. Spontaneous miscarriages occur in approximately 10-15% of clinically P0395. Trisomy 15 mosaicism associated with a familial recognised pregnancies. Chromosomal anomalies account for at least reciprocal translocation t(1;15). 50% of first trimester miscarriages. Carriers of balanced translocations B. Buldrini1, P. Prontera1, V. Aiello1, R. Grupioni1, A. Bonfatti1, G. Venti2, A. Fer- have an increased risk of having abnormal or unviable products of lini1, A. Sensi1, E. Calzolari1, E. Donti2; conception. Conventional karyotyping of abortions presents a high rate 1Genetica Medica, Università degli Studi di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2Genetica of failure. In contrast, molecular studies of DNA (QF-PCR and CGH) Medica, Università degli Studi di Perugia, Perugia, Italy. provide a useful tool to diagnose numerical chromosome anomalies. We We describe a 4 years old female with severe global mental retardation present the molecular approach of two abortions derived from couples (< 1°centile, Griffiths scale), myoclonic epilepsy, proximal hypotonia, in which one partner carried a balanced reciprocal translocation. Case microcephaly (<<3° centile), kyphosis, cutaneous syndactyly between 1 shows complete trisomy 2 due to a 3:1 segregation from a paternal 2nd and 3rd finger of left foot, hands stereotypy and minor facial t(2;17)(q32.1; q24.3). Case 2 shows partial monosomy 13q32 > qter dysmorphisms. and partial trisomy 1q31.2 > qter caused by an adjacent-I segregation A second trimester amniocentesis, performed elsewhere, had disclosed of a maternal t(1;13)(q31.2; q32). In both cases, parental karyotypes a reciprocal translocation 46, XX; t(1;15)(q12;p11)mat. The balanced and DNA were available. Trivalent segregation could be established by reciprocal translocation was found in the healthy mother, in a healthy analysing STR markers. We propose QF-PCR in addition to CGH as anCytogenetics 165 efficient diagnostic method to improve our knowledge of unbalanced P0400. Non-contiguous 8p23 deletions in a case with offspring in balanced translocation carriers. del(8)(p23.1)/psudic(8)(p23.2) mosaicism R. Ciccone1, T. Mattina2, R. Giorda3, M. Patricelli1, O. Zuffardi1; P0398. Direct duplication 12p11.21-p13.31 mediated by 1University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 3IRCSS segmental duplications: a new genomic disorder? La Nostra Famiglia, Bosisio Parini, Italy. M. De Gregori1, G. Gregato1, S. Gimelli1, T. Pramparo1, J. Messa1, R. Giorda2, Mosaicisms with two cell-lines carrying different abnormalities for the M. Patricelli1, O. Zuffardi1; same chromosome are quite rare among constitutional chromosome 1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2IRCSS La Nostra Famiglia, anomalies. In these cases it can be assumed that the zygote would Bosisio Parini, Italy. have had a 46 chromosome karyotype but one of the chromosomes We have identified an almost 20 Mb direct duplication (dual-colour was dicentric (for example: qter->p::p->qter or pter->q::q->pter). The FISH analysis) of the short arm of chromosome 12 in a child with presence of two active centromeres on the same chromosome could mental retardation and dysmorphic features. lead to the formation of anaphase bridge during cell division followed The molecular definition of the breakpoints, performed by array- by an asymmetric breakage of the dicentric with the formation of a CGH and FISH analysis, showed that they were within two highly deleted chromosome and an inv dup del chromosome. homologous segmental duplications of 49 and 123 kb respectively. We report a double 8p anomaly mosaicism del(8)(p23.1)/ Thus this rearrangement is a typical genomic disorder. psudic(8)(p23.2) in a girl with severe mental retardation, dwarfisms Pip-maker analysis demonstrated three clusters of homologous and corpus callosum agenesis. The dicentric breakpoint does not span segmental duplications located at 3, 9 and 31 Mb respectively from any of the duplicons associated with the classical inv dup(8p) (Giglio the 12p telomere, constituted by portions with both direct and opposite et al, 2001). orientation. Microsatellites analysis demonstrated the paternal origin of The rearrangement is of paternal origin and the proposita’s father has the rearrangement. Paternal chromosomes 12 have been inspected for the 8p23.1 heterozygous inversion between the two olfactory-receptor the presence of inversion with the same breakpoint of the duplication, gene clusters (REPD and REPP), located respectively at 7 and 12 predisposing to the duplication itself but resulted normal. An analysis Mb. The deleted 8p chromosome has two non-contiguous deletions of the literature to see if this duplication was recurrent revealed several involving the distal 7 Mb and a 3 Mb region located between 9 and cases of 12p duplication that, at least at the cytogenetic level, were 12 Mb from the telomere. These results suggest that the presence of bigger than this one. Similarly, reciprocal deletions are not reported in the cryptic paracentric inversion in the paternal 8p chromosome, from the literature likely reflecting their lethality. which originated the proposita’s dicentric chromosome, gave rise to This case demonstrates that not only recurrent rearrangements such two non-contiguous deletions in an unique breakage event. as deletions involving 7q11.2, 15q11q13, 22q11.2 but also sporadic These data underline the importance of a proper molecular analysis to rearrangements may be mediated by low copy repeats. characterize chromosome anomalies in order to an accurate karyotype- phenotype correlation. P0399. Phenotypic variability associated with an unbalanced X/Y translocation transmitted through females in a three generation P0401. Characterization of a de novo 20q13 subtelomeric family deletion by microarray comparative genomic hybridization in a N. Lavoura1, J. Gonçalves2, E. Matoso1, M. Venâncio3, A. Lopes Dias2, A. Mas- child with learning difficulties carenhas1, L. Ramos3, I. Marques Carreira1; F. Bena, S. Dahoun, A. Bottani; 1Serviço de Citogenética, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Division of Medical Genetics, Geneva, Switzerland. Coimbra, Portugal, 2Centro de Genética Humana, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Unbalanced subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangements represent Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Serviço de Genética, Centro Hospitalar de a significant cause of unexplained mental retardation with or without Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. congenital abnormalities. Development of new molecular cytogenetic We present the phenotypic variability of an unbalanced X/Y techniques has provided a powerful tool for detection of patients with translocation, in a three generation family - grandmother, mother and subtle chromosome imbalances. a two year old male child (propositus). The grandmother has a normal We report the case of a 5-year-old girl with learning difficulties, phenotype but short stature, the mother has short stature and mild hypotonia and strabismus. Delivery occurred by C-section at 34 weeks mental retardation. The propositus has a more severe phenotype of gestation because of preeclampsia. Birth measurements were with short stature, developmental delay, cryptorchidism and dry skin above the 90th percentile, but term was uncertain. Facial phenotype compatible with a contiguous gene-deletion syndrome. was not dysmorphic. Standard karyotype (resolution 550 bands) was Conventional and molecular cytogenetics (FISH) revealed the presence 46,XX. Subtelomeric FISH analysis revealed a submicroscopic de of a derivative X chromosome, shared by the three family members: novo deletion of 20q13. To further characterize the size of the deletion der(X)t(X;Y)(p22.3;q11.2).ish(WCPY+, DXYS29X-, EsTCdy16c07++, and in order to delineate the critical region involved in the phenotype DYZ3-, SRY-). of the patient, we performed comparative genomic hybridization on In order to identify the extension of the Y chromosome segment, and DNA microarrays, a technique which allows simultaneous detection the Xp22.3 deletion on the der(X), PCR with specific primers for Yq11.2 and mapping of DNA copy number changes. We used commercially and Xp22.3 was performed. Y chromosome sequences present belong genomic microarray slide (Human Array, Genosystem, France) to Y intervals 5 and 6, with the breakpoint occurring between sY89 containing 480 non overlapping BAC/PAC clones spotted in triplicate. (absent) and sY98 (present). The deletion on the Xp22.3 covers all By CGH-microarray the deletion was confirmed by three PACs deleted the genes from the pseudoauthosomal X region 1 (PARX1) to the X and its size is estimated to be between 0,4 Mb and 2.1 Mb. Despite the specific segment until DXS237 marker. The breakpoint in Xp22.3 is extent of this microdeletion 20q13, there does’nt seem to be a clear between DXS237 (absent) and DXS278 (present), showing that the pattern of phenotypic expression associated with this chromosome disease causing genes, SHOX, ARSE, VCX-A, and STS are absent. anomaly. Most of the propositus clinical features can be explained by the Xp23 partial nulisomy. The propositus doesn’t exhibit icthyosis and we P0402. Are chorionic villi a source of stem cell? speculate that this could be explained by the activation of an alternative P. Spitalieri1, L. Scaldaferri2, A. Filareto1, F. Sangiuolo1, A. Nardone1, G. No- pathway that overcomes the X-linked steroid sulfatase deficiency. velli1, M. De Felici2; The phenotypical variability in the two female patients, namely the 1Dept of Biopathology Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of Public degree of cognitive impairment, could be related to a non-random X Health Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy. chromosome inactivation. The aim of this study was to investigate for the presence of stem cell in chorionic villous sampling (CVS), from women subjected to prenatal diagnosis at X-XII week of pregnancy and to the develop an in vitro culture system for their maintenance and expansion. Three CVS were analyzed at the time of sampling for Alkaline phosfatase (AP) positivy, while pan-cytokeratin and vimentin wereCytogenetics 166 used as markers for epithelial and mesenchimal derived cells. P0405. Characterization of two Silver-Russell syndrome patients In freschly collected CVS few clustered AP positive cells were present with uniparental disomy of chromosome 7 in the apex of some villi. J. Rosell, A. Perez-Granero, M. Caimari, M. Bernues, N. Govea, L. Torres- To better characterize AP positive cells and differentiating cells from Juan, D. Heine-Suñer; CVS, we performed primary cell culture up to obtain cell monolayers Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. after 15 days of culture. Silver-Russell syndrome is characterized by intrauterine and postnatal We observed that, after 15 days of culture, AP positive cells were growth retardation, asymmetry of the head and limbs, a small triangular present and expanded exclusively in cells cultured in the presence face and other less constant features. A subset of patients (7-10 %) has of 1000 UI of Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF). At this time most of the been described to show maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome cultured cells were positive for vimentin. 7. We have characterized a total of 12 Silver-Russell patients and found Experiments to analyse these AP+ cells for stem cells markers as 2 of them to be positive for chromosome 7 uniparental disomy. The Oct-4, Nanog and SSEA 1-4 are in progress, both by molecular and first case was found to be caused by maternal isodisomy except the immunohystochemical studies. terminal region of the long arm, that was heterodisomic. In the second Work supported by the Italian Ministry of Health. case we found the patient to show maternal isodisomy of the whole chromosome. In addition, we observed that in the second patient, P0403. Success of intracytoplasmic sperm injection in infertile the chromosome 7 microsatellites besides manifesting maternal men with chromosome abnormalities isodisomy, had also a second very faint band corresponding to one K. Writzl1, T. Kunej1, B. Zorn2, I. Virant-Klun3, A. Brezigar4, B. Peterlin1; of the paternal alleles. Cytogenetic analysis of both patients, their 1Division of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Andrology parents and prenatal amniotic fluid could not detect any chomosomal Centre, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3IVF laboratory, UMC Ljubljana, abnormalities or mosaicism. Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4Institute for Prenatal and Postnatal Diagnosis, Postojna, Slovenia. P0406. Clinical - cytogenetic aspects related to mosaicism in the Purpose: To assess the success rates of ICSI according to the type of variants of Turner syndrome male chromosomal abnormalities. M. M. Mihaescu1, C. Crista2, I. Zosin3, D. Stoicanescu1, V. Belengeanu1; Methods: We analyzed infertile men with chromosomal abnormalities 1Department of Medical Genetics - University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Ti- undergoing ICSI: seven men from the Slovene population and 87 men misoara, Romania, 2Department of Endocrinology - University of Medicine and from 37 published articles. Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 3Department of Endocrinology-University of Results: Altogether 94 men with chromosomal abnormalities Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. underwent ICSI. In couples with male nonmosaic Klinefelter syndrome Turner Syndrome distinguishes itself among the abnormalities of the 36 children with normal karyotype were born and one 47,XXY fetus sexual chromosomes by a large variety of karyotypes and phenotypes. was conceived. In 19 couples with male reciprocal translocation eight Most of the Turner patients are mosaics. We have investigated 90 children were born: four with normal karyotype, three with balanced patients with feminine morphotype. The growing retard was the most translocation and one with unbalanced translocation. In 28 couples frequent symptom of the Turnerian stigmata, associated with absent with male Robertsonian translocation 14 children were born: six with or hardly present secondary sexual characters, primary or secondary normal karyotype and eight with Robertsonian translocation amenorrhea.For all the observed subjects a genetic consult was Conclusions: ICSI is an efficient method for patients with chromosome performed, followed by a chromosome analyses from lymphocyte abnormalities, however prenatal diagnosis or preimplantation diagnosis cultures. The caryotype was established after the G banding procedure. should be offered. For each case, there were examined 50 metaphases. Our goal was the cytogenetic diagnosis of the Turner Syndrome, the emphasizing of P0404. Mosaic cell line in a dysmorphic child with its cytogenetic variants, and the correlation karyotype-phenotype. sacrococcygeal teratoma The non-mosaic karyotypes included cases of 45,X , 46,X,I (Xq), E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Kocova, G. Ilieva; 46,XX,del(Xq), and 46,XXdel Xq-; Xp-, 46,Xr(X) and a normal karyotype Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. 46, XX. Ten mosaicism cases were registered with a cellular line 45,X Marker chromosomes represent a heterogeneous group of or 46,XX. Those cases consisted of: 2 cases of numeric abnormalities chromosomes which have different expression in phenotype of an 45,X/46,XX, the rest being structural abnormalities: 45,X/46,X(r)X [2]; affected person. Some of them are silent, and could be transmitted 46,XXdel(X)(q22.3-22.8) (p22.1 - pter)/45,X; 46,XXdel Xq-; Xp-/45,X; through generations, but some could give a distinct phenotype, 46,XX/46,XXdelXq-[2];45,X/46,Xi((Xq) [2]. depending of the length and the origin of an extra chromosome. The deletions of the regions Xq2.1 and 1.3 were associated with a Mosaicism, if present, affects different tissues in different percentage. primary amenorrhea and the terminal deletions Xq , with a secondary Teratomas, on the other hand, have heterogeneous etiology. amenorrhea, early installed. The phenotypic aspect of the patients Sometimes they represent a part of a syndrome (Currarino syndrome, with structural X abnormalities varies according to the chromosomal caused by mutations in HLXB9 gene), but several reports show abnormality and not to the clones’ percent in the mosaic conditions. various cytogenetic findings in these children -partial trisomy of 13q, Most of the mosaics with 45,X may be the consequence of a mitotic 20p, 1q, 19p, 2p; most often as a result of an unbalanced translocation instability of the chromosomes with a structural abnormality. complement. Marker chromosomes are rarely seen as an etiology of sacrococcygeal teratomas. P0407. Homozygosity for pericentric inversions of chromosome We report a newborn with a sacrococcygeal teratoma, heart defect and 9 in a parent with stillbirth facial dysmorphism. It was a first child of young and unrelated parents. M. Khaleghian, C. Azimi, M. Toughi; The pregnancy was uneventful; the baby was born premature, with Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, and Department of Medical Genetics, birth weight and length under 3rd percentile. The baby had dysmorphic Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic signs including small face, deep set, small eyes, frontal bossing, Republic of Iran. saddle nose, hypoplastic allae nasi, short philtrum, V-shaped mouth, An inversion occurs when a single chromosome undergoes two breaks and micrognathia. Also the baby presented heart defect, diastasis m. and is reconstituted with the segment between the breaks inverted, recti abdominis, brachydactylia, transversal crease, hypoplastic nails, and are of two types: paracentric and pericentric. An inversion does digitalized thumb. Sacrococcygeal teratoma was present, surgery not usually cause an abnormal phenotype in carriers, because it is a confirmed connection of the tumor with the rectum, with a histology balanced rearrangement. Its medical significance is for the progeny; of a mature teratoma. Karyogram of the leukocytes showed two cell a carrier of either type of inversion is at risk of producing abnormal lines 46,XX/47,XX+mar;(80%/20%). Extra material on this marker gametes that may lead to unbalanced offspring. One of the most chromosome predisposed altered embryogenesis and development of frequent inversions is inversion chromosome 9. A few cytogeneticists teratoma in the child. consider inversion of chromosome 9 as a normal variant. However, many reports in the recent literatures link pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 with infertility, recurrent abortions and a number ofCytogenetics 167 other abnormal conditions. P0410. FISH Analysis of Subtelomeric Chromosome Up to now just a few cases of homozygosity of inversion of chromosome Rearrangements Detected in 108 Malformed Infants and/or with 9 have been reported. We report a case of homozygosity pericentric psychomotor delay. inversions of chromosome 9 in a woman with 28-week stillbirth. Our L. Rodríguez1, S. Climent2, N. Martínez Guardia3, I. Arroyo4, R. M. Arteaga5, G. cytogenetic studies on her both non-consanguineous parents showed Rodríguez Criado6, J. Fernández Toral7, F. Lopez-Grondonal1, E. Mansilla1, M. that both parents were heterozygote for this inversion with a normal L. Martinez-Fernandez1, M. L. Martinez-Frias1,8; phenotypes. 1Estudio Colaborativo Español de Malformaciones Congénitas del Centro de Investigación sobre Anomalías Congénitas, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Min- P0408. The high incidence of mosaic forms of numerical isterio de Sanidad y Consumo, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital General de Ontinyent, chromosome abnormalities in spontaneous abortions detected Valencia, Spain, 3Hospital Severo Ochoa, Madrid, Spain, 4Hospital San Pedro by interphase multiplex FISH de Alcántara, Cáceres, Spain, 5Hospital Marqués de Valcecilla, Cantabria, S. G. Vorsanova, A. D. Kolotii, I. Y. Iourov, E. A. Kirillova, V. V. Monakhov, A. K. Spain, 6Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain, 7Hospital Universitario Central Beresheva, E. V. Nesiaeva, Y. B. Yurov; de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 8Departamento de Farmacología, Facultad de Me- Institute of Paediatrics and Children Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow Medi- dicina, Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain. cal I.M. Setchenov’s Academy, National Centre of Mental Health, Russian Chromosome alterations are usually associated to infants with Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. malformations and/or psychomotor delay. Sometimes it has normal The leading cause of spontaneous pregnancy loss in the first trimester karyotype. We observed that high resolution G-band karyotype (550- are numerical chromosomal abnormalities. Interphase multiplex 850 bands) can hide cryptic chromosome alteration not detected but fluorescence in situ hybridization (MFISH) is considered as effective with fluorescence “in situ” hybridization techniques (FISH). Some technique for accurate determination of numerical chromosome cryptic chromosome alterations affect subtelomeric region. abnormalities in uncultured cells. MFISH using original DNA probes We started a project aimed to analyze subtelomeric regions in about for chromosomes 1, 9, 13, 14, 16, 18, 21, 22, X, Y was applied for 300 infants with congenital defects and/or psychomotor delay with investigation of aneuploidy and polyploidy in 259 spontaneous normal high resolution (550-850 bands) G-band karyotype (PI020028). abortions (mean age of gestation: 9.8 weeks). The mean maternal We analyzed 108 infants, all with normal high resolution G-band age was 30.3. The frequency of abortions with abnormal karyotypes karyotype. We have established two groups: A: 42 newborn with was 54,8 % (142 specimens). Among them 8 specimens (5.6%) were congenital malformations with/or without psychomotor delay. B: 66 characterized by multiple chromosome abnormalities. The occurrence dysmorphic children aged 1 to 13 years, with psychomotor delay. We of autosomal aneuploidy was 48.5% (65 from 134), X chromosome used the subtelomeric FISH probes from Cytocell and Vysis. aneuploidy _ 25.4% (34 from 134), and polyploidy _ 26.1% (35 from Among the 108 cases, 10 had a subtelomeric rearrangement [9,26% 134). The high incidence of specimens with chromosomal mosaicism (4.44-17.03)]. Three rearrangements were found in group A [7,14% was detected. Among 142 specimens with chromosome abnormality (1,47-20,87)] and 7 rearrangements in group B [10,61% (4,26- 64 (45.1%) have mosaic forms of aneuploidy and polyploidy. We 21,85)]. conclude MFISH to have high efficiency for screening of regular as In 8 cases the chromosome alteration was “de novo” [1p deletion (2 well as mosaic forms of numerical chromosome abnormalities in cases), 4p deletion (3 cases), 10p deletion (1 case), 10q deletion (1 spontaneous abortions. Supported by INTAS grant 03-51-4060. case) and a der(18)t(18;19)(1 case)]. In two cases the father was carrier of a balanced chromosome translocation (Table 1). P0409. The gain and loss of chromosomes and somatic Our results show the importance to perform subtelomeric chromosome chromosome pairing in developing human brain. rearrangements with FISH in newborn malformed infants and I. V. Iourov1, V. V. Monakhov1, A. D. Kolotii1, E. A. Demidova1, A. K. Bereshe- malformed infants with psychomotor delay, even they have a normal va1, V. S. Kravets1, S. I. Kutsev2, S. G. Vorsanova1, Y. B. Yurov1; high resolution G-band karyotype (550-850 bands), since this could 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Institute of Pediatrics and help defining the prognosis of the patient and to give a correct genetic Children Surgery MH, Moscow, Russian Federation, Rostov State Medical counselling to the family. University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 2National Research Center of Table 1.- Chromosome alterations detected after FISH with subtelo- Mental Health, RAMS, Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery MH, Mos- meric chromosome probes. cow, Russian Federation, Rostov State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. 1º Newborn del(1)(p36.22) de novo" Molecular cytogenetic studies supply the pilot evidences for increased level of aneuploidy in developing and adult human brain (Yurov et al., 2º newborn der(22)t(12;22)(q24.31;q13.3)pat 2001;2005). However the real frequency of aneuploidy in the developing del (4)(p16.3). ish 4p16.3 (WHSCRx2) de brain cells is still unknown. FISH artifacts due to over position of 3º newborn novo" interphase chromosomes and somatic chromosome pairing can lead to “pseudomonosomy” registered by interphase FISH. Therefore, the 4º No newborn del(4)(p16.3). ish 4p16.3 (WHSCR-) de novo" resolution power of FISH analysis of somatic (diploid) cells is limited. The application of qualitative and quantitative assessment of single del (4)(p16.3). ish 4p16.3 (WHSCRx2) de 5º No newborn signals in interphase nuclei of fetal brain (as described in Iourov et novo" al. 2005) allowed us to establish the incidence monosomy and of 6º No newborn der(4)t(4;12)(q34;p12.3)pat somatic chromosome pairing. In the present study we have applied interphase FISH with DNA probes for chromosomes 1, 9, 15, 16, 18, 7º No newborn del(10)(q26.3) de novo" X, and Y for identification of aneuploidy with quantitative assessment of FISH signals in 6 fetal human brain samples. No fewer than 3000 8º No newborn del(1)(p36.22). de novo" interphase nuclei was scored per probe for each sample. We have detected non-specific aneuploidy incidence of all the chromosome 9º No newborn der(18)t(18;19)"de novo" studied. The variation of aneuploidy frequency was in the range 1.3- 10º No newborn del(10)(p15.3) de novo" 2.4% for monosomy and 0.3-0.4% for trisomy and rare tetrasomy. The somatic chromosome pairing or over position of FISH signals was detected to take place for all the chromosomes studied and varied in Supported by Grant PI020028 - FIS, Instituto de Salud Carlos III. the range 2.9-7.3%. Therefore low-level chromosomal mosaicism as Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo. well as somatic chromosome pairing do present in fetal human brain. Supported by INTAS grant 03-51-4060.Prenatal diagnosis 168 P0411. Chromosomal transcriptome maps and linkage to these pregnancies was not possible to be traced, thus being unable sequence data to evaluate the phenotypic and clinical consequences of each case. P. F. Ambros1, A. Kowalska1, C. Stock1, E. Bozsakyova1, T. Lörch2, T. Ramsau- Although M-FISH technique is expensive and not widely performed, its er3, Z. Trajanoski3; systematic application could well offer the information needed to form 1CCRI, Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, more precise evaluations regarding the management and counselling Austria, 2MetaSystems, Altlussheim, Germany, 3Institute for Genomics and in de novo marker chromosomes found prenataly. Bioinformatics, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria. The enormous potential enabled by current techniques to study P0413. The contribution of apoptosis and aneuploidy genome wide gene expression profiles, opened new avenues assessment in sperm after repeated ICSI failure in biological/medical research. Especially in cancer research, M. Benkhalifa1, D. Abazis2, S. Athanatou2, P. Clement3, C. Pappa4, G. Kokkali5, insights into the expression profile can provide vital diagnostic and N. Kanakas6, K. Arvaniti6, M. Pelekanos7, G. Xidias4, M. Tsirigotis7, T. Mantzavi- prognostic information. Current micro-array techniques are extremely nos6, C. Pantos5, C. G. Pangalos2; powerful and may yield direct information on the gene activity of a 1ATL R&D Laboratory, Voisins le Bretonneux, France, 2Diagnostic Genetic Cen- cell or tissue. However, special equipment and a sophisticated bio ter, Athens, Greece, 3Laboratoire de Biologie Clinique, Le Blanc Mesnil, France, informatics program are required to evaluate data and no direct 4Diagnosis, IVF Center, Athens, Greece, 5Genesis Athinon, Athens, Greece, geographical expression profile on the chromosome is provided. The 6Euromedica IVF Center, Athens, Greece, 7Akeso IVF Center, Athens, Greece. CESH (comparative expressed sequence hybridization) technique The analysis of DNA Fragmentation Index (DFI) by apoptosis using in on the other hand represents a unique technique to directly assign situ fluorescent TUNEL technique and the assessment of chromosomal loci of high/low gene expression to specific chromosomal loci (Lu et nondisjunction by FISH techniques on germ cells, provide valuable al. 2001). As normal human metaphase spreads are used as target information concerning the paternal contribution on fertilization rate, to visualize hybridized cDNAs, we searched for a way to directly link early embryo abnormalities and IVF failures. In order to establish the expression- with sequence data. Until today, no direct link from the DFI and the nondisjunction rate, 22 patients with a minimum of two sequence information to the chromosomal phenotypes exists. Thus, ICSI attempt failures and/or less than 40% of fertilization rate were we attempt to find a way to directly link the GC-content published studied with a total of 29 ejaculates. For apoptosis the kit by Roche in accessible data banks like Ensembl and information obtained by was used with the application of positive and negative controls. staining chromosomes with base specific fluorochromes by following For nondisjunction assessment, FISH technique was applied for the concept of linking clearly defined landmarks on the chromosome chromosomes 13,18, 21, X and Y. A minimum of 2000 sperm nuclei (high or low fluorescence intensity with base specific fluorochromes were examined by two observers for each analysis. The data of our like chromomycin A3 (CMA) with GC-rich or GC-pure domains in study indicates a variable DFI from one patient to another and from one the genomic sequence. So far we were able to demonstrate that the ejaculate to another concerning the same patient. In 4 patients the DFI GGCC binding motif correlates well with the (CMA) staining. This was less than 10%, in 7 ranged from 10 to 40%, in 10 was over 40% correlation allows e.g. a direct link of the expression profile along the while 1 case was inconclusive. Concerning the rate of chromosome chromosomes as obtained by the CESH technique with the sequence nondisjunction and DFI, no clear relation was established although 3 information accessible by different data banks. Thus, the use of patients presented more than 70% of apoptosis, with more than 2% of sequence specific fluorochromes allows a precise assignment of multiple chromosome nondisjunction. chromosomal bands to the genomic sequence. So not only the ISCN information will be available but also every chromosomal position can P0414. Array CGH reveals unexpected genomic imbalances in be described in Mbp units. fetuses with multiple malformations and normal karyotype C. Le Caignec1, M. Boceno1, P. Saugier-Veber2, S. Jacquemont1, M. Joubert3, P0412. The role of M-FISH in simultaneous detection of de novo A. David1, T. Frebourg2, J. M. Rival1; marker chromosomes 1Medical Genetics Department, Nantes, France, 2Medical Genetics Department, D. Abazis1, S. Athanatou1, M. Karabela1, M. Tzimina1, C. G. Pangalos2; Rouen, France, 3Pathology Department, Nantes, France. 1Dept. of Cytogenetics, Diagnostic Genetic Center, Athens, Greece, 2Dept. of Malformations are a major cause of morbidity and mortality in full- Cytogenetics, Diagnostic Genetic Center, Piraeus, Greece. term infants. Genomic imbalances are a significant component of INTRODUCTION: The identification of marker chromosomes and their aetiology. However, up to one-half of patients with multiple the elucidation of their clinical significance remains one of the few congenital malformations remains unexplained despite thorough problems in classical human cytogenetics. This will undoubtedly clinical examination and laboratory investigations. In the present yield to the application of M-FISH, which allows the simultaneous study, we used a commercially available array CGH, on which all characterization of all human chromosomes. Because of the variety subtelomeric regions, main microdeletion syndromes, and 201 of marker chromosomes, their different origins and the possibility of other probes covering the genome, on 49 fetuses selected with imprinting and isodisomic effects, there is a great variation in the clinical three or more significant anomalies and normal karyotype to detect outcome. Thus, the characterization of prenataly detected marker submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances. Array CGH identified chromosomes identified in prenatal diagnosis is of great interest for 8 genomic rearrangements (16.3%), all confirmed by Quantitative future medical care. Multiplex PCR of Short fluorescent Fragments method. Subtelomeric MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ten cases involving de novo marker and interstitial deletions, submicroscopic duplications, and a complex chromosomes were studied. All of the above cases were initially genomic imbalance were identified. In 4 de novo cases (15qtel studied with the standard RHG chromosomal banding technique deletion, 16q23.1q23.3 deletion, 22q11.2 deletion, and mosaicism followed by complementary C-banding and NOR-staining techniques. for a rearranged chromosome 18), the genomic imbalance identified M-FISH karyotype was performed using the commercially available was clearly underlying the pathological phenotype. In one case, kit of Metasystems GmbH. The labelled metaphases were visualized the relationship between the genotype and phenotype was unclear, through a microscope equipped with appropriate filters and ISIS since a subtelomeric 6q deletion was detected in a mother and her 2 software (Metasystems GmbH). fetuses bearing multiple malformations. In 3 cases, a subtelomeric 10q RESULTS: In all studied cases we were able to successfully duplication, that is likely a genomic polymorphism, was identified. The identify all marker chromosomes, even the smallest in size. The detection of 5/49 causative chromosomal imbalances (or 4/49 if the chromosomal constitutions were the following: +der(10)[1], +der(12)[2], 6qtel deletion is not considered as causative) argues for the relevance +der(15)[1],+der(16)[3], +der(18)[1] and +der(22)[2]. of a wide genome screening when the standard chromosome analysis DISCUSSION: The correct identification of all ten de novo marker is normal and confirms that array CGH will have a major impact on chromosomes, in our prenatal cases, validates M-FISH as an pre and postnatal diagnosis, as well as providing information for more invaluable tool for a high degree of accuracy and efficiency. Whereas accurate genetic counselling. there are several studies of fragments derived from sex chromosomes, the clinical significance of markers derived from regions of autosomal chromosomes is less clear. Unfortunately, the outcome for some ofPrenatal diagnosis 169 P0415. Non-invasive fetal RHD and RHCE genotyping from karyotyped samples), followed by polyploidies (9 %), and monosomy X maternal plasma in alloimmunized pregnancies (6 %). Cases with an extra sex chromosome constituted approximately I. Hromadnikova1, K. Vesela1, E. Roznakova2, K. Nekovarova3, P. Calda4; 5 % of the karyotyped abortions, with a remarkably high frequency of 12nd Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Blood 47,XXY (3.4 %). It is interesting to note that this is approximately 40 Bank, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Clinic of Obstetrics times greater than the prevalence of Klinefelter syndrome. Similar to and Gynaecology, General Faculty Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Clinic the case of autosomal trisomies, our data suggests that the majority of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, General Faculty Hospital, Prague, Czech Re- of conceptions harboring sex chromosome changes do not survive to public. term. In this prospective study, we assessed the feasibility of fetal RH Autosomal trisomies, and an extra X-chromosome in males (47,XXY) genotyping by analysis of DNA extracted from maternal plasma were associated with an advanced maternal age, whereas monosomy samples of alloimmunized pregnant women using real- time PCR and X as well as polyploidy changes seems to be inversely related to the primers and probes targeted toward RHD (exon 7 and exon 10) and age of the mother. RHCE (exon 2 and exon 5) genes. The single most common aberration was trisomy 16, which was found We analysed anti-D, antiD+C and anti-E alloimmunized pregnant in 14 % of the chromosomally abnormal abortions. We also identified woman at risk of haemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) at first one miscarriage with a full trisomy 1. This represents the third case and second trimestr of pregnancy and correlated the results with of trisomy 1 in a clinically recognized pregnancy. Thus, all human serological analysis of cord blood. chromosomes have been detected in the trisomic state in material Determination of fetal D allele of RHD gene and the C and/or E alleles from spontaneous abortions. of RHCE gene from maternal plasma samples is highly accurate and enables implementation into clinical diagnostic algorithm for following P0418. Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for Genetic pregnancies at risk for HDN. The detection of the negative fetus in the Disorders in Saudi Arabia current pregnancy excludes the risk of HDN caused by alloantibodies A. Hellani1, A. I. Al-Aqeel2; and performance of invasive fetal-blood sampling. 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, This project was supported by 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles University 2Riyadh Military Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. in Prague, no: VZ 111300003. Saudi Arabian culture is highly consanguineous, with the first cousin marriages accounting for 60-70% of all marriages. Given the difficulties P0416. A New Class of Chromosomes Lacking Centromere in management of genetic disorders, preventive measures for the Discovered During Prenatal Diagnosis and Characterized via suffering families from autosomal recessive disorders, by offering Chromosome Microdissection and FISH pre-implantation genetic diagnosis is undertaken. The first of these F. Mahjoubi1, G. Peters2, A. Daneil2, R. Hill3; disorders is Sanjad-Sakati Syndrome (SSS) OMIM# 24140, which is 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The New Children Hospital, Sydney, characterized by congenital hypoparathyroidism, growth and mental Australia, 3CSIRO, Sydney, Australia. retardation with a unique 12bp deletion. The second is Niemann Pick The karyotypes of approximately 0.05% of the human population exhibit Disease type B (NPD-B) OMIM# 257200,) (acid sphingomylinase a small extra chromosome in addition to the normal 46 chromosomes. (ASM) deficiency) with more than 70 mutations have been reported As might be expected, the majority of the marker chromosomes have in (SMPD1) gene, which presents with severe phenotype in Saudi been shown to contain centromeric material, e.g. alpha-satellite DNA Arabia. Four unique mutations are found in our Saudi families. A family (α-satellite DNA). However, a rare class of marker chromosomes that with (W533R) mutation in the (SPMDI) gene suffering from a severe lack detectable α-satellite DNA has been reported. In the present phenotype underwent PGD. The third disorder is Morquio’s disease study, we have employed chromosome microdissection technology (MPSIV) OMIM # 253000, with severe classic phenotype with N-acetyl to characterize a marker chromosome with no detectable α-satellite galactosamine-6-sulftase deficiency (MPSIV-A). More than 20 different DNA which otherwise could not be identified by standard banding mutations in (GALNS) gene have been reported in (MPSIV-A). A family techniques or FISH. with three affected siblings with severe classic (MPIV-A) with detected Case Report: A small, mosaic, C-band negative marker chromosome W195C mutation in the (GALNS) gene underwent PGD. In all these was detected on culture of amniocytes during prenatal diagnosis three families PGD was undertaken using fluorescent PCR(F-PCR) related to advanced maternal age. Following spontaneous premature and/or nested PCR with sequencing on a single cell. A singleton labor at 29 weeks gestation, a dysmorphic infant was delivered, with pregnancy ensure after transfer of one heterozygous and one normal flat nasal bridge, short palpebral fissures, micrognathia, high forehead, embryo and prenatal diagnosis by CVS confirmed a normal pregnancy. low-set . This is the first report of successful PGD in different genetic disorders The origin of the marker chromosome was subsequently identified via in Saudi Arabia. chromosome microdissection. Through reverse FISH, we found the marker to be an inverted duplication of the region 15q26.1-qter. FISH P0419. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for spinocerebellar with alphoid satellite probe was negative, while whole chromosome 15 ataxia type I paint was positive. Both ends of the marker chromosome were positive A. Girardet1, C. Fernandez1, C. Coubes1, S. Hamamah2, H. Dechaud2, M. for the telomeric TTAGGG probe. These data, plus the G-banding Claustres1; pattern, identified this as an analphoid, inverted duplicated marker 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, IURC, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, chromosome, lacking any conventional centromere. France, 2Laboratoire de Biologie de la Reproduction B, CHU Montpellier, Mont- We discuss the etiology and clinical effects of this marker chromosome, pellier, France. comparing it to the few other reported cases of “tetrasomy 15q” Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is an autosomal dominant syndrome. We will also discuss the possible mechanisms that are neurodegenerative disorder whose classical clinical features include likely responsible for this neocentromere formation. ataxia, dysarthria and bulbar dysfunction. Death usually occurs between 10 and 15 years after the onset of symptoms. The disease is caused by P0417. Chromosomal anomalies in first trimester miscarriages expansion of CAG trinucleotide repeats within the coding region of the C. Lundin1, E. Ljunger2, S. Cnattingius3, G. Annerén4; SCA1 gene on chromosome 6p22-23. Normal SCA1 alleles range from 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Women and Child Health, 6 to 39 CAG while clinical symptoms have been reported in individuals Uppsala, Sweden, 3Dept of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Stockholm, carrying 39 to 81 continuous CAG tracts. Sweden, 4Dept of Genetics and Pathology, Unit of Clinical Genetics, Uppsala, We report for the first time a preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) Sweden. protocol based upon the co-amplification of the CAG repeats together It is well known that a large proportion of first trimester spontaneous with each of D6S89 and D6S260 microsatellites. These markers are abortions are caused by chromosome disorders. In the present study, closely linked to the SCA1 locus and have therefore potential diagnostic chromosomal analysis of 259 consecutive first trimester miscarriages value through linkage analysis. A family requested PGD for SCA1 as i) revealed an abnormal karyotype in approximately 61 % of the cases. the father diplayed characheristic SCA1 features with an expanded allele Autosomal trisomies were most frequently detected (in 37 % of the of 46 CAG repeats and ii) their first pregnancy investigated by standardPrenatal diagnosis 170 prenatal diagnosis was selectively terminated as the fetus was carrier of P0422. Cytogenetic studies of spouses who have experienced the paternally transmitted expanded allele. Blood samples were collected early miscarriage from the couple and their unaffected daughter, then duplex single cell J. R. Durkovic; protocols for CAG/D6S89, and CAG/D6S260 have been tested on 119 Health centre, Subotica, Serbia and Montenegro. and 121 single lymphocytes, respectively. PCR efficiency ranged from A miscarriage is often caused by chromosome aberrations. The 94.9 to 100% and allele drop out (ADO) rates were comprised between structural errors in chromosomes found in the parents tested, most 6.2 and 9.9%. The assay we set up is considered to be robust enough to frequent of which are translocations, can be directly related to the proceed to clinical application, and therefore, a PGD will be performed development of chromosopathy in a fetus. However, there is still not for this family in the forthcoming weeks. enough evidence that minor structural variants may be a predisposition of a disturbed fetal genesis and an early miscarriage. P0420. Psychological and ethical problems of prenatal The objective of our study is to define correlation of minor chromosome diagnostics structural aberrations in parents and chromosopathy in fetus by M. Kucerova, A. Sipek, M. Volavkova; analyzing karyotype of a miscarried fetus and karyotype of parents. Inst. for the Care of Mother and Child, Prague 4. 14710, Czech Republic. The analysis was carried out in 186 miscarried fetuses in the first Prenatal diagnostics involving problems of fertility is a very sensitive trimester in 44 (23,6%) of which chromosome aberration was detected. field of medical care. Geneticists and other physicians are obliged Karyotype analysis was made in 44 spouses (88 examinees) of whom to respect the feelings of future probable parents. Quite often the chromosomepathy was confirmed in the fetal tissue. Chromosome solution of problems is not ideal from the medical point of view, but it structural aberration was found in 52 examinees (59,0%), two is the parents who must decide how to solve the situation. Our study translocations, one inversion, one X chromosome mosaicism and illustrates some extreme situations of the families and their solutions. 48 minor structural variants. Among the minor structural aberrations Case l: The wife 36 years old is six years older than her husband and a satellite DNK was noticeable in chromosomes of D and G group, she refuses prenatal diagnosis, because she is afraid of abortion and associations of chromosomes, very big or small hetero- chromatin losing her husband. segment of Y chromosome long arm. Case 2: The husband is an adopted child, they would refuse abortion We have suggested the possible cause-effect relation of heterochromatin in any situation, they refuse amniocentesis. polymorphism in parents and chromosome aberration in the fetus of Case 3: The pregnant women had two brothers with hydrocephalus. such parents. They both died 20 years ago, so it is not possible to do any DNA Key words: chromosome aberration, miscarriage, karyotype diagnosis. There is a possibility of X-recessive inheritance. They both refuse possible abortion of fetus 46, XY. They also refused prenatal P0423. No HLXB9 mutation in a human sirenomelia associated diagnosis, including detailed USG examination. with tracheoesophageal fistula Case 4: The pregnant women is 37 years old. By IVF she had one M. Gerard1, M. Sinico2, F. Encha-Razavi2, C. Touboul3, A. Boutron4, J. Levail- healthy son, who died at age two years of a brain tumor. Now she is lant3, B. Gérard5; pregnant (natural way) and she agrees with amniocentesis and they 1Medical genetics, CHIC, Creteil, France, 2Fetopathology, CHIC, Creteil, both are optimistic and brave. France, 3Obstetrics, CHIC, Creteil, France, 4Cell Culture, Kremlin-Bicêtre, We shall demonstrate 4 more cases. France, 5Molecular Biology, Bichat-Claude Bernard, France. Summary: The genetic counselling should be always emphatetic, fully Sirenomelia is characterized by fusion of the lower extremities. informative and non-directive. Concordant monozygotic twins has been reported (Roberge, 1966), as recurrence in a family (Rudd, 1990), and a strain of mice, srn (Orr, P0421. Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of fetal rhesus status by 1982) Here, we report the first genetic study of sirenomelia. molecular analysis of maternal plasma One young non-consanguineous couple were referred because of S. Altmäe1, A. Runina1, M. Kuningas1, T. Kahre2, M. Peters2, A. Ehrenberg2, H. sirenomelia, bilateral renal agenesis and sacral spina bifida at 11 Karro2, A. Salumets1,2, A. Metspalu1; weeks ultrasonography. Terminaison of pregnancy (TOP) was done at 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu University Wom- 14 weeks. Fetal karyotype was 46,XY. Pathology shows a single lower en’s Clinic, Tartu, Estonia. limb, without external genitals, nor anal orifice. Epidermized sacral Feto-maternal rhesus D (RhD) incompatibility is a serious and spina bifida, bilateral kidneys agenesis, and absence of bladder was potentially life-threatening condition for the growing fetus. The correct confirmed. A tracheoesophageal atresia was discovered. There was a determination of fetal RhD status is useful in the treatment of sensitised single umbilical artery. X-rays showed a complete disorganization of RhD-negative pregnant women. Traditionally, the fetal rhesus D status lumbo-sacral vertebrae, with hemivertebrae in D7. determination has been accomplished by invasive prenatal diagnosis Association of sirenomelia and VATER signs has been described (amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling). Recently, the non- (Duncan et al., 1993; Harika et al., 1995). The association of sirenomelia invasive prenatal diagnosis using fetal DNA isolated from maternal with tracheoesophageal atresia is frequent (Stocker JT and Heifetz SA, peripheral blood became available for antenatal determination of fetal 1987). Pathogenesis is controversial, precocious blood vascular steal RHD genotype. was suggested. Another hypothesis is the anomaly of major gene of The aim of the current study was to develop the non-invasive prenatal the formation of mesoderm, explaining both the vertebral defects and diagnosis method for fetal RhD typing using fetal DNA separated from tracheoesophageal anomalies. Search for mutations in HLXB9 gene, maternal plasma. responsible for the Currarino triad, was first tested, without found Peripheral blood samples were obtained from 40 pregnant women at mutations. Extension of the study will be done, on brachyury gene 9-40 weeks of gestation. DNA was extracted from maternal plasma and receptor of retinoic acid, CYP26A1. An international collaborative and fetal RHD genotyping was performed in parallel using conventional study is proposed. PCR and real time PCR (Q-PCR). Fetal RHD genotyping was performed for 18 RhD-negative and 22 RhD- P0424. Prenatal diagnosis of mosaicism identified in amniotic positive pregnant women. Of 18 fetuses with RhD-negative mothers, 6 fluid cell cultures were identified as RhD-negative and 12 as RhD-positive. The results F. I. Sahin1, Z. Yilmaz1, A. Uckuyu2, O. Ozalp1, E. Tarim3, F. Yanik4; of PCR genotyping were compared with newborn’s serology test to 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, determine the sensitivity and specificity of the applied PCR methods. Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Obstet- Two fetal samples were misdiagnosed as RhD-negative, while the rics and Gynecology, Konya, Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of Medicine postpartum serology screening revealed the RhD-positive blood Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Adana, Turkey, 4Baskent University types. The sensitivity and specificity of PCR typing of fetuses of rhesus Faculty of Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey. negative pregnant women were 85,7% and 100%, respectively. Chromosomal mosaicism is one of the most difficult problems to The results of the current study demonstrate that the non-invasive fetal be solved in prenatal diagnosis. Mosaicism involving normal and RHD genotyping can be performed rapidly and reliably with the use of abnormal karyotypes detected in cultured amniocytes may be a true fetal DNA obtained from maternal plasma. chromosomal mosaicism or pseudomosaicism. Distinguishing betweenPrenatal diagnosis 171 true or pseudomosaicism usually needs a second prenatal diagnostic cycles, for 42 couples, were also performed for SGD combined with test to detail the genetic counselling. HLA matching. In this presentation, we report two numerical and two structural A total of 1648 embryos were biopsied, in 1265 (76.8%) of which mosaicisms detected in amniocyte cultures. The first fetus had a two blastomeres were removed for analysis. PCR amplification was 47,XY,+mar[10]/46,XY[10] karyotype. The marker chromosome was performed on 2913 blastomeres, obtaining a successful amplification shown to be derived from chromosome 15 by FISH method. The in 2678 (91.9%) cells. Diagnosis was achieved for 1536 (93.2%) delivery was by caeserean section. The newborn had intrauterine embryos, 320 of which where transferred to the patients in 156 of the growth retardation and cerebral thrombosis and died at 29th day of age. 219 cycles performed. Forty-seven pregnancies were established The second fetus had a 45, X[4]/ 46,XX[26] karyotype. The parents (30.0% per transfer). All ongoing pregnancies were confirmed to be refused cordocentesis and decided to terminate pregnancy in the 23rd unaffected by conventional prenatal diagnosis and went to term without week. complications, resulting in the birth of 31 healthy babies. Third case had a 46,XX, dir dup(1)(q22-q32)[9]/46,XX[21] karyotype. The present results, complementing other similar experiences on The parents’ karyotypes were normal and the pregnancy was aborted in PGD, confirm once again the feasibility of the procedure, providing the the 23rd week of gestation. Second structural abnormality was reported opportunity for couples who have a known genetically transmittable as 46,XX,t(6;11)(q23; p13)[3]/46,XX[20]. The mosaicism was detected disease to start a pregnancy with the knowledge that their child will be in only one flask. The parents decided to continue pregnancy and unaffected with a genetic condition. cordocentesis could not be performed due to the fetal and placental position. Fetal USG revealed no abnormalities. The gestation is at 32 P0427. Mosaicism for unbalanced structural autosome weeks at the time of abstract submission. rearrangement: better prognosis for male carriers All cases had different chromosomal abnormalities. Information N. V. Kovaleva1, P. D. Cotter2; and risks were explained to all families during genetic counselling. 1St. Petersburg Center for Medical Genetics, St. Petersburg, Russian Federa- Mosaicism in prenatal diagnosis needs both detailed examination and tion, 2Children's Hospital Oakland, Oakland, CA, United States. follow up, since clinical findings depend on the type of abnormality. Mosaicism for unbalanced chromosome rearrangements is rare and is problematic for genetic counseling when detected prenatally. P0425. Single Cell Quantitative Fluorescent Multiplex PCR in Objectives: Analysis of pregnancy outcome in prenatally detected Preimplantation Genetic Diagnostics mosaic cases (PDM) according to the type of chromosome abnormality M. A. Ivanov1,2, V. V. Strelnikov1,2, V. M. Litvinenko3, I. G. Torganova3, M. V. and sex. Comparative analysis of male/female ratio in PDM and Nemtsova1,2, D. V. Zaletaev1,2; postnatally ill-defined mosaic cases (IDM) and in asymptomatic carriers 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics at Russian Academy of Medical Scienc- (AM) (transmitting parents, patients with infertility/miscarriages, es, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Molecular Medicine at Moscow fortuitous findings). Method: Review of mosaicism for normal line/ Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow Medical Academy, unbalanced structural rearrangement cases of known sex identified Moscow, Russian Federation. from the literature. Results: (1) We identified 99 cases of PDM, from In this study we are reporting about developing and optimizing the whom pregnancy outcome was reported in 89 cases. Poor outcome protocol for quantitative fluorescent multiplex PCR (QF-PCR) based was reported in 62% of mosaics for additional material, and in 44% preimplantation genetic diagnostics (PGD) for in vitro fertilization of mosaics for deletion. (2) Males were more frequently reported to (IVF). A great majority of patients seeking IVF are women >35 years be normal (27M/14F), while abnormalities were more common in old, who are at a higher risk of having children with trisomies 13, 18 females (17M/22F). In addition, an excess of females were found to and 21. Our assay includes a number of specific highly polymorphic be miscarried, stillborn or dead neonatally (1M/8F). (3) There is an STR markers for 13, 18 and 21 chromosomes (D13S634, D13S742, increase in proportion of females in the IDM (57M/100F) compared D13S258, D18S391, D18S 386, D18S941, D21S11, D21S1411 and to the PDM (49M/50F). (4) Seven-fold female preponderance was IFNAR) and sex chromosomes (AMG). The main problem of single observed among AM (5M/38F). In contrast, among cases of mosaicism cell PCR is a dramatically low quantity of a genome DNA, but our PCR for balanced rearrangements collected during this study, there was no conditions allow us to solve it. After a cell lysis and a single round of significant female predominance (18M/13F in PDM, 12M/13F in the IDM QF-PCR products were detected on an automated DNA analyzer ABI and 12M/13F in AM). Conclusions: The higher incidence of a normal 310 by using a Gene Scan technology. The two-round PCR also was outcome for male fetuses may be the result of sex-specific selection developed, which will allow us to identify most common chromosome against abnormal cell lines. The strong female prevalence among aneuploidies as well as point mutations leading to monogenic disorders. transmitting parents with gonadal mosaicism can also be explained by All our results were confirmed by routine cytogenetic methods. We have such selection rather than by impairment of male gametogenesis. previously successfully tested this system on prenatal samples with 95 % efficiency and ~99,9 % accuracy. The efficiency of this method P0428. The role of genetic counseling on decisions of pregnant for single cells (blastomers and lymphocytes) is 80 % and accuracy women aged 35 years or over regarding amniocentesis in Turkey is near 95 %. Our optimized protocol for multiplex QF-PCR based H. Ilgin-Ruhi, N. Yürür-Kutlay, A. Tükün, I. Bökesoy; PGD is an effective and accurate instrument for a preimplantation Ankara University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey. sex and trisomies 13, 18 and 21 detection, allowing rapid prenatal or We investigated the effects of genetic counseling given before preimplantation testing within 6 hours. amniocentesis that is given based on maternal serum screening (using the cut-off value of 1/250) and genetic sonogram results (+/- abnormal P0426. Strategies And Outcomes Of Over 200 Cycles Of ultrasound marker) on pregnant women who are 35 years and older Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis For Single Gene Disorders age. Their attitudes towards amniocentesis after genetic counseling A. Biricik, F. Fiorentino, A. Nuccitelli, N. Vitale, L. Brardinoni, A. Morgante, M. were evaluated. Among 340 women, 223 (65.6%) were in the high- Baldi; risk group and 117 (34.4%) were in the low-risk group according to "GENOMA" Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Rome, Italy. non-invasive test results. After counseling, 216 pregnant women (167 Couples at high risk of passing on a serious genetic condition to cases to have high-risk, 49 cases who had low-risk) decided to have their offspring have the opportunity to use Preimplantation Genetic amniocentesis while 124 women (56 with high-risk and 68 with low-risk) Diagnosis (PGD) to diagnose a specific genetic disease on embryos declined it. Fourteen abnormal karyotypes were detected. All pregnant obtained through in-vitro fertilisation (IVF) before a clinical pregnancy women who had fetuses with chromosomal aberrations were in high- has been established. risk group. Our study shows that screening by non-invasive prenatal This article reports the experience of our Centre, from 1999 to March diagnostic tool has an effect on families’ choice of amniocentesis. The 2004, in PGD for single gene disorders (SGD), describing strategies use of these test results during counseling decreased the number of and overall outcome data of 219 PGD cycles performed on fresh amniocentesis in a ratio of 36.5%. cleavage embryos of 156 couples for 22 different genetic conditions. The single gene defect investigated were autosomal dominant (n=13), autosomal recessive (n=127), or X-linked disorders (n=17). Fifty-fivePrenatal diagnosis 172 P0429. Characterization of an unbalanced whole arm in the populations studied. We followed the third pregnancy of a translocation leading to monosomy 18p revealed in prenatal consanguineous couple of healthy, third cousin parents aged 22 and diagnosis 23 years at birth of their first child, a girl with congenital microcephaly S. Yakut1, M. Simsek2, A. Baumer3, G. Bagci1, G. Luleci1, A. Schinzel3; and no other malformation or dysmorphia, with normal skull X-rays 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and and brain MRI except for size. At 2 years her head circumference was Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department 37cm (< 8 SD), height 87.5 cm (p75) and weight 11 kg (p25), and of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Antalya, Turkey, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, she was diagnosed as MCPH. A second pregnancy was interrupted University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. at the end of the second trimester when microcephaly was detected Monosomy 18p is among the most frequently observed autosomal on ulstrasound scanning. DNA analysis in parents, proband, and deletions. Terminal deletion of 18p appears as the main reason fetus showed no evidence of autozygosity for known loci except at for occurrence of monosomy 18, while an unbalanced whole arm MCPH5. At 5 years the proband was mentally retarded with no other translocation is reported in 16% of cases. We present a case of monosomy neurologic deficit, and the couple had a new pregnancy. DNA analysis 18p resulting from an unbalanced whole arm translocation revealed in in amniotic cells showed heterozygosity for linked marker D1S1660 prenatal diagnosis. Amniocentesis was performed on a 41-year old close to ASPM at MCPH5, which we interpreted as an indication that women at 18 weeks of pregnancy, who referred initially for prenatal the fetus was probably not affected. Head circumference remained diagnosis due to advanced maternal age without any USG findings. All normal at ultrasonography throughout the pregnancy. A normal baby metaphases in fetus karyotype analysis revealed an unbalanced whole was delivered. We conclude that careful confrontation of linkage and arm translocation between the long arm of one chromosome 18 and morphometric data may help in prenatal diagnosis of MCPH. the long arm of one chromosome 22, 45,XX,der(18;22)(q10;q10), which lead to monosomy 18p in the fetus. A de novo origion for der (18;22) P0432. Prenatal diagnosis of duplication of chromosome was suggested, as the karyotypic analysis of the parents were normal. 14q resulting from crossingover within a paternal pericentric Chromosome 18p STS markers D18S498, D18S481 and D18S170 inversion were used for genotyping of the fetus and the parents, to determine the G. Bagci1, M. Ozcan Caliskan1, I. Keser1, S. Ozturk1, I. Mendilcioglu2, G. Lu- origin of der (18;22). Among these, D18S170 marker was informative. leci1; Only the paternal allele was detected in the fetus, leaving maternal 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Akdeniz University, Faculty of chromosome 18 to be involved in der (18;22) found. Medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 2Deparment of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey. P0430. Double translocations in prenatal diagnosis We report an extremely rare occurence of pericentric inversion I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, K. Crkvenac Gornik, D. Muzinic, L. Letica, R. Lasan, of chromosome 14 in female fetus with 46, XX, rec14,dup(14q)in D. Begovic; v(14)(p11.2q31.2) karyotype. This abnormality was derived from Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University paternal pericentric inversion of chromosome 14. The proposita’s Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. partial duplication for the distal segment 14q is apparently the result We report one case of a maternal double reciprocal translocation 46,X of crossing-over within the inverted segment during meiosis. All X,t(4;11)(q31;q23),t(5;8)(q35;q22) ascertainment through an offspring conventional cytogenetic tecniques were used to perform chromosome with partial trisomy 11q and partial monosomy 4q, karyotype of 46, investigation of this structural abnormality. The stillborn, female fetus XX,der(4)t(4;11)(q31;q23),t(5;8)(q35;q22)mat. The second child was had various abnormalities. With reference to previous reports, the risk healthy 46,XX girl. Cytogenetic analysis of cultured amniotic fluid cells at clinical abnormalities are discussed for both de novo and familial with GTG banding in following pregnancy showed an unbalanced 46, pericentric inversions at chromosome 14. To our knowledge, prenatal XX,der(11)t(4;11)(q31;q23),t(5;8)(q35;q22)mat karyotype. The parents diagnosis of paternally inherited duplication 14q in a female fetus has decided to terminate the pregnancy. The normal karyotype 46,XX was not been previously described. also detected prenatally by amniocentesis in fourth pregnancy. A second case presents mother with a karyotype 46,XX,t(4;9)(p14;p24), P0433. The single cell as a tool for genetic testing: credibility, precision, implications. and the father 46,XY,t(1;5)(p11;p11) karyotype. A case of multiple congenital anomalies in a female newborn was found to be associated K. Dotan, B. Goldman, B. Feldman, G. Barkai, L. Peleg; with partial trisomy 4p and partial monosomy 9q. The karyotype was Institute of Human Genetics, Ramat Gan, Israel. 46,XX,t(1;5)(p11;p11)pat,der(9)t(4;9)(p14;p24)mat. The unbalanced Tay Sachs disease (TSD) is an autosomal recessive disorder due to karyotype was detected prenatally in a fetus by amniocentesis in impair activity of hexosaminidase A. In its severe form it leads to death third pregnancy: 46,XY,der(9)t(4;9)(p14;p24)mat. The pregnancy was during infancy. TSD is frequent among Ashkenazi Jews, with a carrier terminated. Cytogenetic analysis of cultured amniotic fluid cells in frequency of 1/29. Two mutations underlie nearly 100% of the infantile following pregnancy showed double balanced translocation 46,XY,t(1; form +1278TATC (73% of carriers) and IVS12-1G to C (13%). An 5)(p11;p11)pat,t(4;9)(p14;p24)mat. adult-onset chronic form, caused by the mutation G805A (4% among A review of the literature indicates that the risk of having unbalanced carriers) is usually in compound with a common one. Preimplantation offspring is similar in couples in which both parents have a balanced genetic diagnosis (PGD) was performed in few cases of couples at translocation and in couples in which one partner is a translocation risk after terminations of affected pregnancies. Our objective was to carrier. That result from very early spontaneous abortion of mutually measure quantitative aspects of single cell analysis: amplification unbalanced conceptuses. The fact that the mother with double efficiency and allele-dropout rates in uni, simultaneous (of the two translocation, and the couple with different balanced reciprocal common mutations) and multiplex reactions in: peripheral lymphocytes, translocation, has the healthy children indicates the importance fibroblasts (amniotic), mesenchymal (CVS) and blastomeres. A set of of genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis in cases of double nested PCR protocols was designed for the three mutations in different translocations. combinations. Each of the protocols can be performed in multiplex with one of two markers flanking the HEXA gene found to be highly P0431. Prenatal diagnosis of autosomal recessive primary polymorphic in the carrier population. Mutations were detected by microcephaly agarose electrophoresis and two fluorescent computerized genotyping Y. Tunca1, S. Vurucu2, J. Parma3, R. Akin2, I. Baser4, M. Abramowicz3; systems. Amplification rate was not significantly different among cell 1Medical Genetics, GATA, Ankara, Turkey, 2Pediatric Neurology, GATA, Ankara, types: 86.3% in lymphocytes (82/95) and 82% in the embryonic cell Turkey, 3Genetics, Hopital Erasme, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 4Obstetric and (64/78). ADO rate was significantly lower (1.3%) in embryonic cells Gynecology, GATA, Ankara, Turkey. as compared to lymphocytes (12%). Lymphocytes treated with PHA Primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a developmental abnormality to induce cell-divisions showed a 1.8 fold lower ADO rate than non- resulting in a congenital small-sized but normally formed brain, with dividing lymphocytes. Hypothesis: ADO rate is lower in dividing cells mental retardation, and no other neurological deficit. It is usually having a less compact nucleus structure. transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait. Six loci have been reported to date, with ASPM at 1q31 (MCPH5) being most often implicatedPrenatal diagnosis 173 P0434. Investigation of clastogenic effect of Mitomycin C(MMC) 187 limb malformations in the North of France. LM were antenatally on fibroblast cells(AF,CVS,skin biopsy) in referred patients for diagnosed in 96 cases (51%), straight after birth in 54 cases (29%), prenatal diagnosis of Fanconi Anemia and normal controls and after pathological examination if pregnancy was terminated or in K. Rezaee1, F. Behjati1, R. Karimi-Nejad2, Y. Shafaghati1, S. Ghasemi Firouz- utero death occurred in 37 cases (20%). Results are summarised in abadi1, H. Najmabadi1, M. Karimi-Nejad2; the following tables. 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Karimi-Nejad/Najmabadi Pathology 96 Prenatal diagnoses & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Associated malforma- Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with an Isolated LM: 43 tions: 53 extensive genetic and clinical heterogeneity. The affected patients Terminated: Followed: Terminated: Followed: show pancytopenia, many internal and endocrinal problems, as well Pregnancy 22 21 44 9 as high risk of leukemia in particular AML. And the recurrence risk in Different affected families is 25%. As a result ,prenatal diagnosis of FA is an LM (after important factor to help such families and the society. Diagnosis of FA pathological 13/22 6/21 26/44 3/9 on the basis of ultrasound data and biochemical tests is not possible or paediatric and its molecular diagnosis is difficult and unavailaible in most cases. examination) The diagnosis of FA exploits the hypersensitivity of chromosomes of FA Associated 26/44 (dif- 4/9 (differ- lymphocytes and fibroblasts to bifunctional alkylating agents such as 6/22 3/21 malformation ferent) ent) mitomycine C (MMC). In this study a cytogenetic test was implicated to Right prenatal access to an accurate diagnosis. During study we have investigated 6 diagnosis amniotic fluid (AF) referred for FA.. Mitomycin C with the concentration could change 2/22 1/21 of 2ng/ml have been applied successfully to the fibroblasts of the the pregnancy patients and their normal (negative control) and positive controls .2 management fetuses manifested increased chromosome breakage with MMC in LM helpful to their amniotic fluid cells. They were therefore diagnosed as affected accurate diag- 32/44 9/9 Fanconi Anemia. nosis P0435. Prenatal diagnosis of Osteogenesis imperfecta in Lithuania 54 Neonatal diagnoses E. Benusiene, V. Kucinskas; Isolated: Associated malfor- 27 mations: 27 Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius Uni- versity, Vilnius, Lithuania. Associated malformation could Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a clinically, genetically, biochemically, have been detected on foetal ultra- 17/27 sound and radiologically heterogenous group of inherited connective tissue disorders characterized by bone fragility and other evidence of Right prenatal diagnosis could connective tissue involvement. This definition embraces a very wide change the pregnancy manage- 1/27 16/17 range of phenotype, from, at one end, intrauterine or perinatally lethal ment forms to, at the other end, a barely noticeable increase in fracture LM helpful to accurate diagnosis 18/27 tendency. The form of prenatal diagnostic studies used for a particular pregnancy 37 diagnoses after pregnancy termination depends on the nature of diagnostic studies performed earlier and or in utero death the type of abnormality identified. Four techniques can be used: high Isolated: 3 Associated malformations: 34 resolution ultrasound scan, analysis of the collagen synthesized by LM helpful to accu- cultured chorionic villus fibroblasts, haplotype analysis of fetal DNA, 23/34 rate diagnosis mutational analysis of DNA from CVS or amniotic fluid cells. Lithuanian OI database comprises 137 case records covering CONCLUSION Prenatal detection of limb and associated malformations the period of 1980 - 2001. Clinical and genealogical analysis of OI on ultrasound is very helpful to accurate diagnosis of most MCA cases/families from Lithuania, available for examination, revealed 17 syndromes, and should be performed with more fierceness for a better familial and 23 sporadic cases of OI. As a result of molecular genetic management of patients. investigation, 13 mutations were identified in the COL1A1 gene. Nine mutations identified in the present study were registered in the Human P0437. Twin pregnancy with discordancy for Down syndrome - a Type I and Type III Collagen Mutations Database as novel mutations. case report Prenatal molecular genetic diagnosis is available for 16 families with D. F. Albu, C. Albu, E. Severin, R. Purcarea; OI from Lithuania: in three families indirect identification (RFLP-based "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. linkage analysis) of the mutant COL1 locus is possible, while in 13 A 29-year-old Caucasian female, pregnant for the second time, families COL1A1 gene mutations can be identified directly. Prenatal underwent to ultrasound examination because of her family and obstetric molecular genetic OI diagnosis enables choosing an optimal strategy history: first pregnancy ended after 32-week stillborn fetus (normal for the follow-up of pregnancy and the type of delivery. morphologically appearance but no karyotype was established) and her sister had a baby with trisomy 21. Objective: to specify the most P0436. Prenatal diagnosis of limb malformation: towards a better appropriate safety method of Down syndrome antenatal screening. management of patients? Methods: routine ultrasonography at 7 weeks of pregnancy, selective S. N. Manouvrier1, D. Thomas2, L. Devisme3, P. Vaast4, B. Herbaux5, A. Dieux- ultrasonography for the detection of fetal abnormality at 12 weeks, triple Coeslier1, O. Boute1, Y. Robert6, F. Puech4, M. Holder1; test at 15 weeks, amniocentesis - amniotic fluid samples were taken at 1Clinical genetic Unit, Lille, France, 2Pediatric Unit, Lille, France, 3Foetopathol- 16 weeks from each of the two sacs, parental and fetal chromosome ogy, Lille, France, 4Prenatal diagnostic Centre, Lille, France, 5Pediatric surgery, analyses. Results: ultrasound examinations revealed a twin dizygotic Lille, France, 6Radiology, Lille, France. pregnancy with dichorionic placentas; one fetus showed an increased Limb malformations (LM) are frequent since their prevalence is 1 in thickness of nuchal fold; biochemical maternal serum investigations 1000 neonates and near 4 in 1000 stillborn. They can be isolated revealed low AFP, low uE3 and high HCG levels; lymphocytes from or occur associated with other malformations as part of multiple both parents blood were analyzed for chromosomal abnormalities and congenital anomalies syndromes (MCA). Prenatal detection of LM showed a normal karyotype for the father (46,XY) and a chromosomal by ultrasound is difficult but helpful to an accurate diagnosis and translocation for the mother (45,XX, -14,-21,+t(14q21q); the positive prognosis. We performed a 4 years prospective study (2001-2004) on results of the tests and maternal chromosomal translocation suggestedPrenatal diagnosis 174 us to perform the amniocentesis; fetal chromosomal analysis showed P0440. Results of chromosomal study of 2634 amniotic fluids twin 1 with normal karyotype 46,XY and twin 2 with abnormal karyotype performed in Iran 46,XX,+21. After an extensive counseling the parents decided to A. Kariminejad, H. Jafarieh, I. Rajaee, M. Mirza-Zadeh, F. Azimi, N. Nabavinia, terminate the pregnancy with Down syndrome. Conclusions: first- R. Kariminejad, M. H. Kariminejad; trimester nuchal translucency scan was a strong and useful screening Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, tool for the prenatal detection of trisomy 21; family history, maternal Islamic Republic of Iran. chromosomal translocation and maternal serum biochemistry were Chromosomal study of 2634 amniotic fluid cultures revealed that 2486 also useful for selective termination of abnormal fetus. (94.4%) had no chromosomal abnormality, 41 (1.6%) had balanced translocation and 107 (4.1%) had chromosomal abnormality. The most P0438. Multidisciplinary approach to antenatally diagnosed common chromosomal abnormalities were Trisomy 21 including free gastroschisis trisomy, Robertsonian translocation and mosaic forms, autosomal K. Gardner, E. Lieber, B. Rajagowda; derivative chromosomes, Edward syndrome, marker chromosomes, Lincoln Medical Center, Bronx, NY, United States. Turner syndrome and sex chromosome mosaic abnormalities, in Congenital anomalies continue to be the leading cause of infant decreasing order of frequency(1.1%, 0.6%, 0.5%, 0.3%, 0.2% and mortality in the United States. Cause-specific mortality rates have 0.2% respectively). Sex chromosome abnormalities represented 13 been decreasing, reflecting many factors. But, the rate of serious (0.5%) of all chromosomal abnormalities. The reason for referral and birth defects continues to be high in economically disadvantaged their frequencies were high maternal age (1389 cases, 52.7%), history communities. In New York City, the borough with the highest birth of offspring with chromosomal abnormality (566 cases, 21.5%), fetal defect rates is the South Bronx, served by Lincoln Medical Center. loss (530 cases, 20.1%), abnormal alpha-feto-protein in maternal The obstetric service screens approximately 3,000 pregnant women serum (213 cases, 8.1%), parents’ reassurance (197 cases, 7.9%), annually for genetic risk with genetic counseling being provided to history of offspring with any form of psychomotor retardation (164 about 1,200 of these women. cases, 6.2%), maternal chromosomal abnormality (79 cases, 3%), Between January and July of 2002, there were 1,580 live births and abnormal findings in ultra-sonography (48 cases, 1.8%), abnormal three fetuses were detected with gastroschisis by fetal ultrasound. This findings in ultra-sonography (48 cases, 1.8%), paternal chromosomal translates to a rate of 19/10,000 - more than nine times the expected abnormality (42 cases, 1.6%), sex determination (10 cases, 0.4%) and rate of 2/10,000. Maternal age ranged from 17-20 years. Two of the confirmation of the results of chorionic villi sampling (6 cases, 0.2%). three mothers had abnormal MS-AFPs, and were Hispanic. All were 87.4% of the mothers had one indication for chromosomal study 21.1% delivered by cesarean section and no other anomalies were detected. had two, 1.4% had three and 0.1% had four indications. The rate of These patients were evaluated by a multi-disciplinary team drawn chromosomal abnormality for those who had one indication was 3.3%, from Genetics, Neonatology, Obstetrics, and Pediatric Surgery. The those with two indications were 5.9%, those with three were 15.8% etiology and unique issues associated with gastroschisis as well as the and those with four were 33.3%. Maternal chromosomal abnormalities, special concerns of each family were addressed. This approach, with abnormal findings in ultra-sonography and paternal chromosomal early detection and thorough patient education, resulted in excellent abnormalities had the greatest standardized beta coefficients in a outcomes for all cases. Aspects of this unusual gastroschisis cluster multiple regression analysis, respectively. and optimal psychosocial and clinical management will be described. P0441. The human amniotic fluid proteome P0439. Nucleated Red Blood Cells in maternal blood as a G. T. Tsangaris1, A. Kolialexi2, P. Karamessinis1, A. Antsaklis3, M. Fountoula- second step in screening for fetal aneuploidies and pregnancy kis1, A. Mavrou2; complications 1Division of Biotechnology, Center of Basic Research, Foundation of Biomedi- A. Kolialexi1, A. Antsaklis2, A. Souka2, S. Kitsiou3, G. T. Tsangaris4, E. Kanava- cal Research of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Medical Genetics, kis3, A. Mavrou3; Athens University School of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 31st Dept Obstetrics & 1Medical Genetics Athens University School of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 21st Gynecology, Athens University School of Medicine, Athens, Greece. Dept Obstetrics & Gynecology, Athens, Greece, 3Medical Genetics Athens Proteomic analysis which combines two-dimensional electrophoresis University School Of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 4Division of Biotechnology, and mass spectrometry has nowadays a wide application in biological Center of Basic Research, Foundation of Biomedical Research of the Academy and medical sciences, mainly for protein screening in tissues obtained of Athens, Athens, Greece. from healthy and diseased conditions, for the detection of drug targets Nucleated red blood cells (NRBCs) in maternal circulation during and diagnostic markers. Amniotic fluid samples (AF) are routinely used pregnancy can facilitate genetic diagnosis either by FISH or PCR for prenatal diagnosis of a wide range of fetal abnormalities. In prenatal analysis, but their rarity and technical difficulties do not as yet allow diagnosis, proteomics have been applied for the analysis of tissues their use for reliable non invasive prenatal diagnosis. It has been from abnormal fetuses in order to detect differences in the protein noted however, that an increase of their number could indicate fetal profile as compared to the normal one and to determine possible aneuploidies or pregnancy complications. diagnostic tools. A detailed two-dimensional protein database for the NRBC number in maternal blood was determined in 173 pregnancies normal human AF cells, including 380 different gene products, has in the 2nd trimester. NRBCs were positively selected by MACS with already been reported. In the present study we constructed the two- antiCD71MoAb and identified after anti UcHγ or May Grunwald- dimensional protein database of the normal human AF supernatant. Giemsa staining. Among cases with chromosomally normal fetuses Ten AF supernatant samples from women carrying normal fetuses (n=119) an average of 8 NRBCs were detected (range 1-12). Among were analysed by two dimensional gel electrophoresis. A mean of 412 16 cases with a trisomy 21 fetus the mean number was 71 (22-113) proteins per gel were analysed and protein identification was carried corresponding to a 10-fold increase. 37 NRBCs were isolated from a out by MALDI MS and MS/MS. We constructed a two-dimensional woman with a trisomy 13 fetus and 52 from a pregnancy with a 45X0 protein map comprising 152 different gene products. The majority of fetus. 64 NRBCs ( range 22-158) were identified among 26 women the identified proteins are enzymes, secreted proteins, carriers and carriers of β-thalassemia trait with normal fetuses. Among 10 women immunoglobulins. Twelve hypothetical proteins are also icluded. The with abnormal Doppler in both uterine arteries 15 NRBCs were isolated normal AF supernatant proteome map is a valuable tool to study (range 2-75). One woman in this group developed PET (6 NRBC) and aberrant protein expression and search for new proteins as possible another delivered an IUGR baby (75 NRBCs). markers for the prediction of abnormal fetuses. Determining the number of NRBCs in maternal circulation could represent an additional screening step for fetal aneuploidies as long as P0442. CVS analysis can be considered the method of choice for the anemic status of the mother is taken into account. More cases with rapid cytogenetic prenatal diagnosis. Ten years of experience. abnormal Doppler must be investigated however before we determine A. Sánchez1,2, C. Morales3, A. Serés4, A. Goncé4, A. Borrell4, A. Soler1,2; the use of this test in the prediction of pregnancy complications. 1Servei de Genètica, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2IDIBAPS (Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques Agust Pi i Sunyer), Barcelona, Spain, 3FundacióPrenatal diagnosis 175 Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 4Servei de Ginecologia i Obstetricia, Hospital Clínic, of cranial vault with bulging of eyes and the cerebral hemispheres Barcelona, Spain. were floating freely in the amniotic fluid. Exencephaly was diagnosed Chorionic villus sampling keeps its great advantage over amniocentesis with a small band tethering the hemisphere, suggesting amniotic band. due to the early results produced. Recently, quantitative fluorescent The fetal karyotype was normal (46,XX)Amniotic band sequence is a polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR) has entered in the prenatal sporadic condition and can result in a variety of abnormalities including diagnosis of classical aneuploidies (13, 18, 21, X and Y chromosomes) exencephaly. Exencephaly is in most cases a multifactorial condition. in amniotic fluid producing extremely rapid results with a detection Other possible causes include chromosome abnormalities, single gene rate of 98.6%. However, the pathological diagnosis in mid-trimester disorders, maternal diseases and maternal exposures to teratogens. gestation implying voluntary abortion raises a more difficult situation Amniotic band sequence is a rare cause of this abnormality and is both surgical and psychological. We present the chorionic villi prenatal difficult to be diagnosed prenatally. To our knowledge there is only one diagnoses over last 10 years in our laboratory. We performed 3,868 previously reported case of prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of acrania diagnosis resulting 266 abnormal karyotypes (7%). Among them, 196 secondary to amniotic band sequence and none documented by fetal were different classical aneuploidies and/or triploidies (73.7%) and MRI. Early fetal brain MRI allows early conclusive prenatal diagnosis 70 (26.3%) presented another chromosomal abnormalities including and is therefore essential for counselling. balanced chromosomal rearrangements. If only QF-PCR had been performed, 26.3% of samples with abnormal karyotype would have P0445. Chromosomal aberrations as IUGR cause been missed and 2% of trisomic cases, which arose from unexpected B. O. Joksimovic, A. Ljubic, M. Micic; parental rearrangements would not have benefited from genetic Institute for gynecology and obstetrics, Clinical Center of Serbia,, Belgrade, counselling, the unique prevention tool for cytogenetical abnormalities. Serbia and Montenegro. CVS cytogenetic studies identify a wider range of chromosomal IUGR is a pathological condition of pregnancy characterised by birth abnormalities than QF-PCR in a few days and the results can be weight below the 10th centile. A number of fetal, placental and maternal obtained still in the first trimester. Considering the high number of causes can lead to IUGR; although, in most cases no specific causes chromosomal abnormalities detected in our series, we think that the can be identified. We have analized fetal blood karyotype taken by CVS analysis is the method of choice for cytogenetic prenatal diagnosis cordocentesis from 168 fetuses with diagnosed IUGR. Chromosomal due to its informativity and rapidity. rearrangements both numerical and structural were detected in 17 cases (11,3%). In three cases inversion 9 (p11; q12) was found; two P0443. First-trimester diagnosis of lethal skeletal dysplasia: cases were triploid; trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome), trisomy 18 (Edwards transvaginal ultrasound findings sindrome) and trisomy 21 (Down sindrome) were found in two cases G. B. Viot, C. Ngo, V. Tsatsaris, M. Aubry, G. Grange, D. Cabrol, E. Pannier; each. There was one case of trisomy 7 and one case of trisomy 16; Maternité Port-Royal, Paris, France. one translocation (2; 14) (q23; q32) and a deletion 12 (p12) as well as Over 200 skeletal dysplasias (SD) have been described and around a case of mosaicism 46, XY/46, XX (87,5% / 12,5%). These findings 50% of them are lethal. Current classification of these disorders suggest that a consistent number of IUGR cases (about 11%) can be remains highly complex and molecular basis is yet unknown for many associated with genetic anomalies. Chromosomal aberrations that syndromes. Prenatal diagnosis is based on ultrasonography, commonly cause IUGR are heterogeneous, aberration of autosomes, mostly in the 2nd trimester between 19 and 23 weeks. Ultrasonography is autosomal trisomies, being the most common. highly specific to predict lethal outcome. However, it is of limited value for identification of the precise bone disorder (41 to 60% identification, P0446. Distribution of Pvu II(a) alleles at the phenylalanine according to literature). hydroxylase gene in Republic of Moldova This report describes prenatal transvaginal ultrasound findings in 4 A. P. Gavriliuc, S. A. Groppa; cases of SD during first trimester (achondrogenesis 2; thanatophoric National Centre of Reproductive health & Medical genetics, Chisinau, Republic dysplasia type 1; short rib-polydactyly syndrome type III Verma- of Moldova. Naumoff; diastrophic dysplasia). One of the 4 cases was a recurrence. Phenylketonuria is an autosomal recessive disease, which results from All 4 cases were remarkable for enlarged nuchal translucency (3.2 to a severe diminution of the liver enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase 6.5 mm) associated with bone abnormalities (femora short or deformed, (PAH). More than 10 RFLPs within the PAH locus have been observed osteopenia, macrocephaly, extremities or spine malformations). in Caucasians population. The aim of our study is to emphasize on transvaginal ultrasound On the date of mass neonatal screening we established that incidence performance during first trimester. Overall, sonographers should of PKU in Moldova is 1:9000 newborns. The RFLP-analysis of Pvu be aware that enlarged nuchal translucency, when associated with II(a) alleles was performed as described by Dworniczak (1991). The shortness of fetal long bones, may allow detection of lethal SD as soon CAG/CTG restriction site of the PAH gene was characterized in 59 as 13-14 weeks. families with classical PKU, i.e. 236 parental chromosomes. Frequencies of normal alleles (see Table) slightly differ from average P0444. Prenatal Diagnosis of Exencephaly associated with date in European populations, but not significant (χ2 =1,29; p>0,5) and amniotic band sequence at week 17 by Fetal MRI reveals more similarly to the Danish families (0,227/0,773). The level S. Blaser1, J. Drake2, D. Chitayat3, L. Velsher4, M. Rohrbach5; of observed heterozygosity in population of Moldova is 0,37, but the 1Department of Pediatrics, Neuroradiology, The Hospital for Sick Children, average date in European countries is 0,39. The distribution of mutant Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Department of Pediatrics, Neurosurgery, The Hospital PKU alleles in our study not differs significantly from those observed for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical in European (χ2=0,02; p>0,08) and Asian (χ2=0,01; p>0,8) populations. Genetics Program, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, The Pvu II(a) alleles in our populations had a significant difference Canada, 4Department of Genetics, North York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, in the distribution among normal and mutant chromosomes (χ2=7,08; Canada, 5Department of Pediatrics, Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hos- p<0,01). Frequency of informative cases by RFLP-analysis of Pvu pital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. II(a) alleles from PKU families is 29% that provide a tool for molecular Exencephaly is defined as partial or complete absence of the calvaria diagnosis of these disease and carrier status in Republic of Moldova. (acrania or cranium bifidum) associated with a protrusion of abnormally Table. Distributions of Pvu II(a) alleles at the PAH gene developed brain tissue and is believed to be an embryological precursor of anencephaly or an encephalocele. Allele Normal Mutant χ2 We report a case with exencephaly detected at 17 week gestation on fetal MRI. The mother was a 31-year-old primigravida woman of E 0,216±0,035 0,093±0,026 Asian descent who was referred at 11 weeks of gestation because of 1 7,08; an abnormal first trimester ultrasound which suggested an occipital p<0,01 encephalocele. A repeat fetal ultrasound done at 17 week confirmed E 0,784±0,035 0,907±0,026 2 occipital encephalocele, but could not further elucidate the dimension of the lesion. Prenatal MRI at 17 weeks of gestation showed total absencePrenatal diagnosis 176 P0447. Prenatal diagnosis of Crouzon Syndrome in the high-risk Centre for Reproductive and Fertility Studies, Athens, Greece, 4Mitera IVF Unit, family Mitera Maternity Hospital, Athens, Greece, 5Centre for Human Reproduction, A. Kutkowska-Kazmierczak1, E. Obersztyn1, R. Jaczynska1, P. Sucharski2, T. Genesis Hospital, Athens, Greece. Mazurczak1; In Greece β-hemoglobinopathies and cystic fibrosis (CF) have carrier- 1National Research Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Collegium rates of 10% and 5%. Prevention programmes involving prenatal Medicum of Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland. diagnosis (PND) are well established, but PGD to select unaffected Crouzon syndrome is an autosomal dominant craniofacial dysostosis. IVF embryos for transfer, is appropriate for some couples. Genotyping The main features of the syndrome are: craniostenosis, midfacial of blastomeres from cleavage-stage embryos uses PCR-based hypoplasia, proptosis, mandibular prognathism. The syndrome is methods. However, there are inherent pitfalls, including total PCR caused by mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 (FGFR2) failure, allelic drop-out and contamination, which may compromise gene. To date, over 30 mutations in FGFR2 are known. More than a accuracy of results. Additionally protocols had be applicable for quarter of them are de novo mutations. >25 β-thalassaemia and >80 CF mutations encountered in Greece. We present a familial case of Crouzon syndrome diagnosed prenatally Initially we used denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) by ultrasound examination and confirmed by molecular analysis. but now use real-time PCR with multiplexed “mini-fingerprinting” to Three-dimensional ultrasound examination performed in 27-28 Hbd in monitor contamination (Vrettou et al, 2002; Traeger-Synodinos et al, the 1st and 2nd pregnancy revealed a deformation of temporal region 2003; Vrettou et al, 2004). Over >6 years, 92 couples completed 105 of the skull and dysmorphic features (ocular proptosis; shallow orbits; PGD cycles for β-thalassemia and sickle-cell syndromes. Genotypes wide, flat nasal bridge and prognathism). These signs, together were achieved in 78% of embryos biopsied, identifying at least with data from pedigree analysis, have led to suspicion of Crouzon one unaffected embryo for transfer in all-but-one cycle. Forty-two syndrome. The clinical picture assessed after birth varied between pregnancies were initiated, with 14 spontaneously lost. Twenty-one the two patients. The analysis of DNA, isolated from amniocytes in pregnancies produced 29 unaffected babies (8 twins, 13 singletons); the 1st and 2nd pregnancy, revealed the same mutation as found in the PND in 4 on-going pregnancies confirmed 7 unaffected babies; 3 father - S267P in 7 exon of the FGFR2 gene. Presented case is one pregnancies await PND. One misdiagnosis (14th PGD performed), was of only a few prenatally diagnosed cases of Crouzon syndrome and detected by PND and terminated. For CF, 2 couples (of 7 counselled) it documents the significance of the modern techniques of prenatal completed a PGD cycle. Eleven of 14 blastomeres analysed gave visualization - three-dimensional ultrasonography and magnetic genotype result, with 7 unaffected. Transfer of all 7 embryos initiated resonance - in the diagnosis of dysmorphic syndromes. Still however, one singleton and one triplet pregnancy, all confirmed unaffected by molecular prenatal diagnostics remains the method of choice in high- PND. Our results demonstrate that PGD for these monogenic diseases risk Crouzon syndrome families. is a reliable procedure, well accepted by couples at risk for transmitting β-hemoglobinopathies and CF in Greece. P0448. Screening for large CFTR rearrangements should be considered in the diagnostic strategy for CF in fetuses with P0450. Correlation between fetal sex and maternal serum AFP bowel anomalies and free beta-hCG during second trimester normal pregnancies C. Costa1, F. Niel1, J. Jouannic2, J. Martin3, D. Feldmann4, M. Goossens1, E. B. Brajenović-Milić1, D. Tišlarić2, S. Ristić1, M. Kapović1; Girodon1; 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Rijeka, 1Service de Biochimie et Genetique Moleculaire, AP-HP et INSERM U654, Croatia, 2Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital "Sestre milosrd- CHU Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 2Service de Diagnostic Antenatal, AP-HP nice", Zagreb, Croatia. Maternité Hôpital Rothschild, Paris, France, 3Service de Biochimie et Genetique Objective: To study the effect of fetal sex on maternal serum alpha- Moleculaire, AP-HP, CHU Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 4Laboratoire de Bio- fetoprotein (MS-AFP) and free β-human chorionic gonadotropin (free chimie et Biologie Moleculaire, AP-HP, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France. β-hCG) during second trimester of pregnancy. Recommended investigations when fetal bowel anomalies are detected Methods: The study included 1776 non-smoking women with singelton by ultrasound include fetal karyotyping, screening for infectious and uncomplicated pregnancies who were participated in maternal disease and screening for frequent cystic fibrosis (CF) mutations. serum screening test for Down's syndrome. The results for both CF is found in France in about 3% of fetuses with bowel anomalies biochemical markers were converted to multiples of median (MoM) for at the 2nd trimester of pregnancy. When a frequent CF mutation is normal pregnancy at the relevant gestational age, and were adjusted identified in the fetus, the increased residual risk of CF justifies an in- for maternal weight. The mean maternal and gestational age were depth study of the second allele by sequential analysis of the 27 CFTR 30.8±5.2 and 16.1±1.4, respectively. The log MoMs of MS-AFP and 10 exons. Detection of large CFTR gene rearrangements using recently free β-hCG were compared according to fetal sex. developed semi-quantitative fluorescent multiplex PCR assays led to Results: recognize about 20% of previously unidentified CF alleles in various Table1. - Comparison of MS-AFP and free β-hCG levels between male populations of CF patients, which has increased the overall mutation and female-bearing pregnancies detection rate of diagnostic tools. MALES FEMALES We describe a case of fetal hyperechogenic bowel with intestinal (n=885) (n=891) P value* loop dilation and absence of gall bladder, a triad highly suggestive of median MS-AFP MoM 0.98±0.34 0.97±0.33 CF. The W1282X mutation was present in the fetus and the father. Sequential analysis of the 27 exons was negative. Screening for mean log MS-AFP MoM -0.032 -0.036 0.563 10 large rearrangements led to detect a new deletion removing exons median free β-hCG MoM 1.1±0.66 1.1±0.77 2-6b in the fetus and the mother and to establish the diagnosis of CF. mean log free β-hCG MoM -0.022 -0.029 0.508 This case illustrates the need to include the semi-quantitative test 10 in the diagnostic strategy for CF in fetuses with bowel anomalies. *One-way ANOVA test Moreover, the method is rapid and sensitive enough to detect micro- Conclusion: No fetal sex differences in the MS-AFP and free β-hCG deletions/insertions. When applied after testing for frequent mutations, levels were observed during common term for performing second it increases the mutation detection rate of 4.5% in our population, trimester maternal serum screening test for Down's syndrome. thus being the method of choice for 2nd line screening, especially in emergency cases. P0451. Screening for chromosomal abnormalities in the first trimester using ultrasound and maternal serum biochemistry in P0449. Six years of preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for a one-stop clinic: a one-year review prospective experience for thalassemia, sickle-cell syndromes and cystic fibrosis: a Greek the first time in the Czech Republic. experience I. A. Dhaifalah; J. R. Traeger-Synodinos1, C. Vrettou1, M. Tzetis1, A. Destouni1, S. Davis2, M. Palacky universtiy, Olomouc, Czech Republic. Mastrominas3, G. Palmer4, G. Kokkali5, K. Pandos5, E. Kanavakis1; The increase of maternal age over the last years has intensified the 1Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Embryogenesis Cen- effort to develop early non-invasive methods to screen for trisomy 21 tre for Reproductive and Fertility Studies, Athens, Greece, 32EmbryogenesisPrenatal diagnosis 177 and other chromosomal abnormalities in prenatal diagnosis. In so-called (WIAF899 and 2643). We have isolated the DNA from 60 trisomy 21 OSCAR clinic (One-Stop Clinic for Assessment of fetal Risk), maternal and 49 normal karyotypic samples. PCRs were carried out using Light- age, fetal nuchal translucency, as well as maternal levels of free ß- Cycler-DNA Master Hybridization Probes (Roche Applied Science) in human chorionic gonadotropin (ß-hCG) and pregnancy-associated LightCycler; melting curve analysis was performed following the runs. plasma protein-A (PAPP-A) are used as screening markers. We report The whole procedure including DNA isolation and PCR run takes about our experience of combining these biochemical and ultrsonographic 2 hours. We found the new trisomy 21 detection system informative markers in 686 pregnant women for the first time in the Czech with the WIAF 899. There was a significant difference in curve area Republic. The specific Down syndrome risk was calculated by using ratios (0.5234±0,2498 vs. 0,8347±0,099; p=0,001). We suppose the the Fetal Medicine Foundation software. Karyotyping was offered to quantitative PCR with combined with melting curve analysis using women with risks ≥ 1 in 250. On the bases of maternal age of the selected SNP markers could be an alternative method for detection screened population, 1,5 Down syndrome and 1,5 other chromosomal of trisomy 21. abnormalities were to be detected. 2 out of 2 Down syndrome and 1 out of 1chromosomal 18 were found resulting in a detection rate P0454. Detection of aneuploidies on 5000 prenatal samples by of 100 % with a false positive 4,8 % (33/863). The maternal age of QF-PCR the detected cases were 30, 38, 42 years. The population screened Z. Ban, B. Nagy, L. Lazar, G. Nagy, C. Papp, J. N. Orosz, Z. Papp; showed 18 % aged 35 and more. After the introduction of the first I. Dept. of Ob./Gyn., Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. trimester screening to our clinic, the number of invasive genetic testing QF-PCR analysis of amniotic fluid samples has advantages over decreased from 18 % to 5 %. In our experience first trimester screening cytogenetic analysis. It is fast, detects aneuploidies from minute of for trisomy 21 and other aneuploidies has a high sensitivity with a low samples and does not require viable cells, but it can not detect some false positive rate and can be delivered in an efficient manner in a one- chromosome disorders of clinical importance. stop multidisciplinary clinic. Our aims were to test the reliability of QF-PCR for the prenatal diagnosis of the common aneuploidies and to analyze the indications P0452. Prenatal Diagnostics in Estonia from 1990-2003. in which amnio-PCR can be applied safely in prenatal diagnosis. M. Sitska1, P. Ilisson1, K. Kuuse1, T. Ilus1, P. Tammur1, T. Reimand1, A. Ehren- We compared the QF-PCR results with those of the karyotyping of berg2; 4985 patients undergoing amniocentesis. We studied the occurrence 1Tartu University Clinics, Medical Genetics Center, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu Univer- of chromosome disorders which can not be detected by QF-PCR in sity Clinics, Women's Clinic, Tartu, Estonia. cases with different indications of amniocentesis. In Estonia (pop. 1.46 million, birth rate 13082) prenatal diagnosis of 98.3% of QF-PCR results were informative without false-negative genetic disorders was introduced into clinical practice in 1990. and false-positive results. 126 chromosomal abnormalities of 152 Invasive PND (amniocentesis, CVS, cordocentesis). Altogether were detectable by QF-PCR. QF-PCR detected all aneuploidies in 6128 procedures have been done. Abnormalities were detected in case of advanced maternal age. In case of structural abnormalities 194 (3.2 %) cases. For fetal chromosomal analyses we mostly use detected by ultrasound, the chromosome disorder was not detectable amniocentesis (97 %).%). in 23 cases. We applied a reliable, simple and cost-effective QF-PCR Alltogether 6014 amniocenteses have been done. The main indication protocol using 7 STRs. It is a reliable alternative to karyotyping in case (69%) has been maternal age. Chromosomal disorder was diagnosed of advanced maternal age, but less reliable in case of first and second in 176 (2.9%) cases. trimester ultrasound markers. Prenatal multiplex QF-PCR diagnosis of Transabdominal CVS we have used only in high-risk pregnancies in 69 trisomies 21, 18, 13 and sex chromosome anomalies is reliable, but cases. Abnormalities were detected in 14 cases (20%). the indication of the prenatal diagnosis should be considered prior its Cordocentesis has been done in high-risk pregnancies in 45 cases. application. Chromosomal abnormalties were detected in 3 cases (6,6%) . Screening of chromosomal disordres. P0455. Hartsfield holoprosencephaly-ectrodactyly-clefting Chromosome anomalies have been screened for advanced maternal syndrome: further delineation and review age since 1995. In 2003, 52 % of women >35 had fetal karyotypes. C. N. Vilain1,2, S. N. Whalen1, C. Largillière3, F. Menez4, C. Garel5, A. Verloes1, Maternal serum screening has been routinely offered since 1998 in C. Baumann1; Women's Clinic of Tartu , and only in 2002 in whole of Estonia. In 2003, 1Unité de Génétique Clinique. Hôpital Robert Debré., Paris, France, 2Service altogether 70% pregnant women under 35 in Estonia were monitored. de Génétique Médicale. ULB. Hôpital Erasme, Bruxelles, Belgium, 3Service During the last two years 57% of the trisomy 21(DS) cases were d'Imagerie Médicale. Hôpital Jean Verdier, Bondy, France, 4Laboratoire de detected prenatally . biologie du développement. Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 5Service Conclusion. Incidence of Down Syndrome(DS) in Estonia after d'Imagerie Médicale. Hôpital Robert Debré., Paris, France. prenatal screening was started has decreased: provisional incidence The association of ectrodactyly, holoprosencephaly and clefting was of DS in Estonia is 1: 660 and after prenatal screening (1995-2003) the first described in 1984 by Hartsfield et al. In 20 years, only 7 patients incidence of DS is 1: 919 in live birth. have been reported. We present a male fetus, third child of an healthy In the future first trimester screening is currently under development unrelated couple. Ultrasonography at 24 weeks of gestation revealed in Estonia . ectrodactyly and cleft lip, suggesting an EEC syndrome. Brain MRI We thank private hospital Ferthal , laboratory HTI and laboratory LTKH performed at 32 weeks of gestation showed vermis hypoplasia. After for presenting their data. termination of pregnancy, examination of the fetus showed bilaterally hypoplastic third fingers with absent nails and cleft feet with only P0453. Our experience with rapid detection of trisomy 21 using 3 toes, left labial and gingival cleft without cleft palate, and mild SNP markers. hypertelorism. Neuropathologic examination disclosed short vermis B. Nagy, Z. Bán, L. Lazar, J. N. Orosz, C. Papp, Z. Papp; and arhinencephaly. Genetic Laboratory, 1st Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis Uni- The present case appears to belong to Hartsfield syndrome (HS) versity, Budapest, Hungary. spectrum. Its hallmarks are ectrodactyly and holoprosencephaly, Chromosomal abnormalities are the most frequent genetic disorders unusual hypertelorism, cleft lip and palate, abnormal, low set ears, and observed in both live birth and miscarriages. Karyotyping is the most in some cases, hypernatremia and gonadotropin deficiency. Surviving common diagnostic method to detect chromosomal abnormalities. children have severe mental retardation. HS has only been reported in Trisomy 21 is observed in 1 of 800 live births. During the last decade single male fetuses. Arhinencephaly which is part of holoprosencephaly fluorescent-PCR and DNA fragment analysis became also to the spectrum was present in 2 of these cases, but vermian hypoplasia was tool of rapid detection of gender and most common trisomies. Pont- not reported before. Genetic basis of HS are unknown. XLR inheritance Kingdon and Lyon (Clin.Chem 49;1087-94,2003) has published first is a possibility. Mutation screening of p63 and SHH are pending. the rapid trisomy 21 detection using SNP allele quantification combined This rare observation stress the usefulness of fetal brain imaging with melting curve analysis. We have established this method in our in differential diagnosis of syndromal clefting diagnosed in utero, laboratory using primer-probe system for chromosome 21 SNPs particularly when EEC is suspected.Prenatal diagnosis 178 P0456. Study of maternal and paternal age in 2634 chromosomal Our hospital was the first place where the prenatal genetic diagnostics studies of amniotic fluid (PGD) start in Slovak republic in 80 - years. We point to close H. Jafarieh, A. Kariminejad, M. Mirzazadeh, A. Rajaee, S. Voghouie, N. Khos- cooperation of geneticist and gynaecologist in our work. In 2004 we roshahi, M. H. Kariminejad; indicate 490 patients to PGD at our department. We cytogenetically Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetic Center, Tehran, Islamic Repub- analyzed 487 samples of amniotic fluid. Successful rate of cultivation lic of Iran. was 98,1%. Gynaecologic clinics that cooperates with us performs We studied the age of the mother and father in 2634 amniotic fluid consiliar ultrasound (US) examinations so that is the reason, why the chromosomal studies. We determined the distribution of chromosomal ultrasound pathology is so frequent in our set. abnormality in the fetus according to the maternal and paternal Karyotype Number Termination of age. Age groups with a ten year interval were determined and the Indication groups normal/patho- (n) pregnancy frequency of each group determined for both parents. The frequency logic of chromosomal abnormality of the fetus was determined for each Age over 35 y. 270 256/2 2x age group. The age group with the highest rate of chromosomal abnormality in the fetus was 35-44 years for the mothers and 30-39 Bioch.screening - 97 5x years for the father. The mean (±SD) and median of mothers’ age ware chrom. aberrations 91/5 33.8±6.2 and 35 years (ranged from 15 to 48 years) and for fathers Bioch.screening - NTD 58 50/0 were 38.0±7.0 and 38 years (ranged from 20 to 76 years), respectively. Inborn develop. defect The mean maternal and paternal age (±SD) of parents of fetuses’ with 6 6)0 in anamnesis chromosomal abnormality were 32.8±6.2 and 36.8±7.2. When we excluded the parents with chromosomal abnormality the maternal and Pathologic US result 34 34/6 16x 1xSAb paternal age increased to 35 and 39. The mean age of the mother Chr.aberration in an- with a fetus with Down syndrome was (36.5), Edward syndrome(36.5) 25 25/0 amn. and Klinefelter syndrome(39.5) which were higher that the mean age of mothers with normal fetus. However the mean maternal age Reprod.failures in 5 5)0 was significantly lower in Turner syndrome (29). The mean age of anamn. mother’s with a fetus with an extra marker chromosome was similar DNA dg 10 7)0 to the normal group. The mean paternal age was higher than the Others 11 11)0 normal group in Down syndrome(39.3) and Edward syndrome(43.5), but lower in Turner(31.4), Klinefelter(35.5) and fetuses with a marker ∑ 516# 487/13 23x 1xSAb chromosome(33.4). the total amount of diagnoses is bigger then number of indicated P0457. Study of consanguinity in parents of 2600 amniotic fluid patients (combined indications to PGD) samples According to the examinations the special obstetrician management M. Mirzazadeh, A. Rajaee, H. Jafarieh, A. Kariminejad, N. Miraftabi, M. Tahsili, is indicated, that includes delivery in the hospital, where the M. H. Kariminejad; specialised neonatologic intervention is possible. In cases when the Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetic Center, Tehran, Islamic Repub- termination of pregnancy is realized, geneticist makes observation of lic of Iran. the fetus, verification o prenatally postulated karyotype is done and Consanguineous marriages are common in our country, ranging pathological examination is indicated. This management is necessary from15-25%. In spite of the prevailing policy to educate couples to avoid for determination of exact etiology and prognosis. At the end of our consanguineous marriages, many couples believe that performing an presentation we demonstrate two interesting patients. amniocentesis and chromosomal study, it can prevent the birth of a congenitally abnormal offspring. In our study we confirmed that there P0459. Contingent strategies for Down’s syndrome screening was no increased risk of chromosomal abnormality in related couples. H. Cuckle1, P. Benn2, D. Wright3; Consanguinity was studied in parents of 2600 parents of amniotic 1University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2University of Connecticut, Farm- fluid samples. 79% of the parents were not related and 21% were ington, CT, United States, 3University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom. related. The inbreeding coefficient was greater or equal to1/16 in 429 Screening sequentially across both the first and second trimester can (16.5%) and less in 128 (4.9%). Reasons for referral for amniotic fluid achieve a higher Down’s syndrome detection rate than within-trimester chromosomal study were as follows: high maternal age, history of protocols. Among sequential strategies, by far the most efficient is offspring with chromosomal abnormality, abnormal alpha-feto-protein contingent screening. This involves restricting second trimester tests in maternal serum, abnormal findings in ultra-sonography, fetal loss, to those with borderline Down’s syndrome risks based on the maternal history of offspring with psychomotor retardation, sex determination, age and first trimester marker profile. Those with very high risks are chromosomal abnormality in parents and reassurance. Cases with high offered immediate invasive prenatal diagnosis, those with very low maternal age had the highest frequency of related parents (29.6%) risks are reassured and the remainder are classified as screen-positive and those with fetal loss had the least (17.8%). The frequencies of or screen-negative from their final risk based on all first and second related parents in the other cases were similar and ranged from 19.5- trimester markers combined. Statistical modelling can be used to 22.1%. The frequencies of chromosomal abnormalities in related and predict the detection and false-positive rates of the different strategies. unrelated parents showed no statistically significant difference (3.6% For example, a contingent protocol of first trimester maternal serum vs. 4.2%, p=0.513). The frequency of Down syndrome was greater in pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A and free beta-human chorionic unrelated parents 1.4% vs. 0.2%, p=0.018). The frequency of Edward gonadotropin (hCG) together with ultrasound nuchal translucency (NT) syndrome and Turner syndrome were 0.5% and 0.2% in the unrelated followed by second trimester serum alpha-fetoprotein, free beta-hCG, parents, respectively, and 0.2% and 0.2% in the related group (p=0.268 unconjugated estriol and inhibin-A could yield a 94% detection rate for Edward, p=0.477 for Turner syndrome). for a 5% false-positive rate. This can be achieved with 70% of Down’s syndrome pregnancies detected in the first trimester and selecting only P0458. The importance of cooperation between geneticist and 15% of women for second trimester tests. Contingent screening might gynaecologist; results of prenatal genetic diagnostics in the also be considered within the first trimester for localities with limited year 2004; interesting patients. ultrasound facilities: NT would be restricted to 20-30% of women K. Melisova1, E. Cmelova1, M. Ondrejcak1, J. Karelova1, E. Juskova1, M. Dzu- selected by risk based on age and serum markers. This approach basova1, V. Janosikova1, J. Veljacikova1, A. Cunderlik2, J. Hinst2, P. Klesken2, L. could be extended with a further contingent step to select for even Turkota2; more specialist scans for nasal bone hypoplasia and ductus venosus. 1Faculty hosp.Bratislava, part Kramare, Dpt.of clinical genetics, Bratislava, Moreover, the within-trimester and sequential contingent approaches Slovakia, 2Faculty hosp.Bratislava, part Kramare, Dpt.of gynaecology and ob- can be combined. stetrics SHU, Bratislava, Slovakia.Prenatal diagnosis 179 P0460. The incidence of cystic fibrosis in second-trimester and interruption of such pregnancy is important medical and social fetuses with hyperechoic bowel problem. F. Stipoljev1, T. Hafner1, J. Sertić2, M. Kos1, I. Fabijanić3, A. Stavljenić-Ruka- Objectives: Study the ultrasonic markers 1 trimester, especially vina2; measurement nuchal translucency, in triploid embryoes. 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hospital "Sveti Duh", Zagreb, Study design: We have analysed the cases triploidy, revealled in the Croatia, 2Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis, University Hospital Zagreb, Centre geneticists of Republic Tartarstan during 2001-2003 years. Croatia, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Merkur University Hospital Zagreb, Results: There was examined on the same ultrasound technic strategy Croatia. 4980 womans from 11 to 14 weeks of pregnancy, amongst which there Objective. To determine the significance of fetal hyperechogenic was revealled 6 embryoes with triploidy, confirmed following invasive bowel as a specific ultrasonographic marker for the cystic fibrosis in procedure (the chorion villies samples or cordocentesis). All confirmed the low-risk pregnant women population. pregnancy was interrupted. Methods. Sixteen fetuses with the echogenity of bowel of surrounding Conclusions: There is strong effectiveness of nuchal translucency bone were included in our study. Genomic DNA was obtained from measurement as a screening tool for the early prenatal detection of amnyocytes and fetal blood. LightCycler-based fluorescent-labeled triploidy. oligonucleotide melting assay use the fluorimeter to screen DNA samples for the cystic fibrosis mutations. The family history was P0463. Evidence of blood chimerism in a spontaneous dizygotic negative in all cases regarding to cystic fibrosis and bowel disease. twin pregnancy discordant for trisomy 21 Results. The mean gestational age was 19.2 weeks ranging from S. Allon-Shalev1,2, E. Shalev3,4, E. Pras5, Y. Shneor1, Y. Yaron6, E. Gazit7, R. 17 to 26 weeks of gestation. The screening test for cystic fibrosis Loewenthal7; transmembrane conductance regulator mutations was performed 1Genetics Institute Ha'Emek medical center, Afula, Israel, 2Rappaport faculty of in all included cases. One fetus was found to be a heterozygote medicine, Technion- Israel institute of technology, Haifa, Israel, 3Obstetrics and carrier for ΔF508 mutation. The presence of echogenic dilated bowel gynecology department, Ha'Emek medical center, Afula, Israel, 4Rappaport fac- loops was noted in one fetus homozygous for ΔF508 mutation. The ulty of medicine, Technion-Israel institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 5Genetics incidence of cystic fibrosis was 6% in our study group The termination Institute, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel, 6Prenatal of pregnancy was performed based on the abnormal result of cystic Diagnosis Unit, Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, fibrosis mutational analysis. Israel, 7Tissue Typing Laboratory and Bone Marrow Registry, Shiba medical Conclusions. The appearance of isolated hyperechoic bowel in the center, Ramat Gan, Israel. second trimester fetuses was found to be associated with a significantly A monochorionic-diamniotic placenta (MCDAP) is rare in dizygotic higher risk for cystic fibrosis. The finding of specific ultrasonographic twinning. All reported cases have been documented in IVF pregnancies. marker indicates the necessity for further prenatal molecular testing, Consequently, this phenomenon was thought to be inherent to IVF. which is of critical importance in low-risk population. We report a spontaneous pregnancy in a 39-year-old patient with evidence of MCDAP in dizygotic twins, discordant for trisomy 21. P0461. Carrier detection and prenatal molecular diagnosis in First and second trimester sonographic scans indicated male twins Duchenne muscular dystrophy in Iranian families with MCDAP. Amniocentesis, performed due to advanced maternal M. Hasanzad1,2, A. Taromchi2, Z. Golkar2, R. Karimi-Nejad2, A. Noorian1, N. age, revealed a normal karyotype in one fetus, and trisomy 21 in the Almadani2, Y. Shafeghati1, K. Kahrizi1, M. H. Karimi-Nejad2, H. Najmabadi1,2; other. Molecular studies, performed in order to confirm the zygosity 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- and chorionicity, demonstrated that the fetuses were dizygotic. In order ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology to identity the affected twin, a detailed sonographic examination was and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. repeated, but no abnormal findings associated with Down syndrome Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal X-linked recessive were demonstrated in any of the fetuses. Therefore, umbilical cord disorder affecting 1 in 3500 male births. It is caused by mutations in the blood samples were obtained from both fetuses. Chromosomal analysis DMD gene, located on Xp21.2. Two-thirds of the patients have large revealed in both fetuses two cell-lines: a normal cell-line of 46,XY and intragenic deletions or duplications and the remaining one-third have a 47 XY +21 cell-line, in 65% and 80% of the cells, respectively. This point mutations, small deletions or insertions. Mutations in the DMD result was independently confirmed by both FISH and G-banding. gene result in a progressive muscle degeneration and early death. DNA extracted from both cord blood samples, demonstrated an The direct mutation identification in female relatives of DMD patients admixture of 2 distinct genotypes in each sample. We propose that was done using multiplex exon amplification by PCR. Also, linkage this case represents a monochorionic-dizygotic twin pregnancy with analysis using three intragenic RFLPs and two main CA repeats was blood chimerism. The most plausible mechanism underlying this performed. During the last five years, carrier detection was performed phenomenon is that of placental fusion in early pregnancy, resulting in for 118 families.Our data indicates that deletions were found in 53.1% an architectually single placenta originating from two distinct zygotes. of the patients, with 77.6% of the deletions confined to the distal hot The newly formed blood vessels created anastomoses between the spot and 22.4% of the deletions related to the proximal hot spot. dizygotic twins and allowed reciprocal blood chimerism between the When female carriers were detected, prenatal molecular diagnoses normal and the trisomic twins. were performed in DMD families. Prenatal diagnosis in 34 families, including 21 male and 13 female fetuses, revealed that 5 of the males P0464. Volume of sampled amniotic fluid and prenatal were affected and 16 were normal. Four of the female fetuses were cytogenetic diagnosis: results of retrospective study carrier and the remaining cases were normal. We also performed S. Ceylaner1, M. A. Guven2, G. Ceylaner1, I. Gunyeli3, H. Ekerbicer4; three intragenic RFLPs for 81 families. In 51 families, one or more 1Zekai Tahir Burak Women's Health and Education Hospital, Department of of RFLPs were informative (56.2%). In the remaining families, RFLPs Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Kahramanmaras Sutcuimam University, Faculty of were not informative. The most informative RFLP was BamHI and the Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kahramanmaras, Turkey, least was TaqI. Microsatellite analysis on 38 families was informative 3Zekai Tahir Burak Women's Health and Education Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, in 27 families. The most informative STR was STR49 and the least 4Kahramanmaras Sutcuimam University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of was STR45. Public Health, Kahramanmaras, Turkey. OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationship between amniotic fluid sample P0462. Early prenatal diagnosis of triploidy and nuchal volume, culture time and culture failure in prenatal diagnosis. translucency measurement in the first trimester of pregnancy MATERIALS and METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated the results A. S. Latypov, L. R. Samoilova, L. E. Teregoulova; of 225 cases of genetic amniocentesis performed between 16 and 20 Republic Hospital of Tatarstan, Kazan, Russian Federation. weeks of gestation. Cases were separated into four groups according Triploidy - one of frequent chromosome anomalies at early periods to the amount of amniotic fluid obtained: group 1, 1 to 5 mL (n=12); of pregnancy, revealing significant deflections in development of group 2, 6 to 10 mL (n=23); group 3, 11 to 15 mL (n=10); and group 4, embryo and chorion. In ditto time, there was describeded cases of 16-20 mL (n=180). births alive children with this severe pathology. Well-timed discovery RESULTS: Culture time was significantly longer in group 1 than in thePrenatal diagnosis 180 other groups. (median 19 days vs. 12.5, 10, 11 days). Even if differences P0467. Fetal RHD genotyping by maternal serum analysis: a two- in culture time between groups 2 to 4 were not significant, there was year experience a trend towards an increase in culture time with decreasing amniotic M. Olivi1, A. Benachi2, Y. Giovangrandi3, P. Ernault1, T. Gaillon1, E. Gautier1, J. fluid volumes. Moreover, risk of culture failure was also increased with M. Costa1; smaller volumes. There were no culture failures in groups 2, 3 and 4, 1American Hospital of Paris, Neuilly, France, 2Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, but two culture failures in group 1. Paris, France, 3Hôpital Notre-Dame de Bon Secours, Paris, France. CONCLUSION: When necessary, small amniotic fluid volumes may be Fetal RHD genotype determination isis useful in the management used for fetal karyotyping after information of the family. Small volumes of RhD-negative women, avoiding particularly the unnecessary of amniotic fluid increase culture time, rate of culture failure and cost administration of anti-D immunoglobulin (a blood derivative) iadapt of culture. prophylactic anti-D immunoglobulin infusion to n case of a RhD-negative fetus. The discovery of fetal DNA circulating in the serum of pregnant P0465. 2nd trimester ultrasound diagnosis of hypophosphatasia women offers new opportunities and non-invasive determination of in a low risk pregnancy due to homozygous mutation 1130C>T in fetal RHD genotype has become reality. the tissue nonspecific alkaline phosphatase gene We report a two-year experience with fetal RHD genotyping by G. Scarano1, A. Nazzaro2, E. Mornet3, A. Guadagnino4, F. Lonardo1, M. Della maternal serum routinely proposed in a prenatal diagnosis center. Monica1; After informed consent, 285 women elected to participateaccepted 1Medical Genetics Unit, General Hospital "Gaetano Rummo" Benevento, Italy, blood sampling; all were Caucasian but none were allo-immunized. 2Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, General Hospital "Gaetano Rummo" Benevento, Italy, The mean gestational age was 15.2 weeks (range:8-35). 3Centre d'Etudes de Biologie Prénatale - SESEP, Université de Versailles, Ver- In two cases the status of the fetus could not be determined (RhD- sailles, France, 4Obstetric and Gynecological Unit, General Hospital "Gaetano negative phenotype of the mother not in relation with a complete RHD Rummo" Benevento, Italy. gene deletion). Fetal RHD genotype could be determined from all other Hypophosphatasia is an inherited bone demineralizating disorder 283 maternal sera; in 179 cases the fetuses were considered as being caused bymissense mutations in tissue nonspecific alkaline RhD-positive while the others (n=104) were RhD-negative. phosphatase (TNSALP) gene. The clinical appearance varies widely These results could be controlled for 272 patients either by analysis from a lethal form (perinatal) to a milder adult-onset form (odontoh of amniotic fluids and/or by serological study of the newborn (11 lost ypophosphatasia). So far 127 TNSALP gene mutations have been to follow-up) and were in complete concordance. All sera from women associated with hypophosphatasia. A few prenatal diagnoses of carrying a RhD-positive fetus (n=170) gave positive results for RHD hypophosphatasia have been made, all in high risk pregnancies. We gene detection while all sera from women carrying a RhD-negative believe this is the first diagnosis of hypophosphatasia in a low risk fetus (n=102) gave negative results. pregnancy made, on the basis of the US scan, in a G P 28-year-old Fetal RHD genotype can be determined with a high level of accuracy 3 2 caucasian woman earlier than the 28th gestational week. The patient by analysis of fetal DNA circulating in maternal serum and could be was referred to our tertiary centre because of a diagnosis of skeletal included in prenatal care of RhD-negative women. dysplasia. The 2D scan showed a single living fetus with generalized demineralization of all bones. Ribs were shortened and fractured, P0468. Identification of a novel de novo PAX2 mutation in a mesomelic segments of the four arms appeared shorter and curved fetus presenting asymetric renal involvement and optic nerve with evidence of epiphyseal osteolysis, rizhomelic segments appeared coloboma markedly hypoplastic. The fetus appeared hydropic. Hydramnios was J. Martinovic-Bouriel1, S. Zrelli1, A. Benachi2, N. Brahimi1, C. Esculpavit1, M. present. The presumptive diagnosis was made on the detection of Gubler3, M. Vekemans1, T. Attie-Bitach1, F. Encha-Razavi1; completely demineralised calvarium which seems to be a selective US 1Unit of Embryo-Fetal Development, Department of Genetics, Hopital Necker- marker for hypophosphatasia. The fetus, delivered at 35 weeks by a Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Unit of Fetal Medicine, Hopital Necker- caesarean section, died after a few hours owing to respiratory failure. Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3INSERM U-574, Hopital Necker-Enfants Dysmorphologic, X-Ray and necroscopic examination reinforced the Malades, Paris, France. suspicion of hypophosphatasia, which was confirmed by sequencing The renal-coloboma syndrome (MIM 120330) is an autosomal the TNSALP gene, showing a 1130C>T homozygote mutation. The dominant condition including clinically optic nerve coloboma and parents were shown by sequencing to be carriers. Accurate US scan interstitial renal fibrosis, nephritis or renal failure. Eccles reported that is a useful tool for prenatal diagnosis of hypophosphatasia. some cases have vesicoureteral reflux, high-frequency hearing loss, and/or genital anomalies, while central nervous system anomalies P0466. Prenatal diagnostics of congenital malformations and have been occasionnally reported. These clinical signs are consistent hereditary diseases in Bashkortostan Republic of Russia with the expression of PAX2 in these tissues during development. S. Murzabayeva1, R. Magzhanov1, E. Khusnutdinova2; Termination of pregnancy was elected at 24 weeks for anhydramnios 1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Bio- and suspicion of renal agenesis in the healthy couple with unremarkable chemistry and Genetics of Ufa Science Center of Russian Academy of Sci- previous clinical history. At autopsy fetus presented sequence of ences, Ufa, Russian Federation. external features related to oligo-anhydramnios including Potter Prenatal diagnostics of congenital malformations and chromosomal gestalt, and multiple arthrogryposis. Internal examination revealed aberrations in Bashkortostan Republic of Russia is carried out using bilateral kidney anomalies including small multicystic left kidney (1,8g), alphafetaprotein screening, ultrasonographic diagnostics of pregnant and extremely hypoplastic right kidney (0, 34g). Histology showed women. Medical Genetic Center provides the second phase of prenatal highly dysplastic lesions in the left kidney, contrasting the normal screening and implements invasive methods including chorion biopsy, organisation in however hypoplastic right kidney. Ocular examination placentocentesis, amniocentesis, and cordocentesis. The frequency disclosed optic nerve coloboma. The association of those anomalies of congenital malformations in Bashkortostan Republic is 8.1 per highly suggestive of renal-coloboma syndrome led us to perform 1000 newborn children. The most frequent malformations are multiple molecular study of PAX2 gene. congenital malformations, Down’s syndrome, cleft palate. Ultrasonic Direct sequencing of the PAX2 coding sequence identified a single diagnostics reveals 22-34% of all congenital malformations. Karyotype G deletion of nucleotide 935 in exon 3 of the PAX2 resulting in a anomalies have been found in 871 cases from 2064 children with frameshift mutation (131fsX158). congenital malformations. In 20 cases prenatal diagnostics has been The parents underwent ultrasound kidney examination which was carried out in patients at risk with phenylketonuria, Huntington’s normal in both. disease, Duschenne-Bekker myodistrophy, cystic fibrosis, hemophilia, This is the first diagnosis of Renal-Coloboma Syndrome in a fetal case adrenogenital syndrome. Genetic registers for the seven most spread based on the kidney and ocular histology, and another example of monogenic diseases have been created and are used in medical impact of oriented fetopathological examination in genetic counselling genetic consultation. of the parents.Prenatal diagnosis 181 P0469. Evaluation of relationship between ductus venosus and a dysmorphic phenotype and the cord blood culture confirmed the umbilical artery blood flow, nuchal translucency, maternal serum prenatal diagnosis. Both parents had normal blood karyotype. Causes PAPP-A and free beta hCG in the first trimester. and mechanisms of development of de novo robertsonian translocation L. Dudarewicz, L. Jakubowski; in our case are discussed. Polish Mother Memorial Hospital - Research Instit., Lodz, Poland. Conclusions: Pathological ultrasonographic results were highly Evaluation of fetal ductus venosus waveform is important in the correlated with chromosomally abnormal fetus. In our opinion in all assessment of cardiovascular system. The objective of the present cases with abnormal ultrasonographic findings amniocentesis must study was to investigate the ductus venosus and umbilical artery be performed. Fetal karyotyping is important in counselling and in waveforms in first trimester fetuses and to correlate them with nuchal pregnancy management implications. translucency thickness and maternal serum PAPP-A and free beta hCG subunit concentrations. METHODS: Fetuses between 10 and 13- P0472. Retrospective analysis of a series of fetuses referred 14 weeks of gestation were consecutively enrolled into the study. The for FGFR3-related skeletal dysplasia in Greece: report of two analysis comprised the following parameters: ductus venosus pulsatility hypochondroplasia cases index for veins, presence of A wave, umbilical artery resistance indices C. Karadimas1, S. Sifakis2, D. Trouvas1, P. Valsamopoulos1, K. Makatsoris1, V. and maternal serum parameters. The Doppler and biochemical Velissariou1, G. Nasioulas3, M. Petersen4, E. Koumantakis2, A. I. Hatzaki1; values obtained were plotted on reference ranges. RESULTS: 194 1"Mitera" Maternity & Surgical Center, Athens, Greece, 2University of Crete fetuses were included in the study. We observed a significant inverse Medical School, Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, correlation between PAPP-A and umbilical artery resistance and a 3"Hygeia" Diagnostic & Theurapeutic Center, Athens, Greece, 4Institute of Child borderline negative relationship between the pulsatility index for veins Health, Athens, Greece. in the ductus venosus and PAPP-A concentration. CONCLUSIONS: Molecular genetic screening for detection of mutations in the FGFR3 The umbilical artery resistance is negatively correlated with maternal gene related to achondroplasia, hypochondroplasia and thanatophoric serum PAPP-A levels. dysplasia type I and II, was performed in a cohort of 65 fetuses of Greek origin with ultrasound findings consistent with skeletal dysplasia. P0470. Congenital perisylvian polymicrogyria in four akinetic Preliminary results include the detection of the most common fetuses achondroplasia mutation in one case and hypochondroplasia mutation C. Rouleau1, N. Bigi1, F. Daikha-Dahmane2, J. Martinovic3, A. Clemenson4, F. in two cases. Reports of prenatal diagnosis of hypochondroplasia Razavi-Encha3; are very rare and the phenotype/genotype correlation in these cases 1Hôpital Lapeyronie, Montpellier, France, 2Centre hospitalier de Poissy, Saint is poor. Hypochondroplasia is an autosomal dominant skeletal Germain en Laye, France, 3Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 4Hôpital Nord et dysplasia characterized by micromelia, short stature and lumbar Hôpital de Bellevue, Saint Etienne, France. lordosis, exhibiting a phenotype similar but milder compared to Congenital Perisylvian Polymicrogyria (CPP) is reported in four male achondroplasia. Molecular genetic analysis revealed that both fetuses fetuses, medically aborted for prenatal ultrasonographic diagnosis of were heterozygous for the C1620A mutation resulting in N540K akinesia. substitution in FGFR3 gene. We conclude that the combination of Methods. Complete post mortem studies were performed including ultrasound and molecular genetic approach is crucial for establishing skeletal X-rays, brain ultrasonography and extensive fetopathological an accurate diagnosis of hypochondroplasia in utero and subsequently examination. for appropriate genetic counselling and perinatal management. To our Results. All fetuses shared external features of the dyskinesia knowledge this is the first study in Greece in which the assessment of deformation sequence. Karyotypes on amniotic fluids were normal. genetic and prenatal ultrasound data led to the differential diagnosis of Microscopic examination of the brain revealed a bilateral unlayered hypochondroplasia. polymicrogyria, surrounding the sylvian fissures. At the spinal cord level, the motor neuronal population was reduced or absent, replaced P0473. Evaluation of rapid prenatal diagnosis by QF-PCR in by gliotic tissue. Extraneurological lesions, matching with prenatal 28.000 consecutive prenatal samples ultrasound findings, were consisted of scattered calcifications within V. Cirigliano1,2, G. Voglino3, A. Marongiu3, E. Ordoñez1, P. Cañadas1, P. Ga- the liver in two cases and within the myocardium in one case, with glioti4, T. Todros4, C. Fuster2, J. Egozcue2, M. Adinolfi5; a membranous interventricular septum defect. Excess of basal fibrin 1General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellater- deposits was present in the placenta in one case. ra, Spain, 3Promea, Torino, Italy, 4Obstetrics & Gynaecology University of Turin, Conclusion. CPP is a rare malformation of the cortical plate, Torino, Italy, 5University College London, London, United Kingdom. characterised by a bilateral abnormal gyral pattern in the sylvian regions The Quantitative Fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR) assay, introduced during that may be responsible for developmental and neurological problems. the last few years, allows performing prenatal diagnoses of common An X-linked inheritance, suggested by the recurrence pattern in some chromosome aneuploidies in a few hours after sampling. families, is supported by the discover of a locus at Xq28. A spinal In this study we report the evaluation of QF-PCR tests performed on a cord involvement in CPP has been evocated in children with a club large cohort of 28.000 consecutive clinical specimens analyzed in two feet deformity but a few cases are documented in association to fetal different Centers. Results were compared with conventional cytogenetic arthrogryposis. Concerning the pathogenesis, CPP has been attributed analysis. QF-PCR detected 26.768 normal fetuses. No false positives to hypoxic-ischemic insult in the middle cerebral artery territory. Similar were observed. A total of 1123 abnormal karyotypes were detected transient vascular injury may also have occurred in the spinal cord and by cytogenetic analysis, 1036 cases were correctly diagnosed by QF- in viscera during the gestation. PCR as due to trisomy 21, 18, 13, triploidies, double trisomies and aneuploidies of the XY chromosomes. Four partial trisomies were P0471. Prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 by de novo robertsonian also identified together with 27 cases of chromosome mosaicism; translocation t (21;21). aneuploidy detection was only hampered by maternal contamination or C. Gug; low level mosaicism. In 22 cases of culture failures, QF-PCR was the “Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. only evidence of fetal X, Y, 21, 18 and 13 chromosome complement. Case report: We report a fetus who had robertsonian translocation with QF-PCR proved efficient and reliable demonstrating 93% overall 47,XX+21,t(21;21) karyotype. A 36 year old gravida 1, para 0 woman sensitivity; the assay detected 95% of clinically significant chromosome was referred to our Genetic Department for genetic counselling at abnormalities with 100% specificity, PPV of 100% and NPV of 99.8%. 16 weeks gestation due to advanced maternal age. Ultrasound scan The assay reaches the purposes of relieving anxiety of most demonstrated increased nucchal thickening (0,65 cm cervical-occipital parents within 24 hours from sampling or to accelerate therapeutical fold). Genetic amniocentesis performed upon those findings revealed interventions in case of abnormal result. Main advantages of QF-PCR a 47,XX+21,t(21;21). 45/45 amniotic fluid cells were trisomic and are its very low cost, speed and automation, enabling to analyze more detected in 3 independent cultures. After detailed genetic counselling than 100 samples per day. In countries where cytogenetic analysis is parents decided to have a therapeutic abortion, which was performed hampered by its high cost and lack of technical expertise QF-PCR may at 20+2 weeks of gestation. The post abortion examination revealed be used as the only prenatal diagnostic testPrenatal diagnosis 182 P0474. The analysis of first year activity in chromosomal amniotic fluid or chronic villous sampling (CVS) smples of 46 Iranian prenatal diagnosis laboratory in Iasi, Romania SMA Families, in which at least one affected child was observed. We V. E. Gorduza1, M. Onofriescu1, V. Martiniuc2; found 19% (9/46) SMN1gene homozygous deletion in fetus samples 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2"Cuza-Voda" Obstetrical and 56% (26/46) of them was carriers for SMN1 gene. Hospital, Iasi, Romania. We analyzed the first year of activity of cytogenetic prenatal diagnosis P0477. Assessment of the effectiveness of combined ultrasound laboratory from "Cuza-Voda" Hospital Iasi, Romania. Our laboratory and biochemical screening of fetal chromosomal diseases in the first trimester of pregnancy. make the analysis by FISH method after amniocentesis. The reasons for amniocentesis were: maternal age - more 35 years (7 cases) E. S. Nekrasova, T. K. Kascheeva, T. V. Kuznetsova, V. S. Baranov; sonographic abnormalities (21 cases) a child with Down syndrome Ott’s Institute of OB/GYN, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. in pedigree (4 cases) an abnormal triple test (1 case) and stopped Assessment of risk of fetal chromosomal diseases proceeds due to pregnancy (4 cases). We discovered 9 pathological cases (24.32%): maternal age, concentration of PAPP-A, free β-hCG, value of nuchal 18 trisomy mosaicism (5 cases), 18 trisomy homogenous (1 case) translucency (NT) and presence/absence of nasal bone. It is very 21 trisomy (2 cases) and a 46,XX/46,XY formula (1 case). The important to make such analysis due to lack of such investigations correlation between reason for amniocentesis and chromosomal result in Russian literature. We investigate 1025 women at 10-13 weeks of was: maternal advanced age - 2 cases (18 trisomy); sonographic pregnancy, mean age 32 (16-47). Among all women 22% was over 35 abnormalities - 5 cases (18 trisomy- 3 cases; 21 trisomy - 2 cases); years old. We use ultrasound scanner Aloka SSD-2000 and system stopped pregnancy - 1 case (18 trisomy homogenous); and a child of prenatal screening «Life Cycle» (Pribori Oy, Moscow). In 40 of with Down syndrome in pedigree - 1 case (46,XX/46,XY formula). The 1025 fetuses there was NT 2,5 mm or more and 17 of them have results was confirmed by pathological examination (5 cases ended by chromosomal diseases. In 4 of 1025 fetuses there was absence of abortion) or by clinical examination and postnatal karyotyping (2 cases). fetal nasal bone, 3 of them have chromosomal diseases and one has In 2 cases (one is 46,XX/46,XY) the pregnancies are not finished, and severe malformations. In 109 of 1025 patients there was increased risk we will wait the birth for supplimentary examinations. The presence of fetal chromosomal pathology due to results of biochemical screening, of 6 cases with 18 trisomy against 2 cases with 21 trisomy, can be 13 of them have chromosomal pathology. Totally we diagnosed 21 out explained by presence of more severe malformations in 18 trisomy. In of 22 fetuses with chromosomal diseases (8 fetuses with trisomy 21, conclusion our study reveals the importance of chromosomal prenatal 3 fetuses with trisomy 18, 6 fetuses with Turner syndrome, one of diagnosis and the necessity of clinical and paraclinical trial at women each with trisomy 13, 47,XXY, 47,XXX and triploidy). Detection rate that make amniocentesis. of combined screening in the first trimester of pregnancy was 95,4%, sensitivity and specificity was 95,4% and 88,7%, false positive rate P0475. Prenatal karyotyping of fetuses concieved by - 11%. High false positive rate in our results can be explained due to intracytoplasmatic sperm injection (ICSI) high percent of women over 35 years in our study. Z. Szigeti, Z. Ban, C. Papp, E. Toth-Pal, Z. Papp; I. Dept. of Ob./Gyn, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Budapest, Hungary. P0478. Use of plasmid calibrators to quantify fetal and total DNA in maternal blood : application to Trisomy 21 affected The objective of our study was to determine the incidence of pregnancy. chromosomal anomalies in a cohort of ICSI pregnancies. We examined 146 singular, 22 twin and 1 triplet pregnancies conceived by ICSI. The A. Levy-Mozziconacci1,2, B. Ponseillé1, F. Muller3, J. Mancini4, C. D'ercole5, L. patients underwent genetic amniocentesis or CVS and cytogenetic Boubli5, J. Gabert1,6; analysis. We analysed the frequency of chromosome abnormalities 1Molecular Biology Laboratory, CHU Nord, 13916 Marseille, France, 2ERT and their relationship to parental age. The average maternal age was MEIDIA, IFR Jean-Roche, 13916 Marseille, France, 3Biochemistral Laboratory, 34,6±3,7 years. Amniocentesis/CVS and karyotyping was performed Hopital R. Debré, Paris, France, 4DIM, CHU Sud, 13916 Marseille, France, to evaluate the 193 fetuses from 169 ICSI pregnancies. Intrauterine 5Gynecology-Obstetric Department, CHU Nord, 13916 Marseille, France, 6ERT- karyotyping showed 5 cases of chromosome disorders out of the 146 MEIDIA, IFR Jean-Roche, Marseille, France. singular pregnancies (3.4%). Three cases of trisomy 21, one case of Background: Quantification of free DNA in maternal blood is a potential trisomy 18 and one case of X monosomy were found. Out of the 22 marker of genetic disorders and complications of pregnancy. Each twin pregnancies we found one case of trisomy 21 (4,45%), while in the laboratory generate data under specific conditions highlighting the triplet pregnancy all three fetuses had normal karyotypes. In case of need of procedure standardisation, first step to an essential multicentric maternal age over 35 years, we found 3 aneuploid fetuses of 80 patients study. We propose tools and a methodology for standardization of the (3,7%). In case of mothers younger than 35, we found 3 aneuploid quantification of free DNA in maternal blood and its application in Down fetuses of 89 patients (3,4%). We did not detect abnormal karyotype syndrome pregnancies. from the parents of the affected fetuses. The ratio of chromosomal Methods: We have based on an original approach of calibration wich abnormalities seems to be slightly increased in ICSI pregnancies. consists in a standardized procedure and manufactoring plasmid DNA We found no fetal aneuploidy in case of paternal age over 45. The calibrators containing the target gene sequence: β-globin for total DNA incidence of aneuploid fetuses was not significantly increased in cases and SRY for fetal DNA in order to have sensibilty and specificity of of mothers aged over 35. Our observation supports the need for fetal 100%. Fetal and total DNA are quantified in 22 serum and 12 plasma chromosome analysis of fetuses conceived by ICSI. issued from women with trisomy 21 fœtus whom seven where analysed in both serum and plasma. P0476. Prenatal Diagnosis of Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) in Results: Cell-free fetal DNA levels is significantly higher only in Iranian families maternal plasma (p<0.001). The median fetal DNA level in plasma is I. Salahshourifar, Y. Shafeghati, Z. Golkar, N. Almadani, S. Mirissai, H. respectively 41.5 copies/ml and 16.6 copies/ml for Down syndrome Najmabadi; group and control group. No statistical difference has been shown in Genetics Research Center, the Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences serum or in total DNA in plasma (p>0.05) by using standardized tools University, Evin, Tehran, I, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and procedure. Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common neuromuscular disorder Conclusion: We have developped robust calibrators to standardize the step of RQ-PCR analysis and to perform intra and interlaboratory with progressive paralysis caused by the loss of α - motor neuron in comparison of fetal and total DNA detection or quantification from the spinal cord. The SMA candidate interval genes are located on the maternal samples. The stability of these calibrators will permit to long arm of chromosome 5 (5q13) on two highly homologous copies develop standardization and quality control programs in a multicentric (telomeric and centeromeric) within the SMA region. Homozygous study and larger applications. disruption of SMN1 (survival motor neuron) is the major cause of SMA, while SMA severity is mainly determined by another genes including; NAIP (neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein), P44 and copy number of SMN2. SMN1 is the SMA determining gene disrupted in more than 90% of SMA cases. In this study, SMN1gene was analyzed inPrenatal diagnosis 183 P0479. Evaluation of a new automatic procedure to extract and equipment (Pribori Oy, Moscow) and risk calculation was made by amplify fetal DNA from maternal serum Life Cycle software. Samples of 1089 patients was investigated. T. Gaillon, P. Ernault, M. Olivi, J. M. Costa; Median level of PAPP-A in Saint-Petersburg was about 35% higher American Hospital of Paris, Neuilly, France. compared recommended one, while level of free β-hCG didn’t differ Real-time PCR has become the most widely used amplification system significantly. 380 women (35%) were of 35 years old and elder. High for fetal DNA analysis from maternal serum. However, sensitivity may risk of chromosomal diseases was revealed in 29% of this group (cut vary from 31 to 97% depending on the laboratory thus requiring reliable off 1/250) and 85 % (7 of 8) cases of Down syndrom were detected. protocols for PCR but also for DNA extraction.Four DNA extraction There were 4.7% of 709 patients at risk level less than 35. One fetus protocols were evaluated for the detection of fetal RHD gene in 30 with translocation variant of DS was detected in young woman (PAPP- sera obtained from RhD-negative pregnant women carrying a RhD- A = 0.76 MoM, free β-HCG = 1.45 MoM, NT = 4.77 MoM). In 3 fetuses positive fetus; two silica-based column starting with 400µl of sample, with Edward’s syndrome PAPP-A = 0.22 MoM, free β-HCG = 0.2 MoM. and a magnetic silica-based automatic system starting either with 400 We also detected 1 fetus with triploidy, 1 - with tr16, 2 - 47,XXY and or 1000µl of sample. Quantitative analysis, expressed as crossing- 6 - 45,X. points (Cp), reveals a slightly but significant increase of sensitivity with Combined screening in the first trimester of pregnancy increases the the automated protocol starting with 1000µl of serum when compared efficacy of prenatal detection of fetal chromosomal diseases. with the three others that gave similar results (33.10 vs 34.08 vs 34.12 vs 34.39).A prospective evaluation of this automatic “large volume” P0482. PAPP-A and proMBP proteins in contingent prenatal procedure was started; 87 sera were tested either for fetal SRY (n=62) biochemical screening and detection of different types of coronary artery diseases or RHD (n=25) gene. Results showed a perfect concordance with the conventional protocol usually performed in our laboratory. Neither M. Macek Sr.1, P. Hájek2, H. Cuckle3, B. Houbová1, M. Simandlová4, M. Havlov- false negative nor false positive results were observed. Furthermore, icová4, R. Vlk5, I. Špálová5, J. Diblík1, Š. Vilímová1, P. Potužníková1; quantitative analysis of the positive sera (n=45) confirmed the slight 1Center of Reproductive Genetics, Institute of Biology and Medical Genet- significant increase of sensitivity with the fully automated procedure ics, Charles University - 2nd School of Medicine, University Hospital Motol, with a mean Cp values of 36.40 (vs 37.74 for the conventional one) Praha, Czech Republic, 2Department of Cardiology, University Hospital Motol, resulting from the possibility to treat a larger volume of sample. The Praha, Czech Republic, 3Reproductive Epidemiology Unit, Leeds University, herein described automatic procedure provides therefore a highly Leeds, United Kingdom, 4Clinical Genetics Unit, Institute of Biology and Medi- efficient and safe procedure for fetal DNA in maternal serum. cal Genetics, Charles University - 2nd School of Medicine, University Hospital Motol, Praha, Czech Republic, 5Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Charles P0480. Mosaic 21-trisomy with varying ratio observed by University - 2nd School of Medicine, University Hospital Motol, Praha, Czech prenatal screening Republic. K. Hadzsiev1, M. Czakó2, B. Veszprémi3, G. Kosztolányi1; PAPP-A/proMBP complex and free-ßhCG were evaluated by degree 1Medical Genetics and Child Development, University Pécs, Medical Faculty, of deviation from 1.6-1.9 MoM. Kryptor system was used for first Pécs, Hungary, 2Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Clinical Genetics Research and second trimester screening (AFP and ßhCG), Elipse/LifeCycle Group,Medical Genetics and Child Development, University Pécs, Medical software for aneuploidy risk evaluation and software for first and Faculty, Pécs, Hungary, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University second trimester integrated risk determination. Study of 1825 samples Pécs, Medical Faculty, Pécs, Hungary. indicates, that category I. (normal values) and II. (border-line values) of Twenty-one years old gravida was referred for prenatal examination PAPP-A/proMBP are without risk of aneuploidies. Category II. indicate because of cystic fibrosis of her first child (ΔF508 homozygote) on increased risk of abnormal prenatal development only. Category III. 14th week of pregnancy. DNA examination of chorion biopsy showed (abnormal one biomarker) suggests increased risk of autosomal that the fetus is a normal homozygote. Screening for chromosomal aneuploidy (p=0.05). Category IV. (both analyte abnormal levels) and aneuploidy by interphase FISH gave unexpected result: there were V. (increased ßhCG, decreased PAPP-A, increased NT) point out the three of 21 specific signals in five of the 50 cells (10 %) examined. highest risk of autosomal/X-chromosome aneuploidies (p=0.001) with In the same sample, 85% of examined metaphase (17/20) 47,XX+21 six-times increased risk of preeclampsia, abortions and prematurity. karyotype were observed. Because of the discrepancy between the The contingent screening is recommended in categories II.-III., since interphasic and metaphasic cells examined, repeated sampling was for categories IV. and V. invasive prenatal diagnosis is indicated, if indicated. In the sample from the amniocentesis achieved on the 16th amniocentesis/placental biopsy are not contraindicated due to high of gestation there were three 21-specific signals in 50% of cells (30/60) abortion risk. No single case of trisomy 21 or other severe aneuploidy examined by interphase FISH, while all of the 11 metaphases (100%) was missed. The amnio-PCR is performed in high risk/late referred analyzed trisomy 21 were noticed. Although we proposed fetal blood pregnancies or to decrease mother’s anxiety. PAPP-A/proMBP sampling to shed more light on the ratio of mosaicism, the parents screening was applied in adult patients with different types of coronary following detailed information regarding the results of the previous artery diseases (CAD). No increased levels were found in stable CAD. examination and the presumable prognosis, requested termination Highly increased levels were disclosed in unstable CAD with highest of pregnancy. In fetal blood we could complete only interphasic increase in NSTEMI and STEMI myocardial infarctions with area examination, which showed three 21-specific signals in 130 of the 200 0.92 under the ROC curve. PAPP-A/proMBP complex is earlier and cells (65%) examined. In fetal fibroblast cells, we found trisomy 21 in more sensitive marker of acute CAD than C-reactive protein, creatine 70% (105/150) and 100% (70 mitosis) examined in interphase and kinase-MB isozyme and cardiac troponin I. metaphase cells, respectively. Supported by grants: Copernicus-2 ICA2-CT-2000-10012 and IGA In the course of aneuploidy screening in more than 600 cases, we did MZ-CR NR/7962-3. not find such a great difference between interphasic and metaphasic cells. We found also interesting the different proportion of mosaicism in P0483. Facilitated polar body biopsy by laser-assisted microdissection of the zona pellucida samples gained from different dates of the pregnancy. R. Burgemeister1, A. Clement-Sengewald2, T. Buchholz2; P0481. Results of first trimester Down syndrome screening in 1PALM Microlaser Technologies, Bernried, Germany, 2Center for Polar Body Saint-Petersburg. Diagnosis, Planegg, Germany. T. K. Kascheeva, E. S. Nekrasova, T. V. Kuznetzova, V. S. Baranov; Polar body extraction allows to reveal information about the genetic Ott's Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St.Petersburg, Russian status of the oocyte. This prefertilization diagnosis, which in contrast to Federation. preimplantation diagnosis is allowed in Germany, provides an option Since 2003 first trimester screening included measurements of nuchal for couples at high genetic risk. In women of advanced maternal age, translucency (NT), nasal bone, serum markers (PAPP-A and free beta- polar body extraction is an effective method to eliminate the age- HCG) and maternal age. We used ultrasound scanner Aloka SSD- related increased risk of aneuploidies. Genetically altered oocytes may 2000. NT measurements was made according to FMF guidelines. be excluded from in vitro fertilization. Biochemical screening in first trimester was performed with Wallac Polar body extraction is a safe and accurate technique. However, itPrenatal diagnosis 184 may be critical for the oocyte as the zona pellucida has to be opened P0486. Prenatal diagnosis of a complete parental isodisomy in a to get access to the polar bodies. The most convenient and gentle live fetus coexisting with partial hydatiform mole method is laser-assisted microdissection. An UV-A laser of 337nm D. Hmida1, H. Elghezal2, M. Gribaa1, A. Chaieb3, T. Elyacoubi4, A. Saad1; ist used to open the zona pellucida in a completey non-contact way. 1Department of Cytogenetic, Biology of Reproduction and Molecular Genetic, Subsequently a blunt-ending pipette instead of a sharp one can be Farhat Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Cytogenetic, Biology of used for polar body extraction. This procedure may decrease the Reproduction and Molecular Genetic, Farhat HachedHospital, Sousse, Tunisia, degeneration rate of oocytes. 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,, Farhat Hached Hospital, SOUSSE, Tunisia, 4Department of Pathology, Farhat Hached Hospital , Sousse, Tunisia. P0484. Telomeres lenght differentiation between newborns and their mothers Objective : The aim of this study is to highlight the outcome of partial M. A. Hulten, S. Dhanjal, K. M. Getliffe, S. D. Keay, M. K. Tankimanova; hydatiform mole (PHM) with a complete isodisomic live fetus. University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom. Subject and methods: A 27 years-old Tunisian women; expecting her Telomeres are repeated DNA sequences that cap and protect ends third child; was investigated by ultrasound, pathological, cytogenetic of chromosomes. Telomere length is known to constitute a largely and molecular techniques. heritable trait, maintained during fetal development by the enzyme Results: The ultrasound scan performed at the first trimester identified telomerase but shortening with each division in somatic cells after birth. a hydatidiform mole with admixture of some normal-appearing villi with Much attention has focused on the implication of telomere depletion typical molar villi with a hypotrophic live fetus. The fetus karyotype with biological age, especially the association of reduced telomere was cytogenetically normal (46,XX) according to the examination of length for the development of cardiovascular disease. It is against this amniotic fluid cells, but the chromosomes of each pair were extremely background that we analyzed 38 pairs of matched blood samples from identical. But molecular analysis of Amniotic fluid cells DNA found newborns and their mothers for genome wide telomere length, using homozygous genetic markers. real time quantitative PCR. Newborn babies had significantly longer Discussion: Homozygous genetic markers are paternal markers. So telomeres in comparison to their mothers (mean 9,031 ± 1,511 bp the fetus is isodisomic for the 23 pairs of chromosomes, transmitted by vs. 5,960 ± 1,044 bp, P<0.001). Surprisingly, however, there was no his father in duplicate. correlation between maternal and newborn telomere length (r = 0.172, Conclusion: Prenatal testing for fetal karyotype and genetic markers P=0.301), and the range of variation between mothers was small in is therefore essential in deciding continuation and prognosis of the comparison to that of their babies (range 4,087 - 8,042 bp vs. 6,439 pregnancy. For this reason the termination of the pregnancy was - 12,243 bp). Consistent with previous reports we could not detect any decided. statistically significant correlation with telomere length in this limited maternal age range (20-39 years with majority aged 27-32). Neither P0487. Carrier detection and prenatal testing in families with X- did the substantial inter-individual variation between newborns relate linked spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy to sex or birth weight in this cohort of normal full-term babies. This C. N. Yapijakis1, E. Kapaki1, M. Syrrou2, D. Vassilopoulos1; new information is of special importance as telomere length may 1University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, 2University of Ioannina constitute a biological marker for predicting individual risk of developing Medical School, Ioannina, Greece. cardiovascular disease later in life - and telomere differentiation may Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is a rare late-onset motor aid identification of fetal cells/DNA in maternal circulation. neuron disorder characterized by slowly progressive weakness of the proximal muscles of limbs, bulbar symptoms, muscular atrophy, P0485. The preimplantation genetic diagnosis in couples with and endocrinological abnormalities (oligospermia, impotence, balanced chromosomal rearrangements gynaecomastia and diabetes mellitus). The responsible mutation is a I. Grochova1,2, K. Veselá1,2, P. Travnik1,2, J. Rubes2, P. Musilova2, E. Oracova1,2; (CAG)n repeat expansion in the first exon of the androgen receptor 1REPROMEDA, Brno, Czech Republic, 2GENPROGRESS, Brno, Czech Re- gene (Xq12). Here we report the study of this trinucleotide repeat in 55 public. members of 16 Greek families with SBMA by electrophoretic analysis The preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is an established of PCR products containing the polymorphic (CAG)n. The normal technique for patients at risk of transmitting a serious genetic disorder range, found in 200 healthy males of Greek origin, was 16-29 repeats to offspring. One of possible indications for the PGD is when couples (median 21 repeats). An abnormal size of 40-42 repeats was detected carry balanced chromosomal rearrangements. in 17 males confirming the clinical diagnosis of SBMA, as well as in 11 This is a retrospective review of data from a single center. We initiated female carriers in heterozygosity with a normal allele. Evaluation of the a process of PGD for 19 cycles after the identification of a parental (CAG)n repeat in 36 parent-child pairs showed that 35 transmissions balanced translocation. We performed PGD for translocation and were stable, while in one case there was a contraction of one repeat aneuploidy screening using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). (from 41 to 40). In four families, twelve prenatal tests were performed Specific FISH protocols were developed for every couple. using embryonic DNA derived from CVS at 11th-12th weeks of One or two blastomeres were aspirated on day 3 after in vitro fertilisation pregnancy. Four prenatal tests resulted in positive finding of mutations (IVF) and analyzed with FISH technique. We used probes for in male embryos, and the respective pregnancies were terminated, aneuploidy screening and individual specific probes for chromosomal after genetic counseling. The remaining pregnancies resulted in the translocations. A total of 249 embryos were obtained, 228 embryos birth of six healthy female carriers, one healthy female and one healthy were suitable for FISH analysis. 36 embryos (15%) were diagnosed male. The availability of molecular diagnostic testing for SBMA is very as normal or balanced. 175 embryos (76, 75%) were aneuploid or useful for clinical purposes (as in differential diagnosis from other unbalanced for the translocation. 25 (10, 96%) unaffected embryos motor neuron syndromes) and genetic purposes (carrier detection and were transferred in 15 (78, 9%) cycles, achieving 3 pregnancies prenatal testing). (implantation rate: 20%). All antenatal amniocentesis confirmed the initial diagnosis. Post-natal P0488. Cordocentesis-diagnosed Congenital disorder of physical examination showed no evidence of major abnormalities glycosylation type 1a (CDG1a) in a fetus with hydrops PGD is an alternative method allowing selected couples, with M. J. Edwards1, S. O’Callaghan2, P. Woodford3, G. Spillsbury2, M. Fietz4, B. chromosomal abnormalities, to have healthy children. PGD may Fong4, J. Fletcher4, F. McKenzie1; increase the implantation rate in infertile couples seeking IVF 1Hunter Genetics, Hunter New England Health Service and University of New- assistance. It has the advantage of avoiding repeated spontaneous castle, Waratah, Australia, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, John abortions or therapeutic termination of pregnancies resulting from Hunter Hospital, Hunter New England Health Service, Waratah, Australia, abnormal embryos. 3Hunter Area Pathology Service and Faculty of Health, University of Newcastle, Waratah, Australia, 4Department of Genetic Medicine, Women's and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia. This fetus presented with hydrops fetalis and marked ascites on routine fetal morphology screening ultrasound scan at 19 weeks gestationCancer genetics 185 . As there was some hyperechoic change in bowel wall suggesting by PCR analysis using fluorescent primers followed by analysis on an cystic fibrosis, fetal blood was collected in EDTA by cordocentesis. ABI 310 automated sequencer. The results were reported within 48hrs, Transferrin isoelectric focussing of this plasma sample showed a along with the results of the biochemical screen. distinctly abnormal pattern, consistent with congenital disorder of RESULTS The detection method readily and unambiguously identified glycosylation type 1a. The fetus died in utero at 20 weeks gestation. the ΔF508 mutation in 17 out of the 923 samples analyzed and the At autopsy, there was severe cutaneous oedema and inverted nipples. 35delG mutation in 2 out of 61 analyzed. This corresponds to a carrier Histopathological examination showed cerebellar hypoplasia. Other frequency of approximately of 1/55 (1.8%) for ΔF508. The carrier causes of hydrops were excluded by maternal serum testing for frequency for 35delG is about 1/30 (3.3%), although the sample size is blood group isoimmunisation, TORCH or parvovirus infection and yet too small for accurate determination. lupus autoantibodies. The delta F 508 cystic fibrosis mutation was not CONCLUSIONS The screening for the ΔF508 CFTR mutation and the detected. Phosphomannomutase enzyme activity in cultured amniotic identification of women carriers during the 1st trimester of pregnancy fibroblasts was 0.89 nmol/min/mg of protein, intrabatch controls 7.1 and has obvious advantages and benefits over other approaches designed 7.8, affected range (skin fibroblasts) <2.1. Phosphomannoisomerase to prenatally detect this mutation in the fetus. The early detection of enzyme activity was normal, confirming the diagnosis of CGD 1a. these 2 major mutations may be considered as a wide-scale prenatal Mutation analysis is underway. We believe this is the first reported screening strategy, affording the timely management of families at risk case of abnormal fetal transferrin isoforms, although false negative for CF and/or NSRD. results in this condition are well recognised. Fetal blood testing has enabled the diagnosis of a congenital disorder of glycosylation type P0491. Comparison of developmental characteristics of 1a in this fetus. implanted and non-implanted advanced blastocysts P0489. Fetal abnormalities in USG as an idication to prenatal T. della Ragione1, G. Verheyen2, L. van Landhuyt2, V. Papanicolaou2, P. Dev- diagnosis (PD) roey2, A. van Steirteghem2; A. Ilnicka1, B. Pawlowska1, J. Bogdanowicz1, A. Tomankiewicz-Zawadzka1, J. 1Centre for Reproductive Medicine, Academic Hospital, Dutch-speaking Brus- Czyżewska1, W. Szirkowiec1, E. Zdzienicka2, J. Kubalska2, S. Janabi2, T. Rosz- sels Free University, Brussels, Belgium, 2, Academic Hospital, Dutch-speaking kowski3, J. Garwoliński3, J. Szymkiewicz-Dangel4, J. Zaremba2; Brussels Free University, Brussels, Belgium. 1Intitute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Psychiatry Background: In single embryo transfers (SET) embryo selection is of and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, crucial importance. The present retrospective study aimed to define Postgraduate Centre of Medical Education, Warsaw, Poland, 4II Department of which embryo parameters might be related to the implantation potential Gynecology and Obstetrics, Medical Academy, Warsaw, Poland. of selected advanced blastocysts. 4095 prenatal cytogenetic tests were performed in the period 1999 Materials and Methods: In cycles with SET, developmental - 2003. characteristics of implanted (group A) and non-implanted (group B) In 575 cases (14%) fetal abnormalities detected by USG were the advanced blastocysts were compared. The following developmental indication to PD. In 115 out of these cases (20%) chromosomal parameters were compared between the two groups: number of aberrations were found. This constitutes 46% of abnormal karyotypes blastomeres on day 2 and on day 3, fragmentation rate on day 3, detected in the overall group. Out of 115 aberrations - 102 were compaction on day 4 and cleavage pattern. Statistical analysis was numerical ones: tris 18 - 28, tris 21 - 27, tris 13 - 7, Turner s. - 26, performed by χ2 square test and t test. triploidy - 8, unbalanced structural rearrangments were found in 13 Results: From the different parameters analysed, only the fragmentation cases. rate on day 3 was different between groups A and B. Blastocysts with Among USG abnormal findings most frequent were congenital heart >10-50% fragments on day 3 showed a significantly lower implantation disease (CHD) - 139 cases, hydrocephalus - 102 cases, increased rate (29.7%) than those with ≤10% fragments (49.4% P=0.03). nuchal translucency (NT) - 83 cases. Discussion: Fragmentation rate on day 3 was related to the In 68 isolated CHD cases - chromosomal aberrations were found in implantation potential of advanced blastocysts and should be better 15%. In 71 cases with multiple fetal abnormalities, including CHD, taken into account in the selection of the best blastocyst for transfer. chromosome aberrations were found in 50%. No aberrations were Since the choice of the blastocyst for transfer was performed on the found in 55 cases of isolated fetal hydrocephaly. However when basis of already established criteria, it may be assumed that the hydrocephaly was accompanied by other abnormalities cytogenetic selection on day 5 was carried out properly. aberrations constituted 27%. In 56 cases with increased NT as an only marker of aneuploidy - chromosomal aberrations were found in 13%. However karyotype abnormalities were documented in 19 of 27 cases (71%) of increased P0492. Loss of expression of MMR proteins; hMLH1, hMSH2 NT with other fetal abnormalities. and hPMS2, in secondary and therapy-related AML and MDS We observe a steady increase of USG indications to PD: in1999 - patients. 10%, in 2003 - 18%. M. H. Sheikhha1,2, K. Tobal2, J. A. Liu Yin2; 1Genetics Dept. IVF Center, Shahid Sadughi Medical University, Yazd, Islamic P0490. Screening for ΔF508 CFTR and 35delG Connexin26 Republic of Iran, 2University Department of Haematology, Manchester Royal mutations from maternal dry-blood samples in the 1st trimester Infirmary, Manchester, United Kingdom. of pregnancy DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes are predominantly inherited DNA- C. Konialis, B. Hegnefelt, S. Karapanou, C. G. Pangalos; repair genes that, when mutated, confer susceptibility to cancer. Our Dept. of Molecular Genetics, Diagnostic Genetic Center, Athens, Greece. goals were to study the protein expression of these genes in AML and AIMS Cystic fibrosis has a carrier frequency of about 1/28 to 1/40 MDS patients. Twenty-eight AML and 7 MDS patients were included among the white Caucasian population and an incidence of about in this study. Expression of three MMR proteins (hMLH1, hMSH2, 1 in 3000 live births. One major mutation, ΔF508, accounts for the hPMS2), plus the methylation status of promoter region of hMLH1 and majority of the observed CF mutations in the Caucasian population. hMSH2 genes, were investigated in these 35 patients. In addition, a Pre-lingual, non-syndromic autosomal recessive deafness (NSRD) is panel of 12 microsatellite markers was selected to look for genetic also a relatively common hereditary disorder, affecting approximately instability associated with a mutator phenotype (RER+) in these 1 in 2500 newborns. One specific mutation in the CJB2 (Cx26) gene, patients. Lack of expression of at least one protein (MMR-) was seen termed 35delG, has been shown to be present in more than 70% of in 11 of 28 AML cases (39.3%), and in 2 of 7 MDS cases (28.6%). This affected individuals and with a carrier frequency of about 1 in 40. We rate was 60% (3/5) in secondary, 50% (3/6) in therapy-related and present our data and evaluation of a routine screening program for 29.4% (5/17) in de novo AML patients. Both t-MDS patients were MMR- these mutations in pregnant women in the 1st trimester of pregnancy, , while all 5 de novo MDS patients were MMR+. The rate of MMR- was utilizing maternal dry-blood samples. 61.5% in RER+ AML patients (8 out of 13) while this rate was 20% in MATERIALS & METHODS Maternal DNA was rapidly isolated from RER- AML patients (3 out of 15). All the patients with hypermethylation dry-blood spots and the ΔF508and 35delG mutations were identified of either hMLH1 or hMSH2 genes showed lack of expression of theCancer genetics 186 same protein. Our results suggest that abnormalities of DNA mismatch P0495. PIK3CA mutations in familial colorectal and endometrial repair due to lack of MMR protein expression is higher in secondary carcinomas and therapy-related AML and MDS pateints than this rate in de novo M. Ollikainen1, A. Lindroos1, N. Nupponen2, R. Butzow2, P. Peltomäki1; patients. Our data also showed a strong correlation between RER+ 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Helsinki University Central Hospital, phenotype and lack of expression of MMR proteins. Helsinki, Finland. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway is P0493. Molecular cytogenetics of ovarian granulosa cell tumors activated in multiple cancers, which is associated with malignant by comparative genomic hybridization cellular behavior. Activation may result from activating mutations in Y. Lin1, H. Eng2, Y. Jan3, H. Lee4, W. Ho3, C. Tzeng1; PI3-kinase genes or inactivating mutations in the tumor suppressor 1Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Chang Gung Uni- gene PTEN. PI3K/AKT and RAS pathways have been proposed to versity and Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan Republic of China, 3Taichung converge since binding of PI3K to activated RAS may activate the Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China, 4Tri-Service catalytic domain of the PI3-kinase (PIK3CA). While PIK3CA mutations General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China. occur with variable frequencies in sporadic tumors, their role among Objective. Patients with stage I granulosa cell tumors (GCTs) may familial tumors is unknown. occasionally develop metastasis, which is hard to predict using We explored the oncogenic role of PIK3CA mutations in colorectal pathologic criteria. It is interesting to elucidate whether certain (CRC) and endometrial carcinomas (EC) from patients with hereditary chromosomal imbalances (CIs), detected by comparative genomic nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) with germline mutations in hybridization (CGH), could be useful prognostic markers. Methods. DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes, or patients with familial CRC or CGH was used to identify CI(s) in 37 adult-type GCTs from 36 women. EC without germline mutations in known genes. We focused on exons Nonrandom CIs were compared with clinical and pathological features 1 (p85 binding), 9 (helical domain), and 20 (kinase), representing to evaluate their significance as a prognostic marker. Results. Twenty- known mutational hotspots in CRC. two (61%) of the 36 primary tumors had CIs. One woman’s tumor Somatic PIK3CA mutations were found as detailed in Table 1. PIK3CA showed identical CIs to another tumor that occurred in contralateral mutations, and immunohistochemically detected PTEN inactivation ovary 2 years later, supporting a metastatic nature. The nonrandom CIs were mutually exclusive. Likewise, mutations in PIK3CA and KRAS included losses of 22q (31%), 1p33-p36 (6%), 16p13.1 (6%), and 16q were mutually exclusive. (6%) and gains of 14 (25%), 12 (14%), and 7p15-p21 (6%). No tumor exhibited high-level amplification. The associations between each CI Table 1. Proportion of tumors with PIK3CA mutations according to and pathological features, including the growth pattern, tumor size, mismatch repair gene germline mutation status and mitotic activity, were not evident. The only CI repeatedly detected in tumors with metastasis was monosomy 22, which presented in 2 MMR gene germline mutation of the 4 cases with metastasis but also in 2 of the 5 cases without recurrence for more than 5 years. Conclusions. Monosomy 22 was present absent total the most common CI in GCTs, which often coexisted with trisomy 14 (in 55% cases). Deletion of 22q seems to be, albeit not very specific, associated with the risk of early metastases of stage I disease. The CRC 4/46 (8.7%) 2/22 (9.1%) 6/68 (8.8%) role of loss-of-function mutation(s) of certain putative tumor suppressor gene(s) on 22q is worthy of further investigations. EC 10/61 (16.4%) 2/30 (6.7%) 12/91 (13.2%) P0494. Analysis of Ile105Val Polymorphism of GST-P1 gene in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma from Iran - case control total 14/107 (13.1%) 4/52 (7.7%) study F. Biramijamal1, M. Sanati1, N. Saligheh Araghi2, S. Tanhaei3, G. Iravanloo4, A. PIK3CA mutations were predominantly associated with EC with Allameh5, R. Sharifi5, K. Banihashemi1; MMR gene germline mutations. Mutually exclusive involvement of 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic PIK3CA vs. PTEN or KRAS suggests that alterations of each gene are Republic of Iran, 2Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shahid sufficient to activate the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in colorectal and Beheshty University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Cancer Institute, Tehran, endometrial carcinogenesis. Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P0496. Relative fluorescent quantitation using capillary To investigate the genetic association between functional polymorphism electrophoresis for assaying Loss of Heterozygosity in tumor (Ile105Val) in Glutathione-S-transferase (GST-P1) gene and incidence samples of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), the GST-P1 S. Karudapuram1, L. Joe1, A. Wheaton1, T. McElroy1, Y. Lou1, A. Rico2, C. genotypes were determined by direct DNA sequencing and RFLP Stemmer3, A. Schneider3, M. Gaub3, M. Legrain3, P. Oudet3; analysis in 25 patients with ESCC (Fars ethnic group), 13 patients had 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems, 25 p53 gene mutations in their tumors, and 83 unrelated healthy controls Avenue de la Baltique B.P.96, 91943, Courtaboeuf Cedex,, France, 3Service de (42 Turks and 41 Fars ethnic groups). The incidence of esophageal Biochemie et de Bilogie Moleculaire, Hopital Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France. cancer among Turks and Fars ethnic populations are recorded to A variety of capillary electrophoresis based fragment analysis be moderately high and low respectively. The patients carrying the applications require the measurement of peak height comparisons G allele of GST-P1 (AG +GG) had more frequently CpG transition across samples as a relative quantitation method. Some of these mutation in the p53 gene in their tumor compared with patients with applications include screening for Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH), the AA genotype (p value = 0.00029). But the frequency of A allele was Microsatellite Instability (MSI) and detection of chromosomal deletions demonstrated more among ESCC patients. Polymorphisms in GST-P1 and duplications. The success of these assays depends on having occurred significantly different in Fars and Turks ethnic groups and the optimized chemistries, a robust and reliable electrophoresis platform G allele of GST-P1 (AG + GG) had more frequent among Turks ethnic as well as flexible, accurate analysis software. In this study we use group similar to Fars patient group with CpG transition mutation for a LOH assay to demonstrate relative quantitation using capillary p53 gene. Our finding suggested that GST-P1 genotype may play an electrophoresis. Microsatellite markers were run on the Applied important role in developing the CpG transition mutation for p53 gene Biosystems 3130xl Genetic Analyzer and peak heights were compared and the developing esophageal tumor among Fars ESCC patients. across paired samples from tumor and healthy tissues. Using This work was supported by NIGEB project number 148, 197 and IDB GeneMapper® v3.7 Software candidate LOH samples were flagged grant to F.B. for easy identification and review. Our results highlight the 3130 Series Systems in conjunction with GeneMapper® Software as an optimal solution for relative fluorescent quantitation assays.Cancer genetics 187 P0497. Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer - Where examined in the time of diagnosis and seven in relapse. does the buck stop? The cytogenetic analyses were performed on 24-hours bone marrow J. E. Geary1, J. Mackay2, L. Izatt3, H. Dorkins4, R. Houlston5, S. V. Hodgson6; cells cultured in RPMI 1640 according to the standard methods. GTG 1St George's Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom, 2Great Or- banding technique revealed clonal karyotypic abnormalities in 45% mond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Guy's (15) samples. and St Thomas' Hospital Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4The North West Cytogenetic findings were confirmed by fluorescence in situ London Hospital NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 5The Royal Marsden hybridization (FISH) method. NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 6St George's Healthcare Trust, London, Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was used on bone marrow United Kingdom. samples obtained from this patients in time of diagnosis or relapse. We are auditing the services and quality of care received by Hereditary CGH showed new DNA copy number changes in 70% (23) patients. Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC) families under the care For the first time we were tested the modification of CGH. We show of the London Regional Genetics Centres. All HNPCC families with examples of submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances being detected a known mutation, or microsatellite instability or loss of protein on with this high resolution CGH technique (HR-CGH). By HR-CGH we immunohistochemistry testing are included in the audit. Regional detected new chromosomal aberation in more than 75% cases. Genetic Centre notes are being assessed and follow-up details Here we present comparing among GTG-band karyotyping, CGH and acertained from information held by their family doctor. Currently 136 HR-CGH results. families have been assessed, including 602 at-risk family members of whom 294 are known to live in the geographic area studied. One P0500. Towards a better definition of unclassified genetic third of these families do not fit the Amsterdam (Modified) Criteria. 180 variants in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes: the clinical approach. individuals have had genetic testing carried out; in 162 individuals tested E. B. Gomez Garcia1, T. Ambergen2, M. J. Blok1, A. van den Wijngaard1; there was evidence in the notes that counselling was offered and in 1Dept. Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Dept. Methodology and 162 cases a mutation testing consent form was found. 158 individuals Statistics, Maastricht, The Netherlands. were recommended a surveillance protocol by the genetics centres, One third of the nucleotide variants in BRCA1 and half of those in but only in 13 cases did the patient notes specify which member of the BRCA2 are genetic variants of uncertain significance, also known as combined services was responsible for ensuring follow-up. From the unclassified variants (UVs). Pre-symptomatic testing is not possible available data, 47 of 158 individuals were documented to be adhering and genetic counseling can only be based upon the clinical features to the recommended surveillance protocols. 56 abnormalities from 234 and family history. screening episodes were detected, 9 resulting in the detection of a Whether patients with an UV have different clinical features than those cancer. Further, we have investigated the spectrum of cancers within with a mutation in the BRCA1/2 genes had not been investigated. families, in relation to the specific HNPCC mutation. More colorectal Using BRCAPRO and Myriad II models, we retrospectively obtained cancer is seen in families with MLH1 mutations and there is a marked the mutation probabilities in 24 patients with an UV. The UVs included: increase in urothelial cancers in those with MSH2 mutations. in BRCA1:Arg841Trp, Asp1739Gly, and IVS19: 5313 -25 A>C, and in BRCA2:Tyr42Cys, Ser384Thr, Lys467Arg, Pro655Arg, His1085Arg, P0498. Systematic functional testing of the 3p21.3 critical region Ser1750Phe, Arg2108His,Thr2337Ile, Ala2717Ser, Glu2856Ala, and for tumour suppression of lung cancer Lys2950Asn. Secondly, we compared their clinical features and family A. ter Elst, B. E. Hiemstra, W. Kamminga, I. Davelaar, A. Y. van der Veen, G. J. history with those from 46 patients with an established pathogenic te Meerman, C. H. C. M. Buys; mutation. University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. The probability to detect a mutation was significantly lower in the group In lung cancer, a critical region of 370 kb containing 19 well-defined with UVs than in those with mutations (BRCAPRO: M±SD.297±.312 vs. genes has been defined in the 3p21.3 region. In a systematic test for .627±.315 p=.001; Myriad II: M±SD.124±.090 vs. .283±.176, p=.001). tumour suppressor activity, we have introduced seven PACs overlapping Presence of tumors other than invasive breast and ovarian cancer, the critical region into a well-transfectable lung cancer cell line. We number of affected relatives and of tumors among relatives correlated have used PACs to make it likely that the genes are accompanied with that difference. The last two variables were independent predictive by their main regulatory sequences. We check stable transfectants factors of finding either an UV or a mutation. for complete PAC integration, purity, single site of integration and The combined probability data show significant differences between absence of amplification, and have injected clones meeting all criteria both groups. Individual probabilities (“low” vs. “high”) can be regarded into nude mice for tumourigenicity studies. In nine experiments, each as a help to guide the clinical management of patients with an UV on 24 mice, a PAC has been subcutaneously injected on either side in those genes. However, with the clinical criteria, evaluation of of every mouse. Per experiment we used for one side of the mice one the pathogenicity of an UV should also include biochemical and of two transfectant clones containing one of the PACs, for the other epidemiological criteria. side of the mouse one of two transfectant clones containing another PAC. The tumours were carefully isolated, measured and weighed, P0501. Loss of 18q as a predictive factor for chemotherapy in four weeks after injection. The mean weight of the tumours caused stage II colorectal cancer by transfectants containing the centromeric PAC was significantly less M. Caganova1, I. Hikkel2, A. Žákovičová2, D. Ilenčíková2; than that of the tumours caused by transfectants containing one of 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Genetics, the other six PACs. This centromeric PAC contains two genes (PL6, Mlynská dolina, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2National Cancer Institute, Department of 101F6). Our result suggests that one or both of the genes are more Genetics, Klenová 1, Bratislava, Slovakia. important for tumour development than genes on the other PACs. Colorectal cancer is the second most common cause of death from cancers in Slovakia. Patients diagnosed with colorectal cancer are P0499. The yield of chromosomal aberrations frequency in divided into clinical stage I - IV according to the level of tumor´s children with acute leukaemia using methods GTG banding, invasion. FISH, CGH, HR-CGH The most discussing stage, when concerning adjuvant chemotherapy, D. Mentzlova1, A. Oltova1, V. Linkova1, P. Kuglik2, J. Sterba3, M. Pesakova1, V. is stage II characteristic for metastatic negative lymph nodes and Vranova2, D. Mendelova3, D. Zezulkova1, H. Filkova1; other organs. Stage II-patients are not prognosticly unique at all. One 1Dept.Medical Genetics, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Dept. subgroup shows prognostic similarity to stage III (worse prognosis), the Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University Brno, other is similar to stage I. Adjuvant therapy is often not recommended Brno, Czech Republic, 3Clinic of children oncology, University Hospital Brno, to stage II for its uncertain benefit, whereas patients in stage III with Brno, Czech Republic. metastasis in lymph nodes undergo chemotherapy as a standard We report results from the study of 33 children with acute lymphoid therapy. (25) and myeloid (8) leukaemia. Karyotyping of bone marrow cells is Recent studies have shown that what divides patients in stage II into an important step for the precise diagnosis and for the choice of the two subgroups might be the status of the long arm of chromosome 18 adequate treatment in leukaemic patients. Twenty six patients were (18q). If the tumor loses 18q (with potential tumor suppressor geneCancer genetics 188 DCC) it seems to acquire aggressiveness with high probability of cancer was the most frequent cancer observed. metastatic progression. Therefore loss of 18q is connected with worse Haplotype studies are in progress to confirm if this is a Portuguese prognosis that equals prognosis in stage III. Stage II patients with 18q BRCA2 founder mutation. loss might benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy. We screened 50 paraffin-embedded (stage II) tumors for the loss of P0504. Co-existence of neocentromeric marker 3q and trisomy 18q using PCR assay with primers specific for microsatellite markers 3 in two different tissues in a 10 year old boy having B-cell on chromosome 18q. lymphoma: Support of a gene dosage effect hypophesis Our aims were (1) to asses the effectiveness of chemotherapy, that J. R. Batanian1, K. Zenhenpan2, J. Frater1, G. Gale1; these 50 patients in stage II had taken, according to their 18q status; 1Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, MO, United States, 2Cardinal Glennon (2) to compare PCR-DNA diagnosis with FISH (Fluorescent In Situ Children's Hospital, Saint Louis, MO, United States. Hybridization) focused on marker gene Bcl-2 localized telomeric to A very small supernumerary de novo marker chromosome was DCC. ascertained during cytogenetic diagnosis of a 10 year old boy with B-cell lymphoma. The marker was C band negative but appeared P0502. The canine model in human genetics mitotically stable. The marker was found in 15/15 lymph node cells H. Murua Escobar1,2, J. T. Soller1, A. Richter2, B. Meyer2, S. Winkler2, R. and 10/14 pleural fluid cells. The marker was duplicated in 5 of 10 Nimzyk2, I. Nolte1, J. Bullerdiek2; pleural fluid cells. An unstimulated bone marrow cultures revealed the 1Small Animal Clinic, Hanover, Germany, 2Centre for Human Genetics Bremen, presence of trisomy 3 in 10 of 15 cells. Two additional cells had the Bremen, Germany. marker. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with chromosome- The canine genome offers a wide field for genetic studies on various specific painting probes, alpha satellite probes, subtelomere probes, areas like e.g. phenotypic diversity, heredity and diseases including and physically mapped probes from chromosome 3q was performed cancer. The different canine “purebred” breeding programmes led to and showed the marker to be consisted of inversion duplications of expression of various recessively inherited diseases and allowed to distal portions of chromosome 3q that contain no detectable alpha observe that the different breeds have particular predispositions for satellite DNA. The presence of a functional neocentromere on this these diseases. The “Canine Genetic Disease Information System” marker chromosome was confirmed by immunofluorescence with contains the clinical, pathological and genetic features of more than antibodies to centromere protein-C (CENP-C). The extent of the marker 370 genetic disorders. This offers the rare opportunity for human chromosome was characterized by FISH using mapped BAC clone clinical geneticists to identify breed specific disease associated genes directed onto 3q27 (BCL6) that appeared duplicated. Whole or partial and to study them including their heredity in well documented canine trisomy 3q represents the most recurrent chromosomal abnormality pedigrees. Especially in cases where the number of human patients is occurring in marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (MZBCL) suggesting small the high number of canine offspring is useful. that the 3q contains a critical region for the pathogenesis of MZBCL. In terms of cancer the dog shows additional advantages. The This case which is unique by the fact that the bone marrow revealed dog enjoys after the human the best medical care of all organisms a clone of trisomy 3 whereas the lymph node and pleural fluid showed allowing a detailed surveillance of the cancer, its progression and a neocentromeric marker of 3q supports the hypothesis that a gene therapy. At least a dozen distinct canine cancers are hypothesized dosage effect rather than a specific gene disruption may be involved in to be appropriate models for their human counterparts, among the developmentof this disease. those osteosarcomas, mammary carcinomas, oral melanomas, lung carcinomas and malignant non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. P0505. The DNA mismatch repair gene PMS2 is more frequently We cloned and characterized more than 10.000 canine ESTs, various involved in Hereditary Non Polyposis Colorectal Carcinoma than disease and cancer related genes and evaluated these genes as thought targets for development of new therapeutic approaches done in J. Wijnen; dogs. Among the canine HMGA1, HMGB1, ZNF331, CCND1 etc. Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. The obtained results show that the canine genes and the deduced PMS2 is a MutL homologue mismatch repair gene, involved in repair of proteins are closer to their human counterparts compared to the rodent single base mismatches and insertion-deletion loops. To date, seven counterparts emphasising the importance of the canine model for disease-causing PMS2 mutations have been reported: three causative human genetics. for Hereditary Non Polyposis Colorectal Carcinoma (HNPCC) and four causative for Turcot's syndrome. Our aim was to further delineate the P0503. Insertion of an Alu repeat in exon 3 of BRCA2: a role of PMS2 in HNPCC. candidate Portuguese founder mutation We performed Southern blot analysis in 112 MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 R. D. Brandão, P. Machado, J. Eugénio, P. Rodrigues, F. Vaz; mutation negative HNPCC (suspected) families. In 8 patients, selected CIPM - IPOFrancisco Gentil, Lisboa, Portugal. from 875 familial colorectal carcinoma cases including (suspected) Genetic screening of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in the Portuguese Breast/ HNPCC cases, on the basis of negative PMS2 and positive MLH1, Ovarian Cancer Families was performed in high risk families. Selection MSH2 and MSH6 staining on a tissue micro array, we performed a criteria were either 25% of BRCA1/2 combined probability of mutation, mutation scanning by Southern blot analysis (genomic rearrangements) according to BRCAPRO or Myriad methods, or male breast cancer in and sequence analysis (point mutations). Subsequently 38 (from the the family. 112) cases were scanned for point mutations. Families with a predicted In 50 non-related families screened for both genes, only one recurrent truncating PMS2 mutation were further analysed. mutation was found in 3 of them. After PCR amplification of a 425bp Four genomic rearrangements and three PMS2 protein-truncating product, corresponding to exon 3 of BRCA2 and its intronic boundaries, point mutations were identified. Three of these seven families fulfil an extra product with approximately 800 bp was visible in all these 3 the Amsterdam II criteria. The pattern of inheritance seems to be samples. The sequencing of this product followed by a BLAST search autosomal dominant with a decreased penetrance (older age of revealed an Alu motif insertion. Analysis of cDNA was performed using cancer onset) compared to families with pathogenic MSH2 or MLH1 primers in exons 1 and 10 (corresponding to a PCR product of 1.3 Kb) mutations. Microsatellite instability and immunohistochemical analysis revealing exon 3 skipping. This leads to protein truncation in codon performed in HNPCC related tumours from proven carriers showed in 137 and disruption of the two transcription-activating regions of BRCA2 all an MSI-High phenotype, and absent PMS2 staining indicative for (residues 18-60 represent a primary activating region; residues 60-105 the involvement of PMS2 in the aetiology of these tumours. represent an auxiliary activating region). We show that heterozygous truncating mutations in PMS2 play a Other Breast/Ovarian Cancer Patients were screened for this mutation frequent role in HNPCC (suspected) families. We advise mutation and we observed it in 5 additional non-related families. Another family scanning in patients with absence of the PMS2 protein. had already been studied by another group (E. Teugels, BicDatabase AN: 2971). In two of our 8 families the index patients were male with breast cancer. One of these also developed prostate cancer under 60 as did two of his first degree relatives. Besides this, female breastCancer genetics 189 P0506. A Protein Phosphatase 2A Regulatory Subunit Can This work was supported by the Verbundprojekt "Familiärer Darmkrebs" Modulate the Spindle Assembly Checkpoint of the Deutsche Krebshilfe. D. Markie, L. Wallis; Dunedin School of Medicine, Dunedin, New Zealand. P0508. Deletion of 9p is significantly more common in metastatic The spindle assembly checkpoint monitors spindle structure in early than in primary gastrointestinal stromal tumors mitosis, and delays the onset of anaphase until all chromosome- Y. Chen1, H. Tseng2, Y. Jan3, C. Liou1, C. Lu1, C. Tzeng1; microtubule attachments are appropriate to provide accurate segregation 1Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Kaohsiung Veter- of chromosomes. The Bub1b protein (also known as BubR1) plays ans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan Republic of China, 3Taichung Veter- a critical role in this mechanism with mutations reported in sporadic ans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China. aneuploid tumours and in cases of Mosaic Variegated Aneuploidy, an Objectives: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most inherited developmental disorder characterised by somatic aneuploidy common mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. Current and tumour predisposition. There is also evidence that Bub1b is diagnostic criteria could not reliably predict the metastatic behavior involved in attachment sensing and reorganisation, inhibition of the of this tumor. Whether presence of certain chromosomal imbalances anaphase promoting complex, and initiation of apoptosis in polyploid (CIs) could be applied as reliable genetic markers for such a purpose cells that have escaped mitotic arrest without satisfying the spindle is worthy to be examined. checkpoint. However, the detailed mechanism and regulation of Bub1b Methods: Fifteen metastatic GISTs to the liver, as proved positive for activity in these processes is poorly understood. We have identified CD117 immunoreactivity, were analyzed using comparative genomic a specific PP2A regulatory subunit (B56gamma) that interacts with hybridization. The CIs present more often in the metastatic tumors phosphorylated BubR1 in vivo. PP2A regulatory subunits such as were determined by comparing with the CI pattern of the 28 primary B56gamma confer substrate specificity to the catalytic subunit in the GISTs reported previously (Chen Y et al. J Biomed Sci 2004; 11:65- PP2A complex. BubR1 becomes transiently phosphorylated in mitosis 71). and we have found that treatment of cells with a PP2A inhibitor extends Results: All tumors had a variable number of CIs, with nonrandom the period of Bub1b phosphorylation. Furthermore, overexpression of deletions more common than gains. The common CIs were deletions B56gamma in cells reduces phosphorylation of Bub1b and decreases of 15q (80.0%), 1p (73.3%), 9p (53.3%), 14q (53.3%), 22q (46.7%), and mitotic arrest in response to nocodazole, an agent that activates the 6q (40.0%), and gains of 17q (40.0%). Comparing with the CI pattern checkpoint through spindle disruption. These results suggest Bub1b of the 28 primary GISTs revealed that the most saline differences were phosphorylation status is important in mitotic progression and implicate deletions of 9p and 6q. Their detection rates in primary and metastatic PP2A-B56gamma in its regulation. GISTs were 7.1% (2/28) and 53.3% (8/15) for 9p deletion, with minimal overlap on 9p13-p22 (p = 0.001), and were 7.1% (2/28) and 33.3% P0507. 2300 HNPCC families: research, diagnostics and patient (5/15) for 6q deletion, with minimal overlap on 6q11-q16 (p = 0.040), care - The German HNPCC Consortium meets the challenge respectively. E. Mangold1, C. Engel2, E. Holinski-Feder3, C. Pagenstecher1, H. K. Schack- Conclusion: Among the common nonrandom CIs, 9p deletion was ert4, M. von Knebel-Doeberitz5, T. Goecke6, E. Kunstmann7, R. Buettner8, H. significantly more often identified in the metastatic than in primary Vogelsang9, S. Krueger4, M. Kloor5, G. Moeslein10, J. Willert11, J. Rueschoff12, M. GISTs, which appears to be a useful marker to predict the metastatic Loeffler13, P. Propping1; behavior of this tumor. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Medi- cal Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology,, University of Leipzig, Germany, P0509. Study of NSCLC gene expression and single nucleotide 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany, polymorphism 4Department of Surgical Research, Dresden University of Technology, Ger- K. Välk1, T. Vooder2, A. Kurg1, A. Metspalu1; many, 5Department of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University 1Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology,Tartu Uni- of Heidelberg, Germany, 6Department of Human Genetics, Heinrich-Heine- versity, Tartu, Estonia, 2Clinic of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery of Tartu University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 7Human Genetics, Ruhr-University Bochum, University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. Germany, 8Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, Germany, 9Department Cancer is worldwide problem and lung cancer is one of the frequent of Surgery, Technical University, Munich, Germany, 10Department of Surgery, ones causing ca 1 million deaths every year. Although early stage Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 11Department of Medicine, lung cancer is in most cases surgically curable, about 80% of lung Knappschaftskrankenhaus, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany, 12Department cancer cases due to tumor spread or distant metastases need either of Pathology, Klinikum Kassel, Germany, 13Institute of Medical Informatics, radiotherapy, adjuvant or neoadjuvant polychemotherapy. Despite Statistics and Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, Germany. of certain success achieved in the field of combined therapy, the Adequate approaches to HNPCC require clinically and genetically well prolonged use of it is limited by developing resistance to drugs and characterized HNPCC patient cohorts of reasonable size. Since 1999, side effects of this treatment. a registry for HNPCC families has been established in Germany. In a In everyday lung cancer diagnostics histological classification is used. multi-disciplinary approach, six university hospitals collect clinical data Accordingly, lung cancer is divided to small cell lung carcinoma (20% of of HNPCC families or patients suspected of HNPCC, provide genetic all lung cancers) and non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC, 80% of all and clinical counseling, tumor tissue analysis, molecular genetic workup, lung cancers) including three main groups: squamous cell carcinoma predictive testing and surveillance examinations. Data storage, quality (20-35%), giant cell carcinoma (4.5-15%) and adenocarcinoma (30- control and biostatistical analyses are performed centrally. A reference 50%). Despite of lung cancer histological subgroup diagnostics, the pathology center is in charge of histopathology data. So far, 2300 clinical course of the same stage patients is quite different. This fact families meeting the Bethesda criteria are included in the study and suggests that histological form of cancer is not sufficient predictor of germline mutations have been identified in 405 families. This cohort, clinical course of the disease. which is one of the largest HNPCC cohorts world-wide, represents an In the current study we have analyzed gene expression patterns of ideal population for analyses in genetics, pathology and phenotype different NSCLC types using human 30K microarrays in hope to find as well as evaluation of diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. Up to differentially expressed genes that would help us to predict the survival now studies on this cohort have produced important results in various and clinical course of the patients. In the second step we look for SNPs fields: Mutation analysis uncovered MLH1,c.1489_1490insC as a from the region where the alternatively expressed genes are located. frequent founder mutation in the German HNPCC cohort. Studies Finally we intend to develop the microarray based analytical test for on genotype-phenotype correlations revealed that MLH1 mutation everyday clinical practice of NSCLC. carriers have a younger age at diagnosis than MSH2 mutation carriers both in regard to first cancer (41 vs. 44 years) and to first CRC (42 P0510. Analysis of VEGF single nucleotide polymorphisms -1154 vs. 46 years) and that the rate of CRC was higher in MLH1 versus A/G and 936 C/T in sporadic colon cancer MSH2 mutation carriers. In addition, the German HNPCC Consortium T. Cacev1, S. Radosevic2, K. Pavelic1, S. Kapitanovic1; established a novel sequential strategy that can be used to minimize 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2PLIVA d.d., Zagreb, Croatia. costs of screening diagnostics. Colon cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed cancers inCancer genetics 190 Western Societies. Tumor growth requires the formation of new blood cases, ASS locus deletion in four cases (11% in Ph+ cases), double vessels, a process called angiogenesis. The most important regulator fusion of M-Bcr/Abl in two CML (7%) and one ALL cases (2%), four of angiogenesis is vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) that is fusion of M-Bcr/Abl in one CML case (3%) and isochromosome 9q in overexpressed in several tumors. We examined genotype and allele one CML case (3%). Also, we found minor(m) Bcr/Abl fusion in four ALL frequencies of two VEGF SNPs, -1154 A/G in the promotor region and cases (7%): one case had four copy m-Bcr/Abl signals, and one case 936 C/T in the 3' untranslated region. VEGF -1154 GG genotype is had also monosomy 9. Furthermore, three signals for chromosome 22 associated with higher VEGF expression, while -1154 AA genotype were found in three ALL cases (5%), one of which had also trisomy 9. is associated with lower VEGF expression. Carriers of a 936-T allele Twenty-eight of 37 CML cases (76%) and two of 59 ALL cases (3%) have reduced VEGF plasma levels. VEGF low producers genotypes were found to have a simple t(9;22) translocation (M-Bcr/Abl fusion) may confer protection, whereas high producers may have a promoting by ES-FISH. effect on tumor progression. The aim of this study was to determine Given these results, Bcr/Abl ES dual color probe decreases the false- wether these SNPs might influence the risk for sporadic colon cancer positive results and detects structural and numerical abnormalities development and progression. on chromosome 9 and 22 simultaneously. Therefore Bcr/Abl ES A total 150 colon cancer patients and 150 unrelated cancer-free Dual color probe can be preferable for FISH studies in hematological controls were genotyped for the VEGF -1154 and 936 SNPs using real- malignancies. time PCR TaqMan® SNP genotyping assay and PCR-RFLP method. Genotype frequencies for VEGF -1154 were 12.6%, 49.6% and 37.6% P0513. Genetic polymorphism analysis of p53 in Iranian in control population and 14.2%, 49.6% and 36.2% in colon cancer population with three different ethnicity and incidence pattern of for AA, AG and GG genotype respectively. Genotype frequencies for Esophageal cancer VEGF 936 were 69.4%, 29.9% and 0.7% in control population and S. Tanhaei1, F. Biramijamal2, M. Sanati2; 69.9%, 26.7% and 3.4% in colon cancer for CC, CT and TT genotype 1Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for respectively. There were no significant associations between colon Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cancer susceptibility and -1154 and 936 genotypes however a role of The incidence pattern of esophageal cancer is different among Iranian other polymorphisms within VEGF cannot be excluded. population and is up to 171/100,000. The p53 tumor suppressor gene is involved in the etiology of malignant disease. Several studies were P0511. The relation between telomere length/ telomerase activity described the polymorphism at codon 72 of the p53 gene (CCC, and proliferative effects of 190BCR-ABL and 210BCR-ABL fussion genes proline/CGC, arginine) and susceptibility of several types of cancer. on hematopoietic cells Also, it was reported that p53 genotype is involved in patient survival. N. Y. Kutlay1, M. Ozcan2, A. Tukun1; To investigate the relationship between p53 codon 72 polymorphism 1Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, An- and incidence pattern of EC among different ethnicity, we collected kara, Turkey, 2Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematol- samples from healthy population from three different ethnicity ogy, Ankara, Turkey. groups (Mazandarani from Babol, Turk from Urmieh and Turkomans The product of the Philadelphia chromosome translocation, the BCR/ from Gonbad). Incidences of esophageal cancer in Gonbad, Babol ABL oncogene, exists in different principal forms that are found in and Urmieh are highest, moderate and low respectively. The p53 distinct forms of Ph-positive leukemia, suggesting these proteins have Pro72Arg genotypes were determined by polymerase chain reaction- different leukomogenic activity. Distinct forms of leukemia are differed restriction fragment length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) and direct from each other with respect to levels of telomerase and telomere DNA sequencing analysis in 126 healthy controls. Among the healthy lengths also. It has been known that telomeres and telomerase are subjects with Mazandarani, Turk and Turkomans ethnicity, the genotype essential in the regulation of cell life-span and division. It has been frequency of p53 Pro72Arg were 15.4% , 36.6% and 39.1 for Arg/Arg, hypothezed that the difference in leukomogenic activities of distinct 56.4% , 51.2 and 54.4% for Arg/Pro, 28.2% , 12.2% and 6.5% for Pro/ forms of BCR/ABL oncogene could be related with the telomere Pro, respectively. Significance difference in p53 allele distribution was length and telomerase activity of the hematopoietic cells which were observed between Mazandarani and Turkomans healthy individuals transformed by these proteins. We have directly compared the 190BCR- ( X2 =11.15 , P <0.01). In each groups, the distribution of genotypes ABL and 210BCR-ABL forms of BCR/ABL with regard to the telomerase fits the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Our finding suggested that p53 activity, telomere lenght and proliferative rate of both myeloid (32D genotype play an important role in developing and an increasing cl3) and lymphoid (Ba/F3) cell lines transformed by both oncogenes. incidence pattern of esophageal tumor among Turkomans. This study tested whether telomerase inhibitors suppress growth of This work was supported by NIGEB project number 197. cell lines related with telomer length and telomerase activity. There was found a difference between the telomerase related leukomogenic P0514. New complex variants of the simple translocations in effects of 190BCR-ABL and of 210BCR-ABL. 210BCR-ABL has been suggested to leukemia cases. have a direct effect on telomerase activity in both cell lines. Z. Cetin1, S. Yakut1, S. Berker-Karauzum1, A. Ugur2, K. Temizkan2, I. Karado- This work was supported by Ankara University, Scientific Research gan2, G. Luleci1; Projects Foundation 1Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Department P0512. Determination of typical and atypical signals of of Internal Medicine and Hematology, Antalya, Turkey. chromosomes 9 and 22 in CML and ALL cases using by Bcr/Abl t(9;22), t(8;21) and t(1;7) translocations are frequently observed in ES Dual color probe CML, AML-M3 and ALL respectively and complex variants of these S. Berker-Karauzum1, S. Yakut1, Z. Cetin1, E. Dirice1, I. Karadogan2, A. Kupe- translocations can be observed in leukemia cases rarely. We present siz3, G. Tezcan3, G. Luleci1; here, three cases with new complex variant translocations, First case 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and was a 60 year old male diagnosed as CML. Bcr/Abl fusion gene Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department detected by FISH and RT-PCR. Karyotype of bone marrow cells was of Internal Medicine and Hematology, Antalya, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University, 46,XY[10]/46,XY,t(1;6;9;22)(p36.1;p21.3;q34;q11)[10]. Patient treated Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Anta- with Glivec subsequent to INF-γ therapy for two years. He is currently lya, Turkey. at follow-up as chronic phase CML. Second patient was a 68 years FISH probes with different properties can be used for determination old male diagnosed as AML-M2. Karyotype of bone marrow cells was of t(9;22) translocation including; Bcr/Abl Dual color/Single fusion, 45,X,-Y,t(8;16;21)(q22.1;q13;q22)[9]/46,XY, t(8;16;21)(q22.1;q13;q22) Dual color/Dual fusion and ES Dual color probes. In this study, we [13]. AML/ETO fusion detected by FISH. Patient treated with Ara-C evaluated t(9;22) translocation in 59 cases with ALL, which constitute + Ida (7+3) as remission induction and two courses of HIDAC as 42 pediatric and 17 adult cases, and 37 cases with CML by using ES- consolidation therapy. Patient achieved remission but died because FISH technique. We observed atypical FISH patterns of chromosomes of the early relapse. Third case was a 16 years old male diagnosed 9 and 22 in 8 cases of 37 CML cases (22%) and in 10 of 59 ALL cases as CML. Bcr/Abl fusion was detected by FISH. Patient treated with (17%). These are; trisomy 9 in one Ph- CML (3%) and two ALL (3%) Glivec subsequent to INF-γ+ AraC for one year. Transformation to ALLCancer genetics 191 was observed one year later. Karyotype of bone marrow cells at this of a variety of diseases, such as cancer. Apart from yielding a new time was 45,XY, der (7) t(1;7;22)(p31;p21;q13.2),-9[25]. Three courses source of therapeutic target, it is likely that manipulating the activity of the HyperCVAD+Glivec was applied to patient. After given FLAG of such proteins will provide an important route for treating cancers. therapy, he died because of the progressive disease. Our results show The Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are Serine/Threonine protein that possible alterations of genes located in these breakpoints involved kinases, which play a pivotal role in the transition from the G1 to S, and in complex variant translocations might effect relaps and overall G2 to M phase of the cell cycle. Therefore, in an attempt to search for survival durations of the patients. Therefore, determination of complex a specific CDK inhibitor with minimal side effects, the current authors variant translocations at diagnosis might have prognostic significance synthesized an analogue of Toyocamycin and Sangivamycin, MCS-C2. in hematological malignancies. Furthermore, in the course of screening for a novel inhibitor of CDK2 using the Structure-Based Drug Design (SBDD), we isolated CR2-R29 P0515. Identification of polymorphisms in exon 4 of the p53 gene from the chemical library. The present study investigated the selective among Iranian esophageal squamous cell carcinoma anti-neoplastic potential with significant low toxicity and mode of action N. Saligheh Araghi1, F. Biramijamal2, M. Sanati2, G. Iravanloo3, S. Tanhaei4, B. of apoptotic inductions by MCS-C2 in human cancer cells (HL-60, Bayat2, M. Banouii2; LNCaP, PC-3 and DU145), and CR2-R29 in HeLa and PA-1 cancer 1Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Ge- cells. The two compounds showed the inhibitory activity to the cell netic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Cancer cycle progression, and apoptotic inductions in various human cancer Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic cells, but no effect in normal cells. As the result, we suggest that MCS- Republic of Iran. C2 and CR2-R29 are novel potent anti-cancer drug candidate through It is recorded that most cancers carry p53 gene mutations. The p53 the cell cycle regulation inhibition and apoptosis as CDK inhibitor. protein is considered a key combination in countering stress messages such as DNA damage. The frequency of esophageal squamous cell P0518. BRCA1 mutations in Algerian breast cancer patients: carcinoma (ESCC), the predominant cancer in esophagus, is very high frequency in young, sporadic cases. high in northern Iran and identification of p53 gene mutation is very A. Abdelouahab1, N. Uhrhammer2, L. Lafarge2, R. Kraiba1, A. Kouchkar1, A. important to find the major causes of this type of cancer in Iran. Bendib1, Y. Bignon2; In this investigation, we assessed allele frequency of p53 1Centre Pierre et Marie Curie, Algiers, Algeria, 2Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont- polymorphism among ESCC patients with Fars ethnic group. The p53 Ferrand, France. Pro72Arg genotypes were determined by polymerase chain reaction- Studies of breast cancer in Northern Africa have found striking restriction fragment length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) and direct differences with european breast cancer patterns. The size and grade DNA sequencing analysis in 166 healthy controls and 35 patients. of breast tumors in the Maghreb are increased, while the median age of Among the healthy and ESCC patients subjects with Fars ethnicity, onset is much younger. The increased size and grade may be explained the genotype frequency of p53 Pro72Arg were 34.3% and 31% for by late discovery. Differences in diet and lifestyle, particularly earlier Arg/Arg, 44.6% and 49% for Arg/Pro, 21.1% and 20% for Pro/Pro, and more frequent childbirth, may change breast cancer incidence, as respectively (X2=0.17, P>0.9). No significance differences were found might genetic differences, or combinations of these factors. for p53 genotype distribution among patients and healthy individuals. We tested the contribution of mutations in BRCA1 to breast cancer in Our finding suggested that p53 genotype does not play an important Algeria. We used the same criterea to define ‘familial’ cases that we role in developing esophageal tumor among Fars ESCC patients. use for our french families, and added early onset ‘sporadic’ cases This work was supported by NIGEB project number 197, 206 and the suggestive of a genetic predisposition component. All exons and IDB grant to F.B. splice-junctions of BRCA1 were sequenced. QMPSF was used to detect deletions and duplications. P0516. Assessing NAD(P)H: quinine oxidoreductase 609C→ Cases were chosen at the Pierre and Marie Curie Hospital in Algiers T polymorphism using simple PCR method on formalin-fixed according to the following criterea: age of onset before 38 years, or two paraffin-embedded human colon and esophageal tumor tissues or more affected first degree relatives. 48 early onset sporadic cases from Iranian cancer patients (average age at diagnosis 31.1, range 18 to 38) and 5 familial cases F. Zandi1, F. Biramijamal1, M. Sanati1, G. Iravanloo2, K. Shamimi3, D. Farhood4,1; (average age at diagnosis 39.3, range 32 to 53) were included. 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic We observed six deletions of one to 29 nucleotides, and a change in Republic of Iran, 2Cancer Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran the donor splice site of exon 5. No nonsense or missense mutations Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic were observed. There was no difference in the average age of mutated Republic of Iran. sporadic cases (32, range 26 - 37) versus non-mutated sporadic cases The NAD(P)H: quinine oxidoreductase (NQO1) is applied in the (31, range 18 - 38) or mutated familial cases (37.2, range 32-41). detoxification of numerous endogenous and foreign compounds. It has been shown that homozygous patients having TT allele exhibit negligible P0519. Molecular study on frequency of single nucleotide NQO1 enzyme activity. The lack of NQO1 activity might increase the polymorphism of DNMT1 among Iranian patients with gastric risk of certain types of toxicity and cancer. We assessed NQO1 609C→ cancer T polymorphism in genomic DNA isolated from blood and formalin- F. Khatami, S. Akhoundi, M. Jedi-Tehrani, M. Zali, B. Noori-nayer; fixed, paraffin-embedded human colon and esophageal tumor tissues Research center for gastroenterology and liver disease, Tehran, Islamic Repub- from Iranian individuals by a simple PCR method. Also, the results lic of Iran. were confirmed by Direct DNA sequencing. Because the frequency of Introduction: Mutations of the DNMT1 gene has been frequently NQO1 C609T polymorphism has not been reported among the Iranian reported in gastric cancer. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) population so far. Therefore, the current study presents a simple and have been presumed to be associated with the genetic susceptibility to feasible method for detection of NQO1 genotype in Iran. cancer. We have hypothesized that SNPs within the DNMT1 may be This work was supported by NIGEB projects number 176 and 197. associated with sporadic gastric cancer.Method: we designed a case- control study of age, sex and ethnicity matched patients with sporadic P0517. Mechanisms of apoptotic induction and cell cycle gastric cancer and healthy controls. Up to now we have enrolled 70 inhibition in cancer cells by novel compounds synthesized by cases and 65 controls. Genomic DNA was extracted and the locus for using analogue synthesis and structure-based drug design the SNP: 721186 on exon 20 of the DNMT1 gene was amplified. We C. Lee, M. Kim, H. Lim, Y. Cho; used RFLP reaction by the AcyI enzyme. The undigested amplicons Dept. Medical Genetics, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Re- were of 300 base pairs (bp). In case of homozygoutes state for the public of Korea. CC allele the amplicons were digested to 100 and 200 segments. The In recent years, it is known that normal cellular proliferation is tightly heterozygoutes had three bands at 300, 200 and 100 bp.Results: The regulated by the activation and deactivation of a series of proteins frequency of the CC, CT and TT genotypes among the cases and that constitute the cell cycle machinery. The expression and activity controls were: 98% vs. 98% , 0% vs. 0% , 2% vs. 2% respectively. of these cell cycle components can be altered during the development The C and the T allele frequencies among the cases and controls wereCancer genetics 192 98% vs. 98% and 2% vs. 2% respectively. There was no significant domain is known to be necessary for VCP-mediated reassembly of difference between the cases and controls.Conclusion: Our result Golgi stacks after mitosis and its possible roles in carcinogenesis shows that the SNP: 721186 polymorphism of the DNMT1 gene are yet to be evaluated. We observed methylation of promotor region has no apparent association with gastric cancer among a sample of VCIP135 in 9/54 (16.7%) samples. Iranian patients. Further investigation involving more patients and BIN1 encodes a MYC-interacting protein with features of a tumor more polymorphisms are required to delineate the true role of DNMT1 suppressor. Abnormally methylated CpG island of BIN1 was detected polymorphisms in the pathogenesis of gastric cancer. in 11/54 (20%) of BC samples. We detected no methylation of all investigated CpG islands in control P0520. Gene expression analysis of PAX2 and PAX8 in patients peripheral blood lymphocytes and apparently intact breast tissues. with sporadic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) Epigenetic alterations in above genes have not been reported T. Viktorova1, M. Babjuk2, J. Duskova3, V. Soukup4, J. Stolz4, P. Goetz1, J. previously. Mares1; 1The Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty of Charles P0522. Urothelial carcinoma detection with fluorescence in situ University, Prague 5, Czech Republic, 2Clinic of Urology, 1st Medical faculty of hybridization Charles University, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3The institute of Pathological D. Yasar1, Z. Cetin1, S. Berker-Karauzum1, B. Akkaya2, T. Koksal3, G. Luleci1; Anatomy, 1st Medical Faculty of CharIes University, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and 4Clinic of Urology, 1st Medical faculty of Charles university, Prague 2, Czech Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department Republic. of Pahtology, Antalya, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- Background: Sporadic renal cell carcinoma is one of the most common ment of Urology, Antalya, Turkey. urological malignities in adults (85%). According to the IARC (The Cystoscopy and cytology are techniques, which have high specificity International Agency of Research on Cancer) is Czech Republic but poor sensitivity for urothelial carcinoma detection. Identification on the first world position at incidence and mortality for RCC. The of genetic alterations at chromosomal or DNA level in urological prognosis of RCC is very poor because of high mortality up to 40% malignancies is very important for evaluation of the response against and unpredictable progression after tumor abstraction. More precise therapy. We have performed FISH analysis by using centromeric and molecular prognostic markers are required. Genes PAX2 and PAX8 locus specific DNA probes to interphase tumor cells obtained from control cell division during embryonic development and play crucial urine, without prior knowledge of clinical findings, that is pathology, role in tumor development because of stimulation of cell proliferation cytoscopy and cytology results. A mixture of fluorescent labeled probes or/and inhibition of apoptotic program. for centromeres of chromosomes 3, 7 and 17 and band 9p21 (p16/ Material and Method: Our RCC sample collection (collected since CDKN2A) gene was used to assess urinary cells for chromosomal 2002) contains 61 patients. mRNA was isolated from tumor cells and abnormalities, indicative of malignancy. A total of 16 urine specimens nonmalignant renal cells and converted into cDNA. Expression of PAX from 11 male and 5 female bladder cancer patients were analyzed. genes was analyzed by using relative quantification real time PCR with Two of these specimens were grade 1, five were grade 2, seven TaqMan labeled probe. Gene GAPDH was chosen as an endogenous were grade 3 and two of them were grade 2 or grade 3 with pT2a control. stage. We found three specimens were tetraploid for chromosomes Results: Expression of PAX2 gene was found in 94% and expression 3, 7 and 17, 3 specimens were tetraploid for these chromosomes and of PAX8 gene was found in 89% of analyzed samples. The level of deleted for 9p21, one were triploid for chromosomes 3, 7 and 17 and expression of both PAX genes was very variable with the range from normal for 9p21, two were triploid for chromosomes 3, 7 and 17 and hundred times lower to forty times higher compare to the expression deleted for 9p21, two specimens were deleted for 9p21, one specimen of chosen endogenous control. Correlation between level of PAX2 was normal and we have detected 4 non-specific amplifications. Our expression and tumor size was found (p=0.07) on the cut-off of statistic results strikingly showed that, these chromosomal pathologies could significance. be detected in not only grade 3 specimens also found in grade 1 Summary: These results haven’t got prognostic value yet because tumors, therefore FISH is very sensitive to detect urothelial carcinoma, of short duration of patient observation. Follow-up clinical data are even in earlier stages. essential for completion of our research. Research is supported by IGA MZ 7519-3. P0523. Investigation of mitochondrial common DNA deletion (5 Kb) in Iranian patients with Gastric cancer P0521. Differential methylation of LAMC3, SEMA6B, VCIP135 M. Bagher Shiroodi1, F. Mahjoubi2, M. Montazeri2, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi2, and BIN1 CpG islands in breast cancer identified by methylation- M. R. Abbaszadegan3, M. Houshmand2; sensitive restriction fingerprinting (MSRF). 1Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Ge- E. Kuznetsova1, L. Lubchenko2, I. Zborovskaya3, V. Strelnikov4, D. Zaletayev1; netic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Booali 1Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Center Research Center, Mashad, Islamic Republic of Iran. for Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Carcinogenesis, Rus- Human mtDNA is a supercoild, double stranded circular molecule sian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Research compromising 16.569 base pairs. It codes for 13 proteins (all subunits Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, of the respiratory chain complexes), 22 tRNAs and 2rRNAs. It has been Russian Federation. known that mtDNA is far more vulnerable to mutations than nuclear MSRF is designed to screen for altered methylation patterns in DNA due to its lack of histone protection, limited repair capacity, and genomic DNA. By use of our MSRF modification we have identified closed to the electron transport chain, which constantly generates four abnormally methylated CpG islands belonging to LAMC3, peroxide radicals. In solid tumors, elevated expression of mtDNA - SEMA6B, VCIP135 and BIN1 genes encoding laminin gamma 3 encoded subunits of the mitochondrial electron respiratory chain may chain; semaphorin 6B; valosin-containing protein p97/p47 complex- reflect mitochondrial adoption to gain cellular energy requirements. interacting protein p135 and bridging integrator 1, respectively, in Mt DNA mutations occur in a wide variety of cancers and may have breast cancer (BC) DNA samples. utility in detection of cancer. We investigated the presence of mtDNA Laminins are major glycoproteins of the basal laminae. By methylation- common deletion (a 4977bp deletion which characteristically flanks sensitive PCR we detected methylation of LAMC3 5’-CpG island by direct repeats) using conventional molecular techniques such in 13/54 (24%) samples.We presume that LAMC3 gene abnormal as PCR, Southern blotting etc. We analyzed DNA from 30 paraffin methylation in cancer samples may result in disruption of cellular- embedded gastric adenocarcinoma tissues and 30 blood specimens lamina contacts resulting in cell cycling disbalance and metastatic for this deletion from the cancer patients. Our results showed that 40% spreading. blood tissues and 26% paraffin embedded gastric adenocarminoma Several members of semaphorin family have already been shown had ~ 5kb deletion. Common deletion rate reported in aged people is to take part in cell proliferation and differentiation, cell signaling and only 6%, while the percentage of deletion in our specimens was about interactions with proto-oncogenes. Abnormally methylated CpG island 10%. It has been known that ATP requirement is increased during of SEMA6B was detected in 17/54 (32.5%) of BC samples. cancer development. This may be one of the reasons that we detected VCIP135 gene product conaining an OTU (Drosophila ovarian tumor) more copies of mtDNA with common deletion in our patients.SinceCancer genetics 193 several different mtDNA mutations have been detected in cancers, P0526. Dependence of Fas and FasL expression on genetic more investigation needed to reveal the role of mitochondria in Iranian rearrangements in tumor cells cancer patients. S. A. Alexandrova, L. B. Ginkul, I. N. Shvemberger; Institute of Cytology RAS, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. P0524. Association of two mutations in the CHEK2 gene with The development and progression of tumors dependeds on their breast cancer interaction with the immune system of the organism and the instability N. Bogdanova1,2, N. Enßen-Dubrowinskaja1, S. Festchenko2, G. I. Lazijuk2, Y. I. of the tumor cell genome. The aim of this study was to reveal the effect Rogov3, O. Dammann1, M. Bremer1, J. H. Karstens1, C. Sohn1,4, T. Dörk1; of Fas-dependant apoptosis in tumor cells and splenocytes on genetic 1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Institute of Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, rearrangement in tumor cells. Belarus, 3Byelorussian Medical Academy of Post Diploma Education, Minsk, The study was carried out on the mouce hepatoma cell line MH-22a Belarus, 4Department of Gynaecology, Heidelberg, Germany. and the sarcoma J-774. The 1100delC mutation of the cell cycle checkpoint kinase 2 (CHEK2) Genetic variability in these tumors and their clonal lines was examined gene confers an increased risk for breast cancer, but the clinical impact in vitro and in vivo at their proliferation in the subcutaneous connective of other CHEK2 gene variants remains controversial. We determined tissue (SCT) and in the eye anterior chamber (EAC) by RAPD-PCR. the frequency of two functionally relevant CHEK2 gene mutations, Interinduction of apoptosis between tumor cells and splenocytes was I157T and IVS2+1G>A, in two large series of breast cancer cases and carried out at their combined cultivation in vitro during 18 h. Apoptosis controls from two independent populations. Our first series consisted was revealed by electrophoresis of low molecular fractions of DNA, by of a hospital-based cohort of 996 German breast cancer cases and clonogenic survival and flow cytometric analysis. Expression of Fas- 486 population controls, and the second series consisted of 424 receptor (Fas) and Fas-ligand (FasL) was revealed by RT-PCR. breast cancer patients and 307 population controls from the Republic The level of genetic variability in clonal lines of hepatoma MH-22a and of Belarus. The missense substitution I157T was identified in 22/996 sarcoma J-774 varied greatly both in vitro and in vivo. Apoptosis was cases (2.2%) versus 3/486 controls (0.6%; OR=3.6, 95%CI 1.1-12.2, revealed in tumor cells as well as in splenocytes. Clonal lines of tumor p=0.044) in the German population, and in 24/424 cases (5.7%) hepatocytes MH-22a and hystiocytes J-774 showed heterogeneity in versus 4/307 controls (1.3%; OR= 4.5, 95%CI 1.6-13.2, p=0.005) the intensity of Fas and FasL expression. All clonal lines examined in the Byelorussian cohorts. The splicing mutation IVS2+1G>A was showed expression of Fas and FasL, but the levels varied widely. In infrequent in both populations and was observed in 3/996 German many cases changes in the fingerprints appeared, coinciding with and 4/424 Byelorussian patients (0.3% and 0.9%, respectively) and in significant increases of Fas and FasL expression in hepatoma and 1/486 German control individual (0.2%; adjusted OR=4.0, 95%CI 0.5- histiocytoma clones. 30.8, p=0.273). Heterozygous CHEK2 mutation carriers tended to be diagnosed at an earlier age in both populations, but these differences P0527. Molecular study on frequency of single nucleotide did not reach statistical significance. Family history of breast cancer polymorphism of TP53 among Iranian patients with gastric did not differ between carriers and non-carriers. Our data indicate that cancer the I157T allele, and possibly the IVS2+1G>A allele, of the CHEK2 A. Melati-Rad, S. Akhoundi, M. Vossoughi, M. Jedi-Tehrani, M. Zali, B. Noori- gene contribute to inherited breast cancer susceptibility. nayer; Research Center for gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Tehran, Islamic P0525. Genetic and epigenetic pathology of a number of cancer Republic of Iran. related genes in retinoblastoma. Introduction: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of P53 gene O. V. Babenko1,2, V. Zemlyakova1,2, S. Saakyan3, A. Brovkina3, V. Kozlova4, M. have been presumed to be associated with the genetic susceptibility Nemtsova1,2, D. Zaletayev1,2; to gastric cancer. We have hypothesized that SNPs within the TP53 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute may be associated with sporadic gastric cancer. Method: we designed of Molecular Medicine at Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federa- a case-control study of age, sex and ethnicity matched patients with tion, 3Moscow Institute for Eye Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Na- sporadic gastric cancer and healthy controls. Up to now we have tional Scientific Oncology Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. enrolled 81 cases and 49 controls. We used PCR-RFLP to distinguish Complex testing for structural and functional inactivation of the RB1 between the alleles at SNP 1042522 and the SNP 1800371. Both gene in 60 retinoblastomas have revealed a molecular defect in at loci were amplified by a single PCR reaction which resulted in 240 least one allele in 90% tumors. SSCP and heteroduplex analyses, bp amplicons. For the SNP 1042522, homozygous GG cases were along with direct sequencing, revealed 47 mutations in RB1 gene. Loss digested to 100 and 140 fragments. The heterozygous cases had three of heterozygosity (RBint2, RBint20, D13S262, D13S284) of at least bands at 240, 140 and 100 bp. For the SNP 1800371 homozygous one of markers was found in 70% of cases. RB1 aberrant methylation cases for the TT allele were digested to 25 and 215 segments. The was detected in 25% analyzed tumors. To investigate the role of heterozygous cases had three bands at 240, 215 and 25 bp. Results: methylation-demethylation and its association with retinoblastoma we The frequency of CC, CG and GG genotypes among the cases and studied methylation status of p16/CDKN2A and RB1CC1 promoter controls for the SNP 1042522 were as follows: 22.7% vs. 14.6%, regions as these genes function as upstream regulators of pRB 77.3% vs. 85.4%, 0% vs. 0% respectively. For the SNP 1800371 all activity; and promoter regions of p15/CDKN2B, p14/ARF, N33, MGMT, the genotypes were CC among the cases and controls. No significant HIC, ERα, CALCA, CDH1/E-cadherin and IGF2 tumor related genes difference was observed between the cases and controls for either of by multiplex methylation-sensitive PCR. High methylation frequencies the SNPs. Conclusion: Our preliminary result shows that the SNPs: were observed for CDH1 (60%), HIC1 (47%), p16 (15%), and p14 1042522 and 1800371 in the TP53 gene has no apparent association (22%). Low levels of methylation were detected for MGMT (2%), ERα with gastric cancer among a sample of Iranian patients. (7%), CALCA (3%) and RBCC1 (3%) genes. No methylation was shown for p15 and N33 promoter regions. We also detected a loss P0528. SET (TAF-IB) gene is highly expressed in acute of IGF2 gene imprinting in 28% retinoblastomas. The methylation lymphoblastic leukemia patients profile was compared for unilateral and bilateral retinoblastomas S. Sirma1, K. Ayten2, C. G. Ekmekci1, G. Grosveld2, U. Ozbek1; and for tumors differing in the mechanism of RB1 inactivation. The 1Department of Genetics, Institute for Experimental Medical Research (DE- mean methylation index in retinoblastomas with combined (structural TAE), Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Genetics, St Jude and functional) inactivation of RB1 was significantly higher than in Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, United States. tumors with incompletely inactivated RB1 (P = 0.01). The methylation SET gene (TAF1beta) was orginally identified as a component of the frequencies of the above genes did not significantly differ between the SET-CAN fusion gene in a patient with acute undifferentiated leukemia groups of tumors. These data confirm necessity of methylation profile (AUL). SET gene encodes a nuclear phosphoprotein that ubiquitously studying in different tumor types. expressed. SET was shown to be a inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A which involved in regulating cell proliferation and differentiation. SET is also a subunit of INHAT complex. Binding of INHAT komplex to histones prevent their asetilation which cause transcriptional repression.Cancer genetics 194 Overexpression of SET can inhibit demethylation of DNA which P0530. Combination of various molecular cytogenetic results in gene silencing. We have hypothesized that overexpression techniques in detection of structural rearrangements of of SET gene may play an important role in leukemogenesis. To test chromosome 7 in hematological malignancies this hypothesis we investigated SET gene expression in bone marrow J. Brezinova1, S. Ransdorfova1, Z. Zemanova2, L. Sindelarova2, L. Babicka2, J. sample of 57 acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients and 5 control Cermak1, K. Michalova1,2; samples from healthy volenteers using quantitative real-time PCR 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Cen- technique. SET gene expression in patients with acute lymphoblastic ter of Oncocytogenetics Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory Diag- leukemia was statistically higher than control samples(p=0.005). nostics, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Using Pearson’s chi-square test, no significant association between Prague, Czech Republic. SET gene expression and peripheral WBC count, sex, FAB group Deletion of long arms of chromosome 7 is one of the frequent and immunphenotype and presence of TEL-AML1 fusion gene in chromosomal aberrations in myeloid disorders such as myelodysplastic ALL was detected (Table 1). Overall survival and relapse-free survival syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML), and is was not significantly different between high and low SET expressed associated with aggressive disease and poor prognosis. Both terminal patients with ALL (n=48, log-rank=0.06, P= 0,80 n=42, log-rank=0.12, and interstitial deletions of 7q have been reported with variable P= 0,71 respectively). Finally, high level of SET mRNA expression breakpoints among patients. Only few studies have focused on the were found in acute leukemia. SET gene may play important role in analysis of translocations, either balanced or unbalanced, involving leukemogenesis. deleted chromosome 7q. In our study we used combination of multicolor Clinical characteristics at the time of diagnosis of patients studied fluorescence in situ hybridization (mFISH), multicolor banding (mBAND) Low High P for chromosome 7 and FISH with locus specific probes for 7q22, 7q31 Expression Expression value and 7q35 regions to detect the deletions and rearrangements of n n (X2) chromosome 7. Using classical cytogenetic techniques we examined 31 patients with different hematological malignancies, who had in Gender Female 4 17 (n=57) Male 8 28 1.000 malignant bone marrow cells 7q deletion or complex rearrangements of chromosome 7. FISH with locus specific probes confirmed the deletion 0 1 Age (Years) of 7q in 18 patients. The extent of deletion varied, del (7)(q22q35) was 9 years 9 35 0.823 (n=57) the most frequent one (5 patients). Different complex rearrangements 3 9 of chromosome 7 were proved using multicolor FISH (in 27 patients) 6 33 WBC (/ml) and multicolor banding technique for chromosome 7 (in 9 patients). 100.000/µl 2 4 0.187 (n=55) Origin of these rearrangements and their prognostic significance will 4 6 be discussed in the poster. Precursor B Immunophenotype 5 22 This work was supported by grants IGA MZCR NR 7995-3 and GACR cell 0.751 (n=57) 7 23 301/04/0407. T cell FAB L1 6 23 0.132 P0531. Genetic detection and clinical significance of occult (n=48) L2 5 14 lymph node metastasis in patients with liver metastasis from TEL-AML1 Positive 1 11 colorectal cancer 0.240 (n=55) Negative 10 33 S. Kappel1, D. Kandioler2, R. Steininger2, F. Laengle2, M. Ploder1, G. Berlakov- ich2, T. Soliman2, S. Rockenschaub2, F. Muehlbacher2; P0529. VHL mutation analysis in sporadic haemangioblastoma 1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery/ Surgical Research, Vi- E. R. Woodward1, F. MacDonald2, E. R. Maher3; enna, Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Transplantsurgery, 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham, United Vienna, Austria. Kingdom, 2DNA laboratory, Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women's Liver transplantation for nonresectable liver metastasis from Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Section of Medical and Molecular colorectal cancer has been abandoned in 1994 on account of high Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birming- recurrence rates and limited long-term survival. The aim of this study ham, United Kingdom. was to investigate whether the genetic detection of micrometastasis Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is estimated to account for ~30% in histologically negative lymph nodes from colon cancer can be of CNS haeamangioblastomas. A clinical diagnosis of VHL disease applied to select patients for liver transplantation. We retrospectively may be made in patients with multiple CNS haemangioblastomas or a analyzed 21 patients with colorectal cancer and subsequent liver single CNS haemangiobalstoma and a family history of VHL disease metastasis who had undergone a liver transplant within the 1983-1994 or an extra-CNS VHL tumour (retinal angioma, renal cell carcinoma or interval. Direct DNA sequencing was used to screen tumor material phaeochromocytoma). Previously we identified a germline VHL gene for p53 and K-ras mutations. Eleven of these patients had shown mutation in 4% of apparently sporadic haemangioblastoma cases. no histologically detectable lymph node metastasis at the time of Although specific VHL missense mutations may be associated with surgery (pN0), 10 patients with lymph node metastasis (pN1) served a phaeochromocytoma only phenotype evidence for low penetrance as control group. We used mutant allele-specific amplification (MASA) ‘haemangioblastoma only’ VHL mutations has not been reported. to identify corresponding genetic alterations in regional lymph nodes We now report a survey of VHL mutations in a cohort of 168 from colorectal cancer. p53 and K-ras mutations were detected in 12 apparently sporadic UK CNS haemangioblastoma patients (60 (57%) and 3 (14%) of 21 patients in the primary colorectal cancer, reported previously). We identified six patients (mean age 34.3 years) respectively, and could be confirmed in the corresponding liver with germline VHL gene mutations (two reported previously). Three metastasis. Nine of eleven histologically lymph node-negative patients patients had loss of function mutations (one frameshift, two germline were evaluable due to presence of p53 mutation. MASA revealed 6/9 deletions) reported previously in VHL disease and three patients patients to be genetically positive for micrometastasis. Three patients had germline missense mutations (two R200W and one N179D). were genetically a n d histologically negative. These 3 patients showed R200W has been reported previously in patients with VHL disease a significantly longer overall survival (p=0.011) of 4, 5 and 20 years, and cerebellar haemangioblastoma but, when homozygous, causes respectively. We conclude that the genetic detection of micrometastasis Chuvash polycythaemia. N179D has not been previously reported. by p53 and K-ras MASA could be a powerful prognostic indicator to These preliminary results suggest that (a) all patients with apparently select patients with colorectal liver metastasis who benefit from liver sporadic CNS haemangiobalstoma should undergo molecular transplantation. genetic testing for VHL disease by direct sequencing and MLPA and (b) germline VHL mutations detected in patients with sporadic CNS haemangioblastoma do not necessarily predict classical VHL disease in the proband and carrier relatives. Thus in such cases the family should be counselled carefully.Cancer genetics 195 P0532. Mutation analysis of the MYH gene in Czech FAP patients (CAG, TA and CA) in the androgen receptor, estrogen receptors α and M. Šulová1, K. Zídková1,2, Z. Kleibl3, J. Štekrová1, J. Vandrovcová1, M. Kohou- β genes respectively and breast cancer. DNA was isolated from 153 tová1; invasive breast tumors and 318 controls, and the three tandem repeats 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine and were sized by polyacrylamide electrophoresis. Number of repeats in General Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 23rd each allele and the total repeats of both alleles were taken as variables Medical Department, the First Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hos- for classification into dichotomous groups using the median of each pital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Biochemistry and variable in the control group as cut-off point. Relationship between Experimental Oncology, the First Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching polymorphic tandem repeats and breast cancer was assessed by Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. multivariate logistic regression models. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is inherited predisposition to The overall success of the model in predicting breast cancer was colorectal cancers characterized by adenomatous polyps in the colon 74.1% (for a 0.5 cut value). The results suggest that three variables and rectum. The autosomal dominant FAP is associated with germline combined, longer CAGsum (≥28; p<0.001; OR=9.262; 95%CI=3.583- mutations in the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) tumor-suppressor 23.945), shorter TA (<23; p<0.001; OR=4.195; 95%CI=1.912-9.206) gene. Germline mutations in the MYH gene have been associated and shorter CA (<23; p=0.028; OR=3.180; 95%CI=1.131-8.943) with recessive inheritance of multiple colorectal adenomas. The MYH repeats could constitute a possible genetic profile associated with protein plays an important role in the base-excision-repair system as breast cancer. an adenine-specific DNA glycosylase. Our data confirm previous reports regarding an association between We screened for germline MYH mutations in individuals with multiple (3 longer CAG repeats and breast cancer. In addition to that, we found to 100) colorectal adenomas and in APC-mutation-negative probands that the combination of long CAG, short TA and short CA repeats are with classic familial adenomatous polyposis (>100 adenomas). Mutation strongly associated with breast cancer. screening involves the entire MYH coding region and adjacent intronic sequences. We established mutation analysis using denaturing high P0535. The occurrence of a childhood choroid plexus carcinoma should be added to the indication criteria for testing for germline performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) on WAVE system. TP53 mutations Deviations were confirmed by direct DNA sequencing. We have detected compound heterozygotes for two the most common K. Novotna1, V. Krutilkova1,2, M. Trkova1, J. Fleitz3, V. Gregor4, A. Krepelova1, germline mutations c.494A>G (p.Y165C); c.1145G>A (p.G382D) and D. Sumerauer5, R. Kodet6, S. Siruckova7, P. Plevova7, L. Foretova8, S. Ben- several other sequence changes (mutation/polymorphism) either in dova1, P. Hedvicakova1, N. K. Foreman3, Z. Sedlacek1; MYH coding sequences or in intronic sequences. Further elucidation 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - Second Medi- of functional role of the altered residues, together with the analysis of cal School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Gennet, other family members, will help to establish a more definitive correlation Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology of these changes with pathogenicity. and BMT, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center and The Children´s Supported by the grant project IGA MZ CR NR8103-3/2004 Hospital, Denver, CO, United States, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Thom- ayer University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Department of Paediatric P0533. HER2/neu gene amplification in muscle invasive bladder Haematology and Oncology, Charles University - Second Medical School and cancer; FISH analysis on paraffin-embedded specimens University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 6Department of Pathology T. Yakut1, M. Demiray2, Z. Çalışkan3, T. Gülten1; and Molecular Medicine, Charles University - Second Medical School and Uni- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty of Uludag University, Bursa, versity Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 7Department of Medical Genet- Turkey, 2Department of Medical Oncology, Medical Faculty of Uludag University, ics, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 8Masaryk Memorial Bursa, Turkey, 3Department of Urology, Medical Faculty of Uludag University, Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic. Bursa, Turkey. We present five new families of paediatric patients suffering from choroid plexus carcinoma in which we found germline TP53 mutations. Studies in bladder cancer have revealed a discrepancy between gene Only one of the families conformed to the criteria of the Li-Fraumeni amplification and protein expression of Her2/neu gene and the clinical syndrome, and only three (including the Li-Fraumeni syndrome family) importance as a prognostic value. Parafin-embedded specimens from met the Chompret criteria for germline TP53 mutation testing. There a total of 34 cases which non of them had received radiotherapy or was no family history of cancer in the remaining two families and/or the chemotherapy of diagnosed bladder cancer were analysed using dual- parents of the patient were shown not to carry the mutation. Our results color flourescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Dual color hybridization give further strong support to the notion that the occurrence of this signals belong to chromosome 17/HER2neu gene and chromosome rare paediatric tumour, especially in combination with a positive family 17/chromosome 8 were countered within 200 interphase nuclei history of cancer, but possibly also without any family history, may per specimen. Among the 34 bladder tumor patients 5 cases had be a strong indicator of a germline TP53 mutation. The identification HER2/neu amplification with the different copy number ratio and 17 of these five new families prompted us to analyse the efficiency of cases had increased copy number for chromosomes 8 and 17. The various clinical criteria for germline TP53 mutation testing. In total, we average of overall survival for the 2 of 5 cases which had HER2/neu tested members of 102 cancer families, and found 14 germline TP53 amplification less than 5 copy number was 19.3 months and for the mutations. All but two mutations were identified in families meeting remain 3 cases which had HER2/neu amplification more than 10 copy at least one of the criteria (Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Li-Fraumeni-like number was 34 months. Our preliminary results suggest that HER2/ syndrome (Manchester), or the Chompret criteria). The remaining two neu gene amplifications may play important role in the progression of mutations were identified in two families with paediatric choroid plexus bladder cancers. Furthermore, over expression of HER2/neu protein carcinoma patients mentioned above. Furthermore, in each of the total without DNA amplification may be depend on increased copy number of six families tested with occurrence of this tumour a TP53 mutation of chromosome 17 or poliploidy. was found. We suggest therefore that the occurrence of this tumour is added to the indication criteria for germline TP53 mutation testing. P0534. Polymorphic tandem repeats of three sexual hormone receptors genes in breast cancer Supported by grant MSM0021620813 from the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic. A. Anghel, M. Raica, C. Marian; "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Timisoara, Timisoara, P0536. Genomic and chromosome 17 imbalances as targets for Romania. platin-chemoresistance investigation in ovarian cancer patients Case-control studies have reported inconsistent results concerning J. K. R. Heinrich1, L. C. Teixeira2, L. A. L. A. Andrade3, S. Toledo1, F. A. Böttch- the association between polymorphisms in the androgen and estrogen er-Luiz4; receptor genes and breast cancer. While several studies investigated 1CAISM/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2Gynecology and Obstetrics Dept/ FCM/ the association between the androgen receptor gene CAG repeat UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 3Pathology Dept/FCM/UNICAMP, Campinas, and breast cancer, for the CA and TA repeats in the estrogen receptor Brazil, 4Gynecology and Obstetrics Dept/FCM/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil. genes there are considerable fewer studies. Ovarian cancer diagnosis and treatment are still one of the major We have investigated the potential link between three tandem repeatsCancer genetics 196 challenges for the clinical oncologist. Our hospital follows the known and hence acted as a control for the FISH results. In 30/53 international consensus of surgery followed by chemo, usually platin- tumours an abnormal FISH result was obtained in which 21/30 (70%) based in most cases. Around 30% of the patients show some kind of indicated a tumour content of over 50%. In only two cases was no or an resistance to the chemotherapeutic approach, which is very frustrating incomplete result obtained. For those cases where the karyotype was for the patient and financially demanding for a public institution. New known no discrepancy was seen with the FISH result. In addition the genomic approaches have been applied in order to find molecular signal quality from the touch preparations was superior to that typically markers that could predict chemotherapy response or at least to possible with paraffin embedded material and valuable insights were indicate possible genes or chromosome regions involved in this gained on the karyotypic make-up of old archival material. The results phenotype. The objective of this study was to evaluate chromosome demonstrate that the use of FISH is an efficient and reliable method regions gains and losses through comparative genomic hybridization to accurately screen the tumour content of frozen samples prior to the and correlate the genetic profiling to clinical data in ovarian tumors employment of techniques such as arrayCGH. from patients that haven’t responded to cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Sixteen tumors were included, 75% with a resistant phenotype and P0539. Clinical follow up of BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers in the 25% with a complete responsive phenotype. All tumors were of serous Czech Republic type and FIGO clinical stage III or IV. Four normal ovarian samples L. Foretova, M. Navratilova, D. Hanouskova, B. Dvorackova, M. Lukesova, M. were taken as controls. All tumor specimens presented some degree Palacova, R. Kalabova, K. Petrakova; of chromosomal imbalance widely varying from sample to sample. Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic. Resistant tumors displayed major gains in 11p12~14, 13q21~22, Genetic counselling and testing of BRCA1/2 genes in hereditary breast 16q12~qter, and repeatedly at 17q, which harbors the ERB-B2 region. and ovarian cancer syndrome is done at the Masaryk Memorial Cancer Losses were found at 3q24-26, 1q31~41 and 17p. Twelve resistant Institute (MMCI) in Brno since 1997. Testing was done in 474 families samples presented some alteration at chromosome 17 which indicate that fulfilled our criteria, in 32.5% germline mutation in BRCA1/2 gene that this chromosome might have “hot gene targets” for individual was discovered. Predictive testing was offered to 312 healthy relatives, analysis by less expensive and less time consuming approaches that in 82 women and 41 men genetic predisposition was found. could be investigated before treatment such as mutation analysis, To provide carriers with a clinical follow up high-risk preventive clinic FISH and others. was established at the MMCI. Patients (79 women and 4 men), healthy carriers (53 women and 6 men) of BRCA1/2 mutation and high-risk P0537. Novel CDKN2A mutations and founder effect in individuals with undetected mutation in a family are invited regularly to melanoma families from Tuscany check ups by a specialised nurse. Psychological support, consultation F. Gensini1, R. Sestini1, L. Borgognoni2, P. Brandani2, P. Carli3, A. Chiarugi3, M. with specialised nurse, geneticist and other clinicians is available to all Piazzini1, M. Genuardi1; individuals when needed. 1Medical Genetics, Firenze, Italy, 2Plastic Surgery, Regional Melanoma Referral The role of preventive surgery is explained to all carriers. Until now Center, S.M.Annunziata Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 3Dermatology, Firenze, Italy. 12 patients and 3 healthy carriers (age >35) underwent prophylactic About 10% of melanoma patients have a positive family history for the adnexectomy after the genetic testing. Prophylactic mastectomy and disease, and a fraction of these pedigrees shows mendelian inheritance. reconstruction was done in 13 patients and 1 healthy carrier. At least CDKN2A is the main gene involved in genetic predisposition to 6 patients and 3 healthy carriers are decided for prophylactic surgery melanoma, and is associated with incomplete penetrance and variable of breasts and 8 patients and 1 healthy carrier for adnexectomy. expressivity. Constitutional CDKN2A mutations are found in 15-40% of Psychosocial issues related to genetic testing and cancer prevention, familial melanoma cases. preventive care in other centres in the Czech Republic are now We have investigated the frequency and spectrum of CDKN2A investigated. mutations in a series of 18 apparently unrelated families from a region Contract grant sponsor: Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: of Central Italy (Tuscany). The whole CDKN2A coding sequence was MZ00020980501; Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of Health of the evaluated by direct sequencing. Three novel mutations were identified Czech Republic, contract grant number: NR/8022-3 in 5 families. Two mutations (G23S and E27X, observed in 1 family each) are located in exon 1α, and the other one (P114S, observed P0540. New Croatian PTCH mutation in Gorlin syndrome family in 3 families) in exon 2. Pedigrees segregating CDKN2A mutations linked to craniopharyngioma were characterized by the presence of >3 melanoma cases, multiple V. Musani1, A. Basta-Juzbasic2, T. Stipisic3, P. Gorry4, S. Levanat1; melanomas, early age at diagnosis, and non-melanoma tumors 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Dermatovenerology, (pancreatic and oral cancer). G23S is located in the functionally University School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Department of Dermatovenerolo- important first ankyrinic domain of p16. A different missense mutation gy, Clinical Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 4Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France. affecting the same codon had been reported previously and shown The Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) or Gorlin to disrupt p16 activity by a functional assay. Haplotype analysis in syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized members of the 3 families segregating the G23S mutation showed a by multiple basal cell carcinomas (BCCs), medulloblastomas, common ancestral origin of the mutation. Our data show that the G23S meningiomas, fibromas of the ovaries and heart; cysts of the skin, jaws, mutation is an important cause of hereditary melanoma in Tuscany. and mesentery; pits of the palms and soles; diverse developmental abnormalities, often including rib and craniofacial alterations and less P0538. FISH is a reliable method to assess the tumour content of often, polydactyly, syndactyly, and spina bifida. frozen old archival material The syndrome is caused by mutations in the human homolog of the R. Schaub1, D. Bausch1, C. Oehlschlegel2, F. K. Niggli1, D. R. Betts1; Drosophila patched gene, PTCH. PTCH is a tumor supressor gene, 1University Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland, 2Kantonsspital St. Gallen, located at 9q22.3, and encodes a transmembrane glycoprotein that St. Gallen, Switzerland. acts as an antagonist in the Hedgehog signaling pathway. It has 12- In order to perform genetic analysis of frozen tumour material it is transmembrane domains, two large extracellular loops involved in important to know the actual tumour content of the available biopsy. ligand binding, one large intracellular loop and intracellular N- and C- However, the assessment of tumour content in old frozen material termini. is often hampered by deterioration in cell morphology. To attempt to We report a family case with Gorlin syndrome associated with resolve this problem, prior to processing the material to molecular typical phenothypical features of widespread basocelluar tumors investigation, touch preparations were made for subsequent FISH and craniophacial and bone malformations but also with unusual (fluorescence in situ hybridisation) analysis. Fifty three biopsies from appearance of craniopharyngioma. In this family we found by SSCP, childhood embryonal tumours (38 nephroblastomas, 9 embryonal dHPLC and direct sequencing a novel mutation of PTCH gene. rhabdomyosarcomas and 6 hepatoblastomas) were available of which Immunohistochemistry analyses demonstrated specific aberration of the oldest sample was 28 years old. A range of FISH probes were PTCH. employed that represented some of the frequent cytogenetic events Our finding provide additional evidence of craniopharyngioma of these tumours. In a number of cases the karyotype was already involvement in the pathogenesis of Gorlin syndrome.Cancer genetics 197 P0541. Functional analysis of MSH2 mutations associated with disease, including cancer. hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer TNFα is a cytokine produced by activated monocytes and S. E. Ollila, L. Sarantaus, R. Kariola, T. E. Raevaara, M. Siitonen, M. Nyström; macrophages, which play a key role in the inflammatory response. Departmet of Biosciences, Division of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Increased serum TNFα levels have been described in cancer patients, Finland, Helsinki, Finland. and are associated with an adverse disease outcome. TNFα gene is Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is associated mapped to chromosome 6p21.3 and a large number of polymorphisms with germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes, mainly of its promoter, called "high-production" polymorphisms, have been MSH2 and MLH1. Most of mutations are different with each other described. The aim of our study was to estimate allelic frequency for and quite evenly distributed. Furthermore, a significant proportion of four promoter SNPs in TNFα gene, -238, -308, -857 and -1031 in the mutations give rise to single amino acid substitutions. A major challenge Croatian population and in patients with colon cancer. DNAs obtained in the clinical management of patients with suspected HNPCC is the from 150 colon cancer patients and 150 unrelated healthy volunteers frequent occurrence of missense mutations, which can be considered were genotyped for the TNFα -238, -308, -857 and -1031 SNPs using neither deleterious nor clinically innocent à priori. real-time PCR TaqMan® SNP genotyping assays. The frequency of To assess their significance we studied 16 MSH2 missense variants alleles associated with altered TNFα production was: 3%, 4%, 18.8% that occur in several subdomains of the MSH2 protein for in vitro and 18.8% for -238A, -308A, -857T and -1031C, respectively. "High- mismatch repair capability. The mutations were chosen such that the production" allele variant -308A was more common in the population biochemical data obtained could be correlated with genetic and clinical with colon cancer in the comparison to healthy volunteers. The data relating to respective HNPCC families. PCR mutagenesis was association between these polymorphism and colon cancer has to be used to create the mutated MSH2 cDNAs, the protein variants were investigated in the future studies. expressed in a baculovirus expression system, and the functionality of the mutated proteins was investigated in a homologous human MMR P0544. Differential activity of demethylating agents on the MLH1 system. promoter. Among the sixteen MSH2 variants, 10 variants with remarkably E. Lucci-Cordisco1, L. Boccuto1, I. Zito1, G. Neri1, M. Genuardi2; reduced repair efficiency were classified as defective. It is interesting 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, to note that most of the 10 variants could be expressed only in lower 2Sezione di Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia Clinica, Università amounts than the wild type protein suggesting that these amino acid di Firenze, Firenze, Italy. substitutions impart also instability on the mutant proteins. Six variants Regulatory genes are often hypermethylated at their promoter acted like wild type protein in the repair assay and further examinations regions and silenced in cancer. Therefore, the use of demethylating need to be done to evaluate their pathogenicity. agents, that could reactivate these genes, appears as a logical way to approach cancer treatment. The most widely used demethylating P0542. Analysis of chromosomal translocations involved MLL agent is 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC), a nucleoside analogue, gene using hybridization with oligonucleotide microarrays. that, unfortunately, exhibits large side effects. This has prompted to O. N. Mityaeva1, E. A. Isaeva2, V. S. Zharinov2, A. V. Chudinov1, R. B. Yurasov1, find out less toxic agents. Procainamide, a non-nucleoside inhibitor of A. S. Zasedatelev1, T. V. Nasedkina1; DNA methyltransferases used in the clinical setting for the treatment 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re- of cardiac arrhythmias, induced demethylation and re-expression of search Institute of Pediatric Hematology, Moscow, Russian Federation. several genes in different cell lines. 11q23 chromosomal rearrangements occur in 70-80% of ALL Our purpose was to evaluate whether procainamide can be used to cases and in 50-60% of AML cases among infants and traditionally reactivate MLH1 in human colorectal cancer cell lines (HCA-7 and are characterized by poor prognosis. However, last investigations RKO) with MLH1 promoter hypermethylation. The compound was demonstrate the noticeable clinical heterogeneity of patients regarding administered for 24h - 14 days at 50-1000 μM concentration. MLH1 to a gene-partner involved in rearrangements with MLL- gene. The gene expression was evaluated by Real-Time PCR. No RNA could diversity of genes (MLL-gene has more than 30 different gene- be detected at any drug concentration and time points tested in our partners) makes difficult the analysis of 11q23 abnormalities using cells. As a positive control 5-aza-dC was also used and, as expected, standard methods (cytogenetics, FISH or standard RT-PCR). it restored MLH1 expression. To establish that our procainamide Here we present a biochip, which allows to identify 7 chromosomal treatment regimen was effective on other promoters, we showed an aberrations with MLL gene: t(4;11), t(6;11), t(9;11), t(10;11), up-regulation of RARβ expression in the MCF-7 cell line following t(11;19)ENL, t(11;19)ELL, dup(11). The MLL-biochip consists of 16 treatment at 500 μmol/L for 3 days. types of oligonucleotide probes, representing parts of gene sequences In conclusion, our results show that the effects of demethylating agents involved in aberrations, and allows the analysis of about 45 fusion can vary among different cell lines and genes, suggesting potential transcript variants. limitations to the efficacy of these compounds. The 82 bone marrow or peripheral blood samples from patients with primary AML and the 83 samples from patients with primary ALL were P0545. A novel RFLP analysis of mitochondrial D310 analyzed using RT-PCR with hybridization on biochips. We have found polymorphism in breast and colorectals cancers that translocations involved MLL-gene, occur in 67% of infants with C. Aral, H. Kaya, Ç. Ataizi-Çelikel, M. Akkiprik, Ö. Sönmez, B. M. Güllüoğlu, A. AML, in 8 % of children older than 1 year with AML, in 46% of infants Özer; with ALL and in 9% of children with ALL aged 1 to 3 years. In the present Marmara University, School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. investigation the dup(11) was not included in the analysis since during Recently a homopolymeric C stretch (D310) was identified in the D- screening using standard RT-PCR approach we detected the MLL loop region of mitochondrial DNA as a hot spot of mutations. This duplication more often than it was described previously for leukemia region consists of two cytosine stretches interrupted by a thymine patients. We supposed that the dup(11) might be detected in low titer in nucleotide. It is widely accepted that 7 cytosine residues are located the majority of patients but this fact had no clinical significance. at the first stretch but, it is highly polymorphic between 6-C to 9-C. We conducted an RFLP analysis using restriction enzyme, BsaXI, in P0543. TNFα promoter SNPs in Croatian population - association order to determine the distribution of 7-C sequence among 41 healthy with colon cancer persons and 50 cancer patients in the Turkish population. We found S. Kapitanovic1, T. Cacev1, H. Kapitanovic Vidak2, R. Spaventi3, K. Pavelic1; out that 65.9% of healthy individuals showed BsaXI (-) genotype 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Special hospital for children with that meant most of the population did not fit into the 7-C sequence. neurodevelopmental and motor difficulties, Zagreb, Croatia, 3PLIVA d.d. Re- No heteroplasmy was detected among the healthy individuals. search Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. Heteroplasmy was encountered in breast and colorectal patients (8 The immune system is a complex network of cells that are involved in and 24%, respectively). No significant difference was found between the protection of humans against infectious agents and tumor growth. the matched samples of tumor and normal tissues in their BsaXI status. Inherited polymorphisms in immuno-modulatory genes may contribute BsaXI status of colorectal cancer samples were significantly different to variation in immune function and genetic susceptibility for complex from that in healty individuals. In conclusion, BsaXI RFLP analysis isCancer genetics 198 a rapid and a non-radioactive method for the determination of D-310 IV). In other case with oligodendroglioma (grade II) we proved deletion polymorphism and may be a useful tool for early tumor detection. of RB1 gene - typical finding in high grade astrocytoma. In four patients with anaplastic astrocytoma combined deletion of 1p36 and 19q13.3 P0546. Significance of additional chromosomal aberrations in was found, which could predict good response to chemotherapy in bone marrow cells of children with TEL/AML1 positive acute these patients. lymphocytic leukemia I-FISH is a powerful tool for surveying chromosomal abberations in K. Michalova1, Z. Zemanova1, L. Sindelarova1, L. Babicka1, S. Ransdorfova2, J. tumour cells. A systematic molecular cytogenetic analysis may advance Brezinova2, A. Oltova3, D. Mentzlova3, M. Jarosova4, M. Holzerova4, K. Muziko- diagnosis, grading and classification of brain tumours. va5, R. Formankova6, P. Sedlacek6, A. Vrzalova6, J. Stary6; Supported by grant IGA MZ CR 1A/8237-3. 1Center of Oncocytogenetics UKBLD, General Faculty Hospital, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague 2, P0548. Investigation of the genetic basis of the outcome of Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, 4De- chemotherapy in breast cancer patients. partment of Hemato-oncology, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 5CLIP - Childhood M. Jaremko1,2, C. Justenhoven2, P. Fritz2, B. Abraham2, W. Schroth2, C. Leukaemia Investigation Prague, 2nd Medical Faculty of Charles University, Vollmert3, T. Illig3, H. Brauch2; Prague 5, Czech Republic, 6Department of Children Hematology and Oncology, 1Institute of Molecular Techniques, Department of Forensic Medicine, Wroclaw 2nd Medical Faculty of Charles University, Prague 5, Czech Republic. Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 2Dr. Margarete Fisher-Bosch Institute of Cryptic translocation t(12;21)(p13;q22) which give origin to the hybrid Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany, 3GSF National Research Center for gene TEL/AML1 can be found by FISH in approximately 25% of children Environment and Health, Institute of Epidemiolgy, Neuherberg, Germany. with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) as the most frequent specific Pharmacogenetics aims to identify the inherited basis for inter- aberration. Despite of the fact that according to the most authors this individual differences in drug response. Polymorphisms contributing to finding is favorable prognostic sign, TEL/AML1 positive children can this inter-individual variation may be located in genes encoding drug have late relapses. One of the reasons could be high instability of metabolizing enzymes (DME), drug transporters (DT), receptors, DNA the genome of leukemic cells, which is manifested on chromosomal repair enzymes, cell cycle regulators (CCR), and other potential drug level by additional aberrations and complex rearrangements. As it was targets. To draw conclusion on the relationship between the genome already proved in adult patients with acute myeloid leukemia or other and chemotherapy outcome of breast cancer patients genotype and hematologic malignancies, complex karyotypes in bone marrow cells survival data are needed. This requires patients with long follow-up and mean adverse prognostic effect. The same could apply for pediatric their formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues (FFPET). Constitutional patients. DNA was isolated from FFPET of 199 breast cancer patients who We examined 79 children with ALL and TEL/AML1 fusion gene proved received adjuvant chemotherapy (CMF, and anthracyclines), and had by RT-PCR. Most of them are living in the first or second complete at least 5 years documented clinical follow-up. There were 100 patients remission. Relapse appeared in 16 children (20%). Two patients died without and 99 patients with relapse. Genotypes were established by (one because of relapse and second for treatment complications). MALDI-TOF MS at 32 polymorphic loci of potentially relevant genes. Karyotypes were analyzed by conventional and molecular-cytogenetic We applied univariate analysis for genotype associated over all survival methods (I-FISH, WCP-FISH, mFISH). In 48 children (61%) we found (OVS). All genotype frequencies were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. except t(12;21)(p13;q22) additional chromosomal aberrations, the We observed significant differences in genotype distributions with most frequently trisomy or tetrasomy of chromosome 21 (14 cases), respect to OVS at three loci: CCNA2_159_A>G (p=0.0138), GSTP1_ deletion of non-translocated TEL allele (14 cases) and/or deletion of 313_A>G (p=0.0192), XRCC3_11672_C>T (p=0.0062). These data 6q (6 cases). In seven children variant translocations of chromosomes provide a first basis for the identification of constitutional markers 12 and 21 with other partners were found and in 35 children (44,3%) potentially useful for the prediction of chemotherapy outcome in breast complex aberrations were identified. In our cohort additional aberrations cancer. were indicator of poor prognosis (p=0,05). Supported by grants GACR 301/04/0407 and MSM 0021620813 and P0549. Results of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation analysis in the IGA NC7490. Czech breast/ovarian cancer patients M. Lukesova, E. Machackova, H. Pavlu, V. Urbankova, J. Kuklova, M. Navrati- P0547. Molecular cytogenetic analyses of malignant brain lova, L. Foretova; tumour cells. Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic. Z. Zemanova1, K. Michalova1,2, S. Ransdorfova2, L. Babicka1, L. Sindelarova1, Germline mutations in highly penetrant cancer susceptibility genes J. Brezinova2, F. Kramar3, P. Kozler3; BRCA1 and BRCA2 cause genetic predisposition to breast and 1Center of Oncocytogenetics UKBLD, General Faculty Hospital and 1.st Medi- ovarian cancers. cal Faculty of Charles Univ., Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Hematol- Molecular genetic analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 359 ogy and Blood Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Neurosurgical Depart- high-risk breast and breast/ovarian cancer families, 32 patients with ment of Central Military Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty of Charles Univ., bilateral breast or ovarian cancer or both, and 83 women diagnosed Prague 6, Czech Republic. with early-onset sporadic breast/ovarian cancer below 40 years has Diffuse gliomas are heterogeneous group of central nervous system been performed in our laboratory since 1999. Overall, in 32.5% of tumours with various histological subtypes that differ in their response tested index cases pathogenic mutation was discovered. to treatment and prognosis. Differentiation of glial subtypes based Concerning disease causing mutations, 45 different germline solely on morphology is subjective. Therefore, new diagnostic and mutations were found, 22 in BRCA1 gene and 23 in BRCA2 gene. prognostic indicators must be sought to enable stratification of the The most frequent mutations were c.5385dupC (42 cases), c.3819_ treatment and to help reduce morbidity and mortality of patients. 3823delGTAAA (14 cases), c.300T> G (13 cases) in BRCA1 gene; and One possibility is subclassification of patients according to findings of c.8138_8142delCCTTT (10 cases), c.8765_8766delAG (10 cases) in specific chromosomal aberrations. BRCA2 gene (using the BIC Database numbering). Altogether, these 5 For detection of most frequent chromosomal changes in glial cells mutations represented 58% of all detected mutations. (deletion of tumor-suppressor genes p53, p16 and RB1, deletion of In addition to the pathogenic mutations, 26 different variants of unknown 1p36 and/or 19q13.3, amplification of EGFR gene, trisomy 7 and significance (12 in BRCA1 gene and 14 in BRCA 2 gene) were found. monosomy 10) we used I-FISH with locus-specific and/or α-satellite The population frequency of these variants and segregation analysis probes (Abbott Vysis™). We examined 20 patients with different types was studied. of gliomas (4x low-grade astrocytoma, 4x anaplastic astrocytoma, Moreover, our predictive testing of 342 symptomatic and 6x glioblastoma, 2x low-grade oligodendroglioma, 4x anaplastic nonsymptomatic relatives revealed 145 mutation carriers. Preventive oligodendroglioma). The results of molecular-cytogenetic analyses care in a specialised clinic is offered to all of them. were correlated with morphological and clinical findings. In two patients Contract grant sponsor: Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: with original diagnosis of anaplastic astrocytoma (grade III) we proved MZ00020980501; Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of Health of the amplificationof EGFR gene - typical aberration of glioblastoma (grade Czech Republic, contract grant number: NR/8213-3Cancer genetics 199 P0550. Quantitative Image Analysis for Scoring Her2 basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2Institute of Molecular Cancer Research,University of Amplification Status in Metastatic Breast Carcinoma. Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. C. M. Ellis1, M. J. Dyson1, T. J. Stephenson2, E. L. Maltby1; Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is an autosomal 1Sheffield Childrens NHS Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Histopathology, dominantly inherited cancer predisposition syndrome caused by Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom. germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Large We examined paraffin wax sections from 114 cases of metastatic genomic deletions in MSH2 or MLH1 have been reported to account breast cancer in order to compare the amplification status of the for up to 27% of all MMR gene mutations, missed by conventional oncogene Her2 by means of an immunohistochemical (IHC) stain test mutation detection techniques. (HercepTest) against FISH using the Abbott-Vysis PathVysion probe We screened for large genomic deletions/insertions in the germline kit. using the multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA) The Her2 Digital Scoring Application of Applied Imaging’s assay in 21 unrelated HNPCC patients whose tumors exhibited Micrometastasis Detection System (MDS) was used in addition to microsatellite instability and showed immunohistological loss of either manual scoring of FISH and HercepTest to determine if this system MLH1 (n=12) or MSH2 (n=9) but in whom no pathogenic MMR gene provides an accurate alternative. mutation could be identified. We detected four novel large genomic Of the IHC 3+ cases, 90% showed Her2 amplification by FISH. Of the deletions, two in MLH1 (EX7_9del and EX13del) and two in MSH2 IHC 2+ cases, 32% showed amplification by FISH. Of the negative (EX7_8del and EX8_11del). IHC cases (0 or 1+), 6 % were amplified by FISH. Classification To assess the type of the second, somatic alteration (second hit) discrepancies were observed in 18% of HercepTest cases scored by occurring in the tumors, we analysed 8 different cancers (5 colorectal, 2 eye and by using the MDS system. The MDS proved to be consistent renal and 1 brain tumor) from these deletion carriers using microsatellite with manual FISH scoring and correctly differentiated most cases of markers and the MLPA assay. Assessing allelic imbalance by marker ambiguous manual IHC scoring. analysis was impeded by the presence of microsatellite instability in Published response data has shown that the determination of Her2 about 50% of informative markers whereas the MLPA assay allowed amplification by FISH is a more reliable selection procedure for to determine exon-specific gene dosage in 7 out of 8 cancers. Herceptin treatment than HercepTest. We have found that the MDS Consequently, none of the tumors showed evidence for whole gene system does provide an accurate alternative to manual FISH scoring loss. In two colorectal cancers (both from the MLH1 EX7_9del kindred) and that it also appears to improve the correlation between IHC and as well as in the brain tumor (MSH2 EX8_11del) the second hit was FISH categorisation. identical to the first hit alteration, indicating mitotic recombination as In addition, we have also presented an interesting case with primary mechanism of somatic inactivation in these tumors. heterogeneous tumour populations where FISH analysis has called into question the DakoCytomation HercepTest scoring criteria. P0553. Increasing detection efficiency of microsatellite instabilities in colon carcinoma by applying a label-free method P0551. Detection of chromosomal changes in plasma cells by R. Salowsky1, N. Barta2, S. Baldus2, S. Lammers2, O. Mueller1, M. Odenthal2; interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization in patients with 1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2Institute for Pathology, University multiple myeloma Clinic Cologne, Cologne, Germany. L. Sindelarova1, Z. Zemanova1, L. Babicka1, J. Brezinova2, S. Ransdorfova2, L. Microsatellite instability (MSI) is caused by a failure of the DNA Houskova1, K. Michalova1,2; mismatch repair system and occurs frequently in various types of 1Center of Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory cancer. Since MSI, associated with ca. 10 to 15 % of colorectal, gastric Diagnostics, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Hematology and Blood or endometrial carcinoma, impact clinical prognosis, MSI analysis is Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic. an important tool of molecular pathology. This study aimed to develop Multiple myeloma (MM) is hematological malignancy characterized a simple and efficient procedure of MSI detection. 40 cases with by the infiltration of bone marrow by plasma cells with numerical and no (27), low (l) or high (h) MSI (13), pre-identified by conventional structural chromosomal abnormalities. The most frequent are deletions fluorochrome-associated PAGE technology, were selected out of a of RB1 gene at 13q14 or monosomy 13 and translocations involving panel of 150 patients with colon carcinoma. Microdissected non-tumor 14q32, where is the locus for immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH). (N) and tumor (T) tissue areas of one or two 4 µm-sections were de- From different partner chromosomes in translocations, 11q13 is the paraffinized and DNA was extracted. Primer sequences recognizing most frequent one, giving better prognosis. FISH analysis of plasma the five microsatellite loci BAT25, BAT26, D5S346, D17S250, cells labeled by immunofluorescence allows their identification even in D2S123, were selected according to the recommendation of the cases with low bone marrow infiltration. 1997 National Cancer Institute-sponsored conference on MSI. Primer The aim of the study is identification of the frequency of deletions and/ sets were applied in label-free duplex or single PCR assays for DNA or monosomies 13, 14q32 rearrangements, t(11;14) and evaluation of amplification and amplicons were analysed by microfluidics based their prognostic significance. on-chip electrophoresis. In all 40 cases, chip linked microcapillary We examined bone marrow samples of patients with MM by FISH electrophoresis of the amplicons, arisen from tumor and non-tumor with specific DNA probes (Abbott-VysisTM). Identification of deletion/ DNA, resulted in highly resolved, distinct patterns of each of the monosomy of chromosome 13, was done by locus specific probes LSI microsatellite loci. Label-free detection of MSI could be demonstrated 13 (RB1) 13q14 and LSI 13q34, 14q32 translocations were verified by microsatellite loci-associated deviations in the electropherogram with LSI IgH rearrangement probe, t(11;14)(q13;q32) was detected profiles of tumor and non-tumor material, and confirmed the with LSI IgH/CCND1 probe. Totally 66 patients were examined with prediagnosis of the MSI cases by conventional technology. Here, we 13q14/13q34 probes, deletion of RB-1 gene was found in 22 (33%) present a simple and robust approach for MSI detection, which allows and monosomy 13 was identified in 20 (30%), combination of both was a label-free microsatellite analysis of uncharacterized microdissected proved in five (7,6%). IgH translocation was evaluated in 58 patients tissue areas within 30 minutes. and was detected in 21 (36%) of them (deletions, partial trisomies and monosomies were also found). Five out of 10 patients examined for P0554. RNASEL R462Q is significantly associated with Prostate t(11;14) were positive. Cancer in the Italian population Prognostic significance of chromosomal changes and the contribution M. M. van Duist1, D. Giachino1, A. Zitella2, P. De Stefanis2, M. E. Graziano2, C. of immunofluorescence in cytogenetic examination of MM will be Cracco3, R. Scarpa3, U. Ferrando2, D. Fontana2, A. Tizzani2, M. De Marchi1; evaluated. 1Medical Genetics, University of Torino, Orbassano, Italy, 2Centro prostata, ASO Supported by grant IGA NR-8183-4. S.Giovanni Battista, Torino, Italy, 3SCDU Urologia, Orbassano, Italy. RNASEL is the most likely candidate prostate cancer susceptibility P0552. Second hit analysis in tumors from HNPCC patients gene of the HPC1 locus at 1q23. It encodes a constitutively expressed carrying novel large genomic deletions in MSH2 or MLH1 latent 2'-5’-oligoadenylate-dependent ribonuclease that mediates the J. Zhang1, G. Marra22, H. Mueller11, K. Heinimann1; antiviral and pro-apoptotic activities of the interferon-inducible 2-5A 1Research Group Human Genetics,Center for Biomedicine DKBW,university of system.Cancer genetics 200 In single high risk families rare inactivating mutations have been accumulation of carcinogenic events). reported and association studies of sporadic prostate cancer with the We attempted to address this question by the analysis of genetic events common R462Q polymorphism resulted in variable findings in different in the 17p13 region in multifocal and recurrent superficial TCCs. TP53 populations. To our knowledge, this putative low-penetrance allele has gene mutations and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of three intragenic not been previously analyzed in the Italian population. and two extragenic TP53 polymorphic DNA markers were tested in We collected DNA samples of 192 prostate cancer patients attending 25 patients with 2-8 TCCs sampled between 2000 and 2004 (a total four participating Urologic Units and 218 controls, with the aim to of 83 tumours). We found that the tumours from an individual always evaluate the frequency of R462Q in our population and detect possible showed the same TP53 mutation (4 of 25 patients (16%)). In similar, we differences between sporadic and familial cases, useful to plan a larger found that with the exception of two patients with discordant findings prospective study on this and other SNPs. Genotyping was done by and three non-informative patients, the tumours from each individual PCR-DHPLC. always showed either absence or presence of LOH, with the same Genotype frequencies (%) in controls were: RR 43.6, RQ 42.2, QQ allele lost in all tumours (14 of 20 patients (70%), and 6 of 20 patients 14.2 vs 31.2, 51.6 and 17.2 in patients. Allele Q was significantly more (30%), respectively). These results rather support the monoclonality frequent in patients (69%) vs. controls (56% p0.01), and RR have an hypothesis for the development of multifocal and recurrent superficial average age of onset three years later than patients carrying Q in TCCs. single or double dose. Early detection of prostate cancer is currently based on PSA testing, P0557. Expression profiling of T-cell lymphomas defines genetic which as a screening strategy is debated. Identification of new determinants of survival and response to treatment related predisposing genes might contribute both to a better understanding of the genes. underlying molecular mechanisms, and also open new ways for defining M. Cuadros; the individual risks, a difficult challenge if prostate cancer susceptibility Spanish National Cancer Centre, Madrid, Spain. depends on several low-risk rather than few high-risk genes. T-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas (T-NHLs) constitute an heterogeneous group. They are in general aggressive tumours with clinical behaviour P0555. A Report of Cytogenetic Study in 146 Serbian Children that may not correlate with morphology. In a previous study (1) we with ALL and it`s Prognostic Value tried to subclassify this group by use of cDNA microarrays and found N. S. Lakic, A. Krstic, S. Cirkovic, M. Guc-Scekic, G. Bunjevacki, D. Micic; that according to the mean survival (10 months) we could establish Mother and Child Health Care Institute, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. a common genetic signature with 5 genes related to survival and In this study we present the results of cytogenetic analysis in 146 drug response. The aim of the present study was to validate these children with ALL, diagnosed between 1998 and 2003. at the Mother results in a new series and to identify genes related to survival and and Child Care Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic”. Patients, all under response to treatment in T-NHLs. Expression profiling of T-HNLs were 15 years old, belonged to various ALL types (L1 or L2). There where established using a cDNA microarray, containing 6386 cancer related more males patients then females (1,78 :1). genes, developed by the CNIO. RNA from 60 T-NHLs was obtained Normal karyotype was found in 79 (54%) of our patients. Chromosomal and subsequently cDNA and T7-amplified RNA was synthesised. T- abnormalities were seen in 67 (46%) children; among them 44 (65%) lymphocytes extracted from peripheral blood, thymus samples or have numerical and 23 (35%) structural rearrangements. Structural reactive node tissues were used as control tissues. abnormalities were presented in a form of specific and nonspecific Previous results were validated and furthermore, cluster analysis chromosomal aberrations. Among specific chromosomal disorders identified genes that were significantly over or under-expressed, cytogenetic analysis revealed: hyperdiploidy in 37 (55.7%) children most of them of immune response, genes involved in the NFkB with ALL L1 or L2, hyperhaploidy in one patient with ALL (L1), pathway, cell cycle or T cell differentiation. Importantly, we found translocation 9/22 [t (9;22)(q34;q11)] in 4 (6%) patients with ALL (L1 or two different subgroups of PTCLs based on the expression of NFkB L2), translocation 4/11 [t (4;11)(q21;q23)] in one patient with ALL (L1) pathway genes. A reduced expression of NFkB pathway genes was and translocation 11/14 [t (11;14)(p13;q11) ] in one patient with the significantly associated with shorter survival, in contrast to longer sime tipe of ALL. Nonspecific chromosomal abnormalities detected in survival times showed by the NFkB+ lymphomas. Over-expression of our group of patients were: hypodiploidy (6 patients (9%)with ALL(L1 two representative genes of the NFkB pathway, NIK and IKBa, was or L2));translocations: t(6;9)(q23;p24) (1 patient with ALL (L1)), found among NFKb+ lymphomas. These genes might be considered t(13;19)(q14;p13) (1 case with ALL(L1)); deletations: del(7)(q22) (1 as targets for new therapies. patient with ALL(L1)) , del (8)(p11) (1 case with ALL (L2)), del(2)(q33) (1 1- Martinez et al.Clin Cancer Res 2004 patient with ALL (L2)) and inversion of chromosome 1[ inv (1)(p34;q21) ] in one patient with ALL (L1). P0558. Study of mtDNA amount in prostate cancer by real-tyme The authors will discuss the prognostic value of nonspecific PCR. rearrangements in analysed sample of ALL patients. J. Abril-Jarilla, M. Gómez-Zaera, L. González, M. Nadal, V. Nunes; Institut de Recerca Oncològica (IRO), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. P0556. Analysis of genetic events in the 17p13 region points to According to recent estimates of the global cancer prevalence, prostate monoclonal origin of multifocal and recurrent bladder cancer. cancer (PC) is the third most common cancer in men, causing 40,000 M. Trkova1, A. Soukupova1, M. Babjuk2, V. Soukup2, J. Duskova3, J. Mares1, Z. death per year both in Europe and the United States. Sedlacek1; In recent years, a high number of point mutations, insertions or deletions 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - Second Medical in mtDNA have been identified in multiple cancers. The analysis of the School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department mtDNA has been suggested as a very useful tool for the early detection of Urology, Charles University - First Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic, of cancer. 3Department of Pathology, Charles University - First Medical School, Prague, We studied the relative amount of mtDNA in normal, tumoral and Czech Republic. hyperplastic samples corresponding to 30 patients with PC and 5 Bladder cancer is the second most common malignancy of the controls. Small cylinders of prostatic tissue were obtained from radical genitourinary tract with about 90% of tumours belonging to transitional prostatectomy specimens. In addition, 7 seminal vesicles from patients cell carcinoma (TCC). Approximately 70% of patients with superficial and controls were also studied as a second control tissue because it TCC develop recurrences after transurethral resection, and nearly 30% seldom, very infrequently malignizes. of patients present at diagnosis with multifocal disease. Synchronous Our purpose was to determine if there were differences in the mtDNA or metachronous development of superficial TCCs evokes the question quantity between the different types of samples or between patients and of clonal nature of these tumours. Published studies present evidence controls. We used a real-time PCR technique for the amplification of the for both the monoclonality hypothesis (which proposes that malignant mitochondrial gene ND2 and the nuclear housekeeping gene 18S. cells spread via intraluminal seeding or intraepithelial migration), and There were no statistical significant differences between normal, the field cancerisation hypothesis (which proposes transformation tumoral, hyperplasic or seminal vesicle groups, nor between patients of numerous urothelial cells at multiple sites due to exposure and and controls.Cancer genetics 201 P0559. Germ-line mutations and large deletions of the APC gene cells obtained from 20 patients in liquid media with natrium butyrate in Czech FAP patients and butyrate derivative, phenylbutyrate. After 24 hours of culture we M. Kohoutová, J. Štekrová, K. Zídková, M. Šulová, J. Vandrovcová, V. Kebrd- observed significant increase in number of apoptotic cells using anti lová, J. Kotlas; active caspase 3 antibody in flow cytometer, in comparison to control Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the 1st Faculty of Medicine and cultures (without fatty acids). The intensity of apoptosis was compared General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. to positive control (with dexamethasone). Germ-line APC (adenomatous polyposis coli gene) mutations are In conclusion, the apoptotic properties of fatty acids alongside their low responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). FAP is a toxicity suggest that they could be used in modern schemes of B-CLL dominantly inherited predisposition to colorectal tumors, which treatment. shows substantial phenotypic variability. Routine mutation detection techniques fail to detect APC germ-line mutations in 20 - 40% of P0562. Methylation profile of N33, HIC, GSTP1 and CDKN2 at patients with classical or attenuated FAP. The failure to detect germ- different stages of prostate carcinogenesis. line mutations might be caused by large deletions, MYH mutations or T. V. Kekeeva1,2, B. Y. Alekseev3, P. V. Shegai3, M. V. Nemtsova2; by mutations in other genes. From a series of 103 Czech unrelated 1Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre probands with colorectal polyposis, 72 (69,9%) were found to have for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow Herzen truncating or missense mutations. Using PCR, PTT, DGGE methods Research Oncological Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation. and sequence analysis, the 39 previously reported and 33 mutations DNA methylation of CpG sites of tumor suppressor genes is a unique for Czech populations were detected. The APC mutation frequent epigenetic event in the cancer pathogenesis. We examined negative patients have been screened for large APC deletions using the methylation profile of N33, HIC, GSTP1 and CDKN2 genes in multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Two whole- the spectrum of prostate cancer disease progression, from benign gene deletions and one exon 14 deletion were found in a set of the 37 prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia APC negative probands. Fine mapping has to be performed to assess (PIN) to primary prostate cancer. Biopsy specimens were obtained the exact molecular extent of the APC germ-line deletions identified. from patients with BPH (n=24), PIN (n=32) and adenocarcinoma Supported by grant project IGA MZ CR NR8103-3/2004. (n=52), 28 prostate tissues were obtained from patients with prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy. Methylation status was determined P0560. Novel 3’ mutation of the APC gene in a patient with using methylation-sensitive PCR. isolated desmoid tumors in a family suffering from familial Methylation frequency of HIC1 in BPH samples was 37% and adenomatous polyposis (FAP). methylation frequencies of PIN and adenocarcinoma were L. Benoit1, N. Cheynel1, B. Diane1, M. Marty2, C. Thauvin-Robinet3, J. Fraisse4, significantly higher 66% and 65% accordinally (P=0,05). Promoter S. Olschwang5, J. Cuisenier4, L. Faivre3; hypermethylation of p16 was detected in 25% of hyperplasia, 29% of 1Digestive surgery, CHU le Bocage, Dijon, France, 2Anatomopathology, Centre neoplasia and 36% of carcinoma. The similar pattern of methylation Georges François Leclerc, Dijon, France, 3Clinical Genetics, Hopital d'Enfants, was shown for GSTP1 gene (25%, 16% and 42%). It was interesting Dijon, France, 4Surgery, Centre Georges François Leclerc, Dijon, France, 5Ge- that methylation of N33 was absent in the preinvasive lesions but was netic Oncology, Institut Paoli Calmette, Marseille, France. frequent in adenocarcinoma (18%, P=0,02). Methylation percentages Desmoid tumors occur sporadically or as part of the extraintestinal in prostatectomy tissues were: GSTP1, 32%; HIC1, 71%; p16, 18%; manifestations of FAP, the phenotypic expression of APC gene mutations. N33, 20%. There were no significant differences in the frequencies of Considerable clinical variability is known both within and especially methylation in biopsy and prostatectomy prostate adenocarcinomas between families. Some phenotype-genotype correlations concerning specimens for individual genes. the gastrointestinal and extra-gastrointestinal manifestations of the We can conclude that N33 methylation is related to late, tumor- disease have been demonstrated. In particular, 3’ mutations of the associated events, while HIC1, GSTP1 and CDKN2 methylation APC gene may result in attenuated adenomatous forms or, in extreme appears with different frequencies at cancer precursor lesions. These cases the occurrence of desmoid tumors only. We present here the early epigenetic DNA alterations are the accessory component case of a 42-year-old women suffering from desmoids tumors without of extensive tumour reorganizations and provide clinically useful colonic involvement but for whom the history of FAP among siblings markers to diagnose early prostate cancer lesions and assess disease indicate APC gene mutation screening. A frameshift mutation due to prognosis. a single adenosine deletion at position 5772 (codon 1924), located at the 3’ end of exon 15 of the APC gene was found. Six other families P0563. The survival of human B-CLL cells and “nurse-like” cells in whom desmoid tumors represent the main phenotype and mode of in the different conditions of culture in vitro. ascertainment have been described in the literature. All the mutations B. Cisel, A. Filip, J. Kolano, J. Wojcierowski; were found in the 3’ end of the APC gene. Desmoid tumors were found Department of Medical Genetics of Medical University in Lublin, Lublin, Poland. in 79 % of patients, FAP in only 37 % and mainly in its attenuated form, Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a disease characterized by and colorectal cancer may be the only colonic manifestation in some an accesive accumulation of B lymphocytes displaying deficient individuals. This data suggests that an APC gene mutation must be programmed cell death and a different clinical course and prognosis. looked for in cases of familial desmoid tumors, even in the absence The aim of invastigation: To examine the capacity of leukemic of a personal or familial history of FAP. Likewise, colonoscopy must lymphocytes and “nurse-like “cells to survive in vitro and protective be performed in the case of a desmoid tumor, even when sporadic, in effects of “nurse-like“ cells on leukemic lymphocytes. order to detect FAP and its risk of colorectal cancer. Object and methods: The lymphocytes isolated from peripheral blood obtained from patient with B-CLL were examined. The cells were P0561. Induction of apoptosis in BCLL cells by fatty acids cultured under four separate conditions:1)medium alone, 2) medium J. Kolano, A. Filip, B. Cisel, J. Wojcierowski; supplemented by apoptosis-inducing dexamethasone, 3)medium Department of Medical Genetics of Medical University in Lublin, Lublin, Poland. conditioned by coculturing leukemic lymphocytes and “nurse-like” Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a group of enzymes able to cells, 4) medium conditioned by coculturing leukemic lymphocytes change nucleosome structure by removing acetyl groups from histone and “nurse-like” cells and supplemented by apoptosis-inducing tails. This modification results in more compact chromatine structure. dexamethasone .The cells cells were quantiefied by flow cytometry Inhibition of HDACs in neoplasmatic cells leads to change in some after labelling with FDA and propidium iodide / annexine-V. genes expression (2-5% of cellular genes) and, subsequently, Results: After 14 days of culture in vitro we have demonstrated differentiation or apoptosis. Thus HDAC inhibitors posses antitumour increased survival of lymhocytes in the presence of “nurse-like” cells activity and, since they are well tolerated, create a new strategy in (96.35 vs 93.15% for cultures without dexamethasone and 67.80 vs cancer treatment. 50.91% for cultures with this factor). We also have noticed decreased Short chain fatty acids and some of their derivatives form a class of capacity of “nurse-like” cells to survive as compared with leukemic substances who work as histone deacetylase inhibitors. lymphocytes (83.02 vs 96.35% for cultures without dexamethasone In our study we cultured B-CLL (B-cell Chronic Lymphatic Leucaemia) and 1.60 vs 67.80% for cultures with this factor).Cancer genetics 202 Conclusions: This experiment could show the protective role of “nurse- 0.990) In a routine familial cancer clinic, 2 mutations were identified in like” cells in the apoptosis of CLL cells under different conditions of the proband (BRCA 1 - frameshift mutation in exon 11 nt3450delCAAG culture in vitro and decreased resistance to dexamethasone-induced STOP 115; BRCA 2 - splice site mutation IVS7+2 T>G in exon 7) apoptosis of these cells. Immunohistochemistry of the bowel cancer showed normal expression Because of the fact that it was an initial study further ones on the for the mismatch repair genes. interactions between lymphocytes and “nurse-like” cells are needed. Predictive testing was offered to her asymptomatic sister, who was found to be positive for both mutations. P0564. Familial Nonmedullary Thyroid Carcinoma In Italian While it is acknowledged that the penetrance of each mutation within Families: Clinical And Genetic Heterogeneity BRCA1 or 2 is incomplete, the very different phenotypes of these I. Torrente1, E. M. Valente1, C. Faloci2, R. Di Nardo2, B. Grammatico3, B. Dal- sisters if of interest. lapiccola1,4, P. Grammatico3; Studies of their demographic differences have given few insights 1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of Surgical Sciences, University La into the differing clinical outcomes. Modifier genes or haplotypes Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, University La Sapienza, S. Camillo– are a plausible explanation. Larger family studies are underway to Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4Dept of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, eliminate other possible genotypic differences which account for this La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy. discordance. The familiar form of nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma (FNMTC) is a complex genetic disorder characterized by bilateral and multifocal P0567. Genetics of Diagnosis and Management in Chronic thyroid cancer, occurring at an earlier age and with a more aggressive Myeloid Leukemia (CML)- An Indian study course than the sporadic forms, often associated with benign thyroid R. Talwar, V. P. Choudhry, L. Kumar, K. Kucheria; pathologies. Several environmental risk factors have been identified, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. but little is known about genetic risk factors of the disease. The finding Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is a hematopoietic malignancy of RET proto-oncogene mutations cosegregating with papillary thyroid characterized by presence of Philadelphia (Ph1) chromosome and/or cancer suggests an important role of this gene in epithelial thyroid bcr/abl fusion gene. Although CML has been widely studied, various carcinogenesis. In addition, a recent linkage study identified a novel genetic changes leading to progression of disease and relapse are still FNMTC susceptibility locus on chromosome 2q21. We describe here unexplored. The present study was conducted to evaluate cytogenetic five large Italian families with familial aggregation of PTC and benign and molecular anomalies and response to therapy in CML patients thyroid disease. Twelve individuals had papillary thyroid cancer while on various therapies (IFN-α 2b+HU, IFN-α2b+HU+Ara-C, STI571 and 27 family members showed benign thyroid disease, either plurinodular allogeneic BMT). goiter or thyroiditis. Mutational analysis of the RET proto-oncogene Six hundred bone marrow samples from 349 suspected CML patients failed to identify pathogenic mutations in all families. Moreover, in the were analyzed using conventional cytogenetics and Fluorescence In two families with at least three individuals with PTC, linkage to the Situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis. Of these, 101 cases on the above FNMTC locus was excluded. Our findings indicate that different genes therapies were followed at sequential intervals of 4-6 months for four are involved in the pathogenesis of the familiar form of nonmedullary years. Probes used for FISH analysis were specific for bcr and abl thyroid carcinoma, further confirming genetic heterogeneity of this genes and centromeres of chromosomes X and Y (in cases of sex- condition. mismatched BMT). Novel cytogenetic and molecular anomalies could be identified at diagnosis and during therapies that were found to be P0565. High frequency of p16INK4b (MTS1) gene promoter associated with specific clinical/hematological profiles. Appearance of methylation in Iranian patients with breast tumor some anomalies was followed by clinical/hematological relapse and M. Sedeaghat1, S. Vallian2, A. Farazmand1; progression to blast crisis. New variant Ph1 translocations associated 1The University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The University of with resistance to therapy were also observed. Minimal residual Isfahan, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. disease (MRD) could be evaluated using FISH analysis in cases with The methylation status of p16INK4b (MTS1) gene promoter was analyzed complete cytogenetic response. in 67 breast tumors from Iranian patients with breast cancer. The These findings reiterate that molecular analysis in conjunction with analysis was performed using methylation-specific polymerase chain cytogenetic analysis has tremendous importance not only in accurate reaction (PCR) (MSP) followed by restriction-enzyme related PCR diagnosis and management of CML but also in predicting relapse/ (REP). Methylation of the p16 gene was detected in 47% of the breast progression. Further identification of novel anomalies indicate the tumors analyzed. The data showed that the tumors with high-grade involvement of chromosomes other than 9 and 22 in the pathogenesis (85%) were more often methylated than those with low-grade (27%). of CML, which needs to be explored further. Moreover, a large variation in the methylation patterns of p16 exon 1 was observed from one sample to another. Analysis of the expression P0568. No sib pair concordance for breast or ovarian cancer in of p16 promoter in methylated and non-methylated tumors indicated the BRCA1 mutation carriers association of methylation and the absence of p16 gene expression. P. Møller1, L. Mæhle1, N. Clark1, M. Bjørnslett1, J. Apold2; The results suggested a role for p16 gene promoter methylation during 1The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Haukeland University Hospi- breast tumorigenesis and a possible inactivation of p16 expression in tal, Bergen, Norway. high-grade breast cancers. Modifying factor(s) of expression of BRCA1 mutations would be expected to induce concordance for breast and ovarian cancer in P0566. Familial breast cancer- two mutations, two phenotypes. affected sibships. We identified all pairs with cancers where one or I. Winship1, S. Fawcett1, R. Bell2, M. Smith3; both sisters were demonstrated to carry a BRCA1 mutation. 1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia, 2Barwon The preliminary results were that under the assumption of random Health, Geelong, Australia, 3Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Melbourne, distribution we would expect 23.4 pairs to be concordant for breast Australia. cancer, and the observed number of concordant pairs were 22 The co-existence in an individual of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations is (p<<0.05). The expected number of concordant pairs for ovarian unusual. Initially it was believed that the homozygous or compound cancer were 10.4 and the observed number 9 (p<<0.05). Final results heterozygous state of BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 was lethal. Reports now of the study will be given. Methodological problems will be discussed. exist of such compound heterozygotes. In conclusion, there may be no single major modifying factor of We have encountered a family where two sisters have co-existent expression of BRCA1 mutations. The mutations did not differ with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. The proband aged 58 had bilateral respect to breast or ovarian cancer as clinical expression. Previous breast cancer(aged 34 and 53) and colorectal cancer(aged 39 and 58 disease manifestations in close relatives may have no bearing on first years). Her sister aged 63 has had regular cancer surveillance without cancer to be expected in a young female mutation carrier. This means the detection of malignant pathology thus far. The pattern of cancer that, in BRCA1 carrying kindreds without ovarian cancer, the risk for in this kindred is consistent with a predisposing mutation in a BRCA ovarian cancer may be as high as in ovarian cancer kindreds. It means gene. (BRCAPRO scores: A1 - 0.885; A2 -0.110 Combined score - that, in ovarian cancer kindred, the next young cancer to expect mayCancer genetics 203 be breast cancer because it occurs at an earlier age. It also means in childhood ALL. that research strategies to uncover modifiers of BRCA1 expression, All ten centres of Hungarian Pediatric Oncology Network and diagnostic may be suitable to uncover multifactorial systems and not only single laboratories accepted cooperation. In addition to initial routine factors. cytogenetic examination flow cytometric DNA-index determination, FISH (numerical aberrations) and molecular genetic tests (ABL/BCR, P0569. A preliminary molecular analysis of APC gene in the MLL/AF4, TEL/AML1 gene rearrangements) were introduced to Iranian FAP patients determine different genetic subgroups of ALL. Event-free and overall M. Shahmoradgoli1,2, O. Mueller3, N. Kutzner3, P. Rostami1, B. Noorinayer1, M. survival of patients was analysed by Kaplan-Meier method in genetic R. Zali1; subgroups. Multivariate analysis (Cox’s regression) was performed 1Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Taleghani Hospital, taking into account different other prognostic factors (age, sex, major Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of congenital abnormalities, initial WBC, therapy, immunphenotype). Iran, 2Young Researchers Club, Science and Research Campus, Islamic Azad 588 new cases of childhood ALL were diagnosed in Hungary 1993- University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Max-Planck Institute for Molecular 2002. Cytogenetic examination was performed in 537 cases (91%) Physiology, Dortmund, Germany. with success rate of 73%. DNA-index was determined in 265 cases Germ-line mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene (45%), FISH in 74 (13%), TEL/AML1 RT-PCR in 215 (37%). Taking into are causative for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), a dominant account results of all genetic tests we came to genetic diagnosis in 456 inherited syndrome characterized by presence of multiple adenomatous cases (78%). Proportion of subgroups with good prognosis was lower polyps in the colon and rectum. In this study, we screened the coding than expected: hyperdiploidB 18% (80/456), t(12;21) positive 18% region of APC gene for germ-line mutations in seven Iranian FAP (45/215). Univariate analysis showed significantly better 5-year event- patients. Clinically typical FAP was diagnosed in three patients and free survival in TEL/AML1 positive (82%) and the hyperdiploidB cases four patients were diagnosed with attenuated adenomatous polyposis (76%) than those with hypodiploid (54%), pseudodiploid (specific coli (AAPC). Our study began with a non-radioactive protein truncation translocations: 48%) or combined aberrations (tetraploid/structural test (PTT) to screen all patients for protein truncating mutations in aberrations with TEL/AML1 positivity)(45%). Multivariate analysis mutation cluster region (MCR) of APC. Then, we analyzed all 15 exons identified congenital abnormalities, high initial WBC, delay in therapy of APC in patients negative for PTT test by single-strand conformation and specific translocations as main negative prognostic factors. polymorphism (SSCP) and DNA sequencing. We identified a C to T substitution at codon 1303 (CAA to TAA) resulting in a stop codon P0572. Cowden syndrome may be under-diagnosed in the (Q1303X) in a FAP patient. Interestingly, no other nonsense or missense cancer genetics clinic mutation was detected in the remaining subjects. Furthermore, two C. D. Delozier1,2, R. Pilarsky3, T. Treisman1, C. J. Curry1,2; novel silent polymorphisms, 4509G>A and 5898A>G, were found in 1Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, CA, United States, 2University of our patients. Based on our findings, other genes may have the major California San Francisco-Fresno, Fresno, CA, United States, 3Ohio State Uni- causative roles in the etiology of FAP in Iran. versity Cancer Genetics, Columbus, OH, United States. Referrals to the hereditary cancer clinic are usually for a personal or P0570. Cytogenetic Analysis of over 500 Iranian Leukaemic family history of breast/ovarian, colorectal or endocrine neoplasias. Patients Depending on the referral source, in some 30-40% of these families M. Khaleghian1, F. Mahjoubi1,2, T. Tavakoli1, f. Javan1, M. T. Akbari1,3; gene analysis is indicated; the majority of patients will be negative 1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National for mutations. Among the likely reasons for this low mutation yield is Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic the under-diagnosis of phenotypically-mild cases of “rare syndromes” Republic of Iran, 3Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of such as Peutz-Jaegers and Cowden syndromes. We would like to call Tarbiat Modarres, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. attention to what we perceive as a high frequency of Cowden syndrome We analyzed bone marrow and peripheral blood samples of more than among patients referred for breast/colon cancer; we have seen at least 500 Iranian patients referred from major hematology-oncology centers three Cowden families in eighteen months, out of approximately 120 at Tehran and provincial capitals. They were either suspected of a referred for hereditary cancer consultation. Patient 1 is a 58 year-old leukemia condition at presentation or being monitored for their response man with personal history of colon polyps and family history of a brain to medication. Cell culturing and banding (GTG & high resolution) were tumor. A frame-shift mutation in the PTEN gene (872-875insA) was carried out according to standard protocols. Chromosome analysis identified. Patient 2 is a healthy 40-year-old man with colon polyposis, was performed following ISCN (1995) guidelines. The patients were whose daughter had lipomas and enlarged thryroid. Patient 3 is a divided into six major groupings as far as the leukemia subtypes 64-year-old female with previous breast and uterine cancer, whose were concerned: CML, AML, ALL, MDS, lymphoma and "others". daughter had papillary thyroid cancer. Molecular analysis has also With regard to the stage they were broadly categorized into "at initiated in patients 2 and 3. presentation" and "under treatments". There were more male patients In all three cases, the clinical diagnosis was suspected not so much than females, approximately1.32:1 ratio. In terms of sample type, most by the proband’s phenotype as by the combination of history/physical cases had bone marrow aspiration whereas peripheral blood was examination and symptoms present in first degree relatives. All three utilized only in a fraction of cases. The common typical chromosomal probands have normal intelligence, and only patient 1 has obvious abnormalities as well as rare and combined forms were observed. The skin lesions . The proband or family’s clinical management has overall chromosomal abnormality rate obtained was around 50%. The been positively impacted by knowledge of the diagnosis of Cowden breakdown figures for different categories were roughly as follows: 80% syndrome. in CML, 40% in AML, 25% in ALL, 30% in MDS and 50% in other types. Compared to published data, the observed chromosomal abnormality P0573. The Expression of IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 in Breast rate in the present study is considered average. carcinoma. H. J. Kim1, E. J. Choi1, H. J. Choi1, N. R. Kim1, K. S. Kim2, Y. H. Cho2, K. Y. P0571. Diagnostic and prognostic significance of initial genetic Cha1, J. K. Kim1; examination in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: 1Pochon CHA University, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2Hanyang University, Seoul, results of a ten-year study in Hungary(1993-2002) Republic of Korea. Z. Jakab1, E. Balogh1, L. Pajor2, E. Olah1, G. P. Szabó1, Hungarian Pediatric Immortalization-upregulated protein-1 and 2 (IMUP-1 and IMUP-2) Oncology Study Group; were more frequently expressed in Breast tumor tissues in the same 1University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2University of Pécs, Pécs, Hun- pattern with the gene. Our last data showed the open reading frame of gary. IMUP-1 spans 321bp, coding for a 10.9kDa protein of 106 amino acids, Population-based national study was started in 1993 in Hungary with while an insertion of 59bp in the otherwise identical mRNA of IMUP-2 the aim of providing genetic diagnosis for all new childhood acute leads to a frameshift, resulting in an 8.5kDa protein of 85 amino acids. lymphoblastic leukemia cases. We investigated distribution of genetic We also studied the in vitro proliferation of cells overexpressing IMUP- aberrations, their prognostic role and use of different genetic methods 1 and IMUP-2 in the low serum. Overexpression of IMUPs increasedCancer genetics 204 growth rates and reduced serum requirements for growth compared ment of Forensic Medicine, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, with control cells. Consistent with these findings, cells overexpressing 3Department of Experimental and Clinical Radiobiology, Center of Oncology, IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 showed increased IMUPs expression displayed Marie Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Institute, Gliwice, Poland. a shortening of cell cycle by FACS cell-cycle distribution analysis. Malignant melanoma is the most aggressive skin cancer, with incidence Especially, the level of S phase and G2/M in IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 rapidly increasing throughout the world at a faster rate than any other transfectants cells are increased than cells transfected vector alone. In tumor type and is usually connected with poor prognosis. We report a the yeast two-hybrid system to find the function, IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 case of a melanoma patient X with 46-years long oncological history, was fused with the DNA-binding domain(DBD) of GAL4 and HeLa cell which due to such long term of the disease seems to be a medical cDNA library was fused with the transcription activation domain(AD) phenomenon. The patient X was diagnosed first time in 1957 for Ca. of GAL4. We performed a high-stringency scale procedure to screen basocellulare, and until 2003 recurrences of some other histological IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 against HeLa cell cDNA library and characterized subtypes of the disease (i.e. Mel. malignum, Ca. plano keratodes) to positives by sequence analysis. As the result, 12 novel and 27 known different parts of the skin were observed. Moreover, during this period proteins were found as the binding proteins. Some of them are under- patient X underwent initailly 3 radiotherapies, and then 30 surgeries, checking to confirm whether binding with IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 or not and survived until today. by immuno-precipitation in vivo. In order to explain the basis of this phenomenon, polymorphisms of some genes (CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19) were analyzed by TaqMan P0574. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction for technology, and DNA repair capacity of peripheral blood lymphocytes evaluation of MRP1 mRNA level in Iranian AML patients irradiated in vitro with 2 Gy of γ-radiation was tested by comet assay. M. Golalipour1,2, F. Mahjoubi1, F. Moshiri1; Patients X was indicated as a heterozygote for all obtained genotypes. 1NIGEB, Teheran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tarbiat Modaress University, Teh- The comparison of DNA repair capacity of patient X, two other ran, Islamic Republic of Iran. melanoma patients and controls has shown decrease for cancer Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a complex phenomenon that includes patients. Although the initial DNA damage induced by radiation in the expression of many different genes regulating drug transport cells from patient X was high, the kinetic of strand breaks rejoining or metabolism, cellular repair or detoxification mechanisms. The during the 180 min of incubation was faster than those present in expression or co-expression of gene(s) such as multidrug resistance other melanoma patients. In conclusion this study requires the further (MDR1) and multidrug associated protein (MRP1) could be at the basis evaluation in order to find for patient X the molecular factors ensuring of the resistant phenotype in vivo. We developed a quantitative reverse the better DNA repair capacity. transcription (RT)-PCR method for MRP1 transcripts to evaluate drug resistance, and applied it to clinical samples. P0577. Tissue microarray analysis of c-myc copy number The cutoffs for copy numbers of MRP1 transcripts were defined based alterations in a large number ovarian cancers on copy numbers in healthy blood. To confirm that the cutoffs reflected I. Dimova1, A. Yosifova1, S. Raicheva2, R. Dimitrov3, N. Doganov3; biological resistance, we used HL60 (known to have over-expression 1Department of medical genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Labora- of MRP1) to examine the correlation between the copy numbers of tory of gynecopathology, “Maichin dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3II Gynecologic clinics, these transcripts and the biological resistance of this cell line. “Maichin dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria. After optimizing the assay, it has been employed to test possible The genetic changes involved in the pathogenesis of ovarian carcinoma prognostic roles of the expression of MRP1 in 30 patients affected by are not completely understood. Summarized data of different CGH acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Among those patients, 33% showed studies in this tumor type showed that chromosome segment 8q24.1 is over-expression of MRP1. These patients are under monitor to test consistently gained in more than one third of ovarian cancers. A target whether or not the high level of MRP1 will contribute to the remission gene for amplification of 8q24.1 is likely to be the MYC oncogene, rate and remission periods. These results may also help the prediction which is located at this sub-band. There is not complete information of clinical drug resistance in AML Iranian patients. about the significance of c-myc copy number increases for the disease outcome. Here we have used the high-throughput technique P0575. Expression of ras p21 oncoprotein and K-ras point of tissue microarrays (TMA) in order to analyze by FISH 503 ovarian mutations in colorectal cancer cancers (OC) for the correlation of c-myc copy number changes with M. Akkiprik, Ç. Ataizi-Çelikel, F. Düşünceli, Ö. Sönmez, B. Güllüoğlu, A. Sav, clinicopathological parameters - histological type, stage, grade. C-myc A. Özer; was amplified in 35,9 % of OC and gained in 3,8 % of them. We have Marmara Univ. School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. found that the amplification tends to be more frequent in late-stage Mutational activation and overexpression of the ras family genes (42,5%) vs early-stage (31%) cancers without reaching statistical especially K-ras, have been associated with colorectal tumorigenesis. significance. Regarding histological grade, there was no significant We investigated the clinicopathological characteristics and point difference between the frequency of amplification in different grade mutation of K-ras oncogene codon 12/13 and ras p21 expression tumors (G1-30%, G2-36%, G3-42,5%). Gains of c-myc did not show using paraffin embedded materials from 53 colorectal cancer cases an association with clinicopathological parameters. Concerning and their surrounding normal tissues. Point mutation of K-ras was histological type, the highest frequency of c-myc amplification was analysed by PCR-SSCP and followed by DNA sequencing, ras p21 established in mixed Mulerian carcinomas - 53%; We concluded that c- expression was examined immunohistochemically. Mutations of K-ras myc amplification is common event in ovarian carcinogenesis. It could and overexpression of the ras p21 were detected in 11% and 76% be targeted in novel anticancer strategies for improving the outcome of the tumors, respectively. Ras p21 overexpression did not correlate of the disease. with any of the clinicopathological parameters examined. K-ras gene mutations were found mostly in presence of a mucinous component P0578. Role of the -675 4G/5G PAI-1 gene polymorphism in within the tumor (p=0.076). Follow-up data were available for 43 breast cancer patients. There was no statistically significant correlation between F. Dora1, M. Alessandro2, D. Carla3, P. Marta2, C. Giovanni2, R. Stefania2, A. these alterations and patient survival. Our data suggest that apart from Claudia2, P. Andrea2, P. Fabio2, D. Giuseppe4; K-ras codon 12/13 point mutations, overexpression of the ras family 1Istituto di Genetica - Azienda Policlinico universitario a gestione diretta, Udine, genes is important in the development of the disease. Furthermore, Italy, 2Clinica oncologica, Udine, Italy, 3Istituto di Anatomia Patologica, Udine, mucinous secretion in the colorectum may represent a distinct genetic Italy, 4Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Udine, Italy. pattern The molecular components of Plasminogen Activator system, Urokinase-type Plasminogen Activator (uPA) and its inhibitor PAI-1, P0576. Preliminary genetic investigation of the patient with are involved in tumor progression and have prognostic value in early atypical long term malignant melanoma process. breast cancer (BC) patients. The -675 4G/5G polymorphism of the PAI- M. Dobrut1, M. Jaremko2, M. Konopacka3, J. Rogolinski3, T. Dobosz2; 1 promoter gene is associated with different activity levels of PAI-1 in 1Clinic of Oncological Surgery, Center of Oncology, Marie Sklodowska-Curie serum. Cycloxigenase-2 (COX-2) expression is associated with poor Memorial Institute, Gliwice, Poland, 2Institute of Molecular Techniques, Depart- prognosis in early BC. We aimed at studying the -675 4G/5G PAI-1Cancer genetics 205 polymorphism together with the immunohistochemical expression of were studied. A RT-nested PCR assay amplifying both EGFR and PAI-1 and COX-2 in BC patients. EGFRvIII was performed. Methods: Blood samples from a consecutive series of 199 BC patients The RT-nested PCR allowed the detection of 0.5 pg of total RNA from and 132 controls were collected and PAI-1 -675 4G/5G polymorphism an EGFRvIII expressing cell-line, diluted in 5 µg of total RNA from an was analyzed by PCR technique. Immunohistochemical expression of hematogenous, non expressing cell-line. EGFRvIII RNA was detected PAI-1, COX-2 and MIB-1/Ki-67 was evaluated in the tissue sample of in the peripheral blood of 30% of patients and in none of the control primitive BC. A score combining intensity and percentage of cellular women. All positive results were obtained in the nested PCR (sensitivity immunoreactivity, was used to assess the staining of PAI-1 and of 10-7). When EGFRvIII positive results were compared with the COX2. PAI-1 positivity was evaluated both in tumor cells and stromal presence of known recurrence factors, no correlation was noticed with fibroblasts. microscopic lymphatic node metastases or tumour diameter. There Results: No statistically-significant difference of genotypic and allelic was an association with risk factors of tumour aggressiveness such as frequencies was found between BC patients and controls. The 4G absence of estrogen receptors, presence of ERBB2 or histopathologic allele was associated with regional lymph node involvement (P=.04). grades G2/G3. All EGFRvIII positive patients had one or more of these No statistically significant association was found between genotype risk factors, whereas in the EGFRvIII negative group of patients, only and immunohistochemical expression of the PAI-1 gene PAI-1 score 56.5% did so (p<0.05), supporting EGFRvIII predictive value as a directly correlated with COX-2 expression (P=.02), and strong PAI-1 dissemination marker. immunostaining was associated with moderate/strong expression of Further studies are needed to confirm the role of EGFRvIII RNA COX-2 (P=.006). Tumors with PAI-1 positive fibroblasts showed higher detection in the peripheral blood of early stage breast cancer patients MIB-1/Ki-67 expression (P=.02). as an independent relapse predicting factor. These findings suggest that BC patients carrying the 4G allele of the PAI-1 promoter may have an increased probability of axillary lymph P0581. Molecular genetic findings in patients with multiple node involvement. polyposis coli P. Plevova1, J. Stekrova2, M. Kohoutova2, I. Urbanovska1, E. Silhanova1, P. P0579. The prognostic relevance of cytogenetic findings in Opletal3, L. Foretova4, A. Krepelova5; malignant tumours of cervix and ovary 1Faculty Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology, Charles M. Krkavcová1, N. Jančárková2, M. Janashia1, R. Mihalová1, M. Kohoutová1, M. University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Hospital, Rymarov, Czech Republic, Jarošová3, M. Holzerová3, J. Dušková4; 4Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 5Faculty Hospital, 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Depart- Prague-Motol, Czech Republic. ment of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Department Multiple colorectal polyposis (the occurrence of 3 to 100 polyps) might of Hematology/Oncology, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Pathology, be associated with germline mutations in APC, MYH or mismatch Prague 2, Czech Republic. repair genes. The knowledge of tumour genetic profile as tumour-related prognostic Patients and methods: A patient (age 62 years) with about 30 factor, in correlation with other known predictors ought to led to colorectal polyps and synchronnous occurrence of colorectal cancer improved prediction of outcome and individualization of therapeutic and a patient (age 52 years) with tens of polyps have been referred to strategies. mutational analysis of the APC and MYH genes. The aim of the presented study is to estimate the major genetic Results: In the 1st patient, a novel mutation was found in exon 2 of alterations in examined tumours and to evaluate their significance in the APC gene located at splice site: c.220G→ T, p.Glu74X; IVS2 correlation with other available markers. ds-1. The mutation segregated with the findings of polyposis in In tumour samples - 46 of ovarian cancer and 20 of cervical presymptomatically tested members of the family older than 50 years. cancer tumours histological type and grading were estimated, than No polyposis was found in mutation carriers younger than 40 years. immunohistochemical semiquantitative method with quantification of Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene polymorphism HSCORE according McCarty was applied to determine TP53 and the C677T, described to decrease the risk of colorectal cancer, was found proliferative marker MIB 1 . in the family. In the 2nd patient, no mutation in the APC gene was found, Another part of the tissue sample was used for a cytogenetic but two most common mutations in the MYH gene Y165C and G382D processing combining conventional method and FISH method using were detected. DNA specific probes and painting probes. The isolated DNA samples Conclusion: We report a novel mutation in exon 2 of the APC gene, were preserved to be evaluated by CGH method. which segregates with clinical findings in multiple members of the family. Genetic instability and structural aberrations were detected in 90% Supported by IGA MZ CR NR8103-3/2004. ovarian cancer cells and in 48% cervical cells, 10% ovarian tumours and 52% cervical tumours were diploid. Most frequent structural P0582. Analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation in familial aberrations were unbalanced translocations, deletions and unidentified breast/ovarian cancer with BRCA1 gene mutations in Russia markers. The rearrangements generally affected chromosomes 1, 2, 3, N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lyubchenko2, S. A. Tjulandin2, R. F. 4, 8, 9, 11 in ovarian cancer cells and chromosomes 1, 3, 5, 9, 11, 17, Garkavtseva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; 18 in cervical cancer cells. 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer The wide range of genetic findings corresponds with advanced stage, Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. serous type of poorly differentiated tumours and highly positive TP53 BRCA1 mutations may confer as breast so ovarian cancer. One of HSCORE. the conceptions on a decision of the genotype-phenotype correlation This work has been supported by the grant of the Ministry of Health of problem consists in supposition of influence of a mutation disposition the Czech Republic: IGA-MZ-NH/7659-3: Predictive value of molecular in the gene on breast/ovarian cancer risk. biological parameters in malignant gynaecological tumours. The BRCA1 mutation frequency in our sample of ovarian cancer families was 86%. This value was not significant different from BRCA1 P0580. Circulating EGFRvIII positive cells in early stage breast mutation frequency in the families with both breast and ovarian cancer cancer: association with factors predicting recurrence (61%). In families of both types - ovarian cancer only and breast/ H. A. C. Silva1, M. F. Dias2, T. S. Silva3, C. F. Oliveira2, F. J. Regateiro1; ovarian - one mutation 5382insC was predominant (50% and 90%, 1Faculty of Medicine, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Gynaecologic Department, Coimbra respectively). We compare our proportion of families with breast/ University Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Anatomopathologic Department, Coim- ovarian cancer and breast cancer only with published data on samples bra University Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal. from the other populations and no found significant difference, in This work aims to evaluate epidermal growth factor receptor variant spite of different mutation spectrums. As the results shown, the other III (EGFRvIII) as a possible marker for the diagnosis of breast cancer genome peculiarities than a mutation position may have influence on occult systemic disease. cancer localization. Analysis of splitting on breast and ovarian cancer Thirty three (T1N0M0 or T2N0M0) breast cancer patients, with tumours segregation in the families gives a possibility to propose that cancer < 3 cm of diameter, selected for curative surgery and 40 control women localization may be defined by interconnection of BRCA1 gene withCancer genetics 206 the other gene. We studied some variants of BRCA2 as a candidate in a combination with protein truncating mutation and were not found in for a risk modifier gene under BRCA1 mutations. The evidence for 100 control samples. The results suggest that these variants may be influence on ovarian cancer risk increasing of BRCA1 variant 1038G mutations. In contrast, the variant S2621C in two cases of three was and BRCA2 variant 372H combination was received (OR = 6,00; P = found in a combination with a protein truncating mutation and in control 0,053). samples. The samples of patients without APC mutations were tested P0583. No alteration of TH01 DNA marker at patients with skin on mutations in gene MYH. In four cases the mutations were revealed. cancers in Romanian population There were two cases with mutations on both chromosomes (Y165C/ G. Duta - Cornescu1, F. Stanciu1, I. Neagoe1, V. Stoian1, I. Nedelcu2, A. Alam- Y165C and 1395delGGA/R95W) and two cases with heterozygote oreanu2; mutations (Y165C and G382D). The mutation R95W and variant 1Genetic Department, Biology Faculty, Bucharest University, Bucharest, Ro- IVS8+21C/A (in combination with G382D) were revealed for the first mania, 2Histopathology Laboratory, Military Emergency Clinical Hospital – “Dr. case. Carol Davila Centre”, Bucharest, Romania. The aim of this study is to determine if the TH01 STR marker suffer P0586. IL1β -511 promoter polymorphism and GEP-NET any type of alteration (like MSI (microsatellite e instability) or/and LOH M. Berkovic1, S. Kapitanovic2, V. Zjacic-Rotkvic1; (loss of heterozygosity)) in a Romanian population affected by skin 1University hospital "Sestre milosrdnice", Zagreb, Croatia, 2Rudjer Boskovic cancers. We based our project on the facts that LOH was observed for Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. TH01marker in malign transformations, especially in gastric cancers. Neuroendocrine tumors of the gut and pancreas (GEP-NET) For this research we determined (by PAGE technique) the genetic produce biogenic amines, peptides and chromogranins, especially profile of 200 healthy, unrelated individuals and 25 individuals affected chromogranine A (CgA). Increased IL1 levels have been described in by skin cancers from Romanian territory. The allele and heterozygout patients with NET, suggesting a regulatory link with this inflammatory frequencies were analysed using population genetic tests (like χ2 cytokine and its role in tumor growth and morphogenesis. test and Hardy - Weinberg equilibrium) and programs (like AMOVA IL1β gene is mapped to chromosome 2q14 and a few polymorphisms program). associated with altered IL1β production have been described. The aim We concluded that in the Romanian population affected by skin cancers of our study was to estimate allelic frequency for -511 promoter SNP that we have studied, the TH01 marker is not affected by microsatellite in IL1β gene in patients with GEP-NET. DNAs obtained from 30 GEP- instability (MSI) or by loss of heterozygosity (LOH), when compared NET patients and 150 unrelated healthy volunteers were genotyped with the normal, healthy Romanian population. for the IL1β -511 SNP using real-time PCR TaqMan® SNP genotyping assay. There was statistically significant difference in the frequency of P0584. STR typing of cancerous tissues for identification -511T allele associated with altered IL1β production between healthy purpose population and patients with GEP-NET. The association between other S. Ceccardi, F. Lugaresi, T. Balbi, A. Conconi, F. Ingravallo, G. Ferri, C. Bini, IL1β polymorphisms and GEP-NET tumors has to be investigated in S. Pelotti; the future studies. University of Bologna Dept Medicine and Public Health Section of Legal Medi- cine, Bologna, Italy. P0587. SULT1A1 213Arg is a risk factor for the development of Malignant tissue samples can be a source of biological material not only breast cancer in Macedonian woman for forensic caseworks as personal identification or paternity testing Z. Sterjev1,2, Snezana Smickoska2, Maneva2, Kraleva2, Stojmenovska2, Lju- when no other specimen is available, but also for the attribution of a bica Suturkova1, Aleksandar Dimovski1; tissue to a patient or in transplantation matter. Aberrations in coding or 1Faculty of Pharmacy, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, non-coding region of genome have been reported in cancerous tissues 2Institute of Radiology and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, Republic of also for those short tandem repeats (STRs) widely used in forensic Macedonia, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. analysis. Chromosomal instability, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and Sulfotransferase A1 (SULT1A1) is an enzyme involved in both microsatellite instability (MSI), were previously described in different detoxification and bioactivation of endogenous and exogenous kinds of tumors with variable frequency. To increase the number of compounds. A genetic polymorphism in the coding region of the cancerous samples analyzed by the Identifiler PCR amplification SULT1A1 gene (Arg213His, CGC-CAC) has been associated kit, routinely used in forensic laboratories, we present preliminary with modular phenotype, where individuals with Arg allele have a results on 23 gastrointestinal and 14 urogenital carcinomas with substantially higher enzyme activity. Several studies investigated the corresponding control normal samples. In our tumor samples we found influence of this variant on susceptibility of breast cancer (BC), but four types of profile alteration: MSI low, MSI high, partial or complete no definitive conclusion has been obtained. We determined the allele loss of one allele (pLOH or LOH). pLOH was the most frequent in all frequency and genotype distributions of SULT1A1 Arg213His variant in the two kinds of cancer. In addition on the samples showing a lower 100 sporadic, non-syndromic, breast cancer patients and 200 normal Y-amelogenin signal, no genetic alteration of 11 Y-STR markers profile controls from the Republic of Macedonia. The Arg allele was more was detected. Previous microscopic analysis of the tissue sample and common in cases than controls (74% vs. 63%, respectively, p=0.0051, careful interpretation of DNA profile in MSI and LOH are required for RR 1.99; 95%CI:1.0449<R.R<3.745). A dose dependant effect of Arg identification purpose. 213 allele on BC risk was detected (Arg/Arg vs. Arg/His + His/His p=0.036. RR 1.38, 95% CI: 1.0188<R.R.<1.876; Arg/Arg + Arg/His P0585. New APC and MYH gene variants among patients with vs.His/His p=0.0178, RR 1.99, 95%CI 1.0449<R.R.<3.7745). When we familial adenomatous polyposis in Russia examined the data by stadium of diagnosis, patients with an advanced T. A. Muzaffarova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, I. Y. Sachkov2, A. M. Kuzminov2, E. K. disease (stadium III & IV) have a significantly higher frequency of Arg Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; than His allele (82% vs. 18%, respectively, p = 0.0131, RR 0.68; 95%CI 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2State 0.5196<R.R<0.9003). No association was found in allelic frequency Scientific Centre of Colo proctology, Moscow, Russian Federation. and genotype distribution of this variant with other clinicopathological The new protein truncating mutations were near 50% of the APC gene parameters of patients (ethnicity, gender, age, menarche). Our data mutation spectrum. Deletions were the more frequent both among indicate that the SULT1A1 213Arg allele is one of the low penetrance new mutations and in the whole spectrum (60%). New (unique) alleles responsible for the development of BC in Macedonian women. deletions in 90% of cases were deletions of 1 or 2 nucleotides while all known (repeated) deletions were deletions of 4 or 5 nucleotides P0588. Homozygous or combined deletion 13q14.3 in patients (P=0,0008). The published data on six countries have been analyzed with B-cell chronic lymphocitic leukemia for comparison. The significant difference of unique and repeated A. Carrió1,2, D. Costa1,2, I. Madrigal2, C. Gómez1,2, N. Villamor1,3, D. Colomer1,3, deletions found by us was shown for a number but not all of the M. Rozman1,3, F. Bosch3, E. Monserrat3, E. Campo1,4; countries. The selections of patients with FAP from various populations 1Hematopathology Unit Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Genetics Service are different on this parameter. Also there were three new missense Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hematology Department Hospital Clínic, variants (T1556S, P1780S, T2160A). These variants were not observed Barcelona, Spain, 4Pathology Department Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.Cancer genetics 207 B-cell chronic lymphocitic leukemia (B-CLL) is the most frequent to breast/ovarian cancer predisposition in Spanish families. leukemia in the western world. Deletion of chromosome 13q14.3 is Participants and methods: The MLPA technique was performed the most frequent genetic aberration in B-cell chronic lymphocitic, in 105 families for BRCA1 gene and 54 families for BRCA2 gene by found in approximately 50% of patients with B-CLL and suggesting the using MRC-Holland kits. No mutation had been found in these families presence of tumor suppressor gene(s) whose loss or inactivation may in earlier analyses by different techniques (SSCP, PTT, dHPLC and contribute to the pathogenesis of B-CLL. Loss of this region has also sequencing). been observed in other human malignancies. The 13q14.3 deletion Results: Nine copy number variants were found within BRCA1 and can be found in the onset of B-CLL, in contrast to other chromosomal two within BRCA2. One BRCA1 alteration involved the deletion of aberrations. The deletion can be heterozygous, homozygous or exons 1 to 23 and segregated with cancer in the family. Sequencing of combined. genomic DNA with an apparent deletion of BRCA1 exon 18 revealed a FISH analysis, with specific probes for chromosomes 11 (LSI ATM), 12 missense variant in the hybridisation sequence of the MLPA probe. The (CEP12), 13 (LSI D13S319/13q34) and 17 (LSI p53), were performed remaining 7 aberrations are currently being confirmed. Of the families on 190 samples from B-CLL patients. The most frequent abnormality, analysed for BRCA2 a deletion of exons 15-16 has been confirmed as was expected, was del(13)(q14.3) in 50% of cases as sole anomaly to date. plus 4.7% among others. In about 23% of these cases the deletion was Conclusions: These preliminary results suggest that rearrangements found in homozygous or combined form. The frequency of the other within the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are not frequent in the Spanish aberrations were 11% for trisomy 12, 5.3% for the deletion of ATM and population. MLPA is a sensitive and rapid method for molecular 3.7% for the deletion of p53. detection of large deletions and duplications in BRCA1 and BRCA2 Deletion 13q14.3, as sole anomaly, has a good prognosis in clinical in high-risk breast/ovarian families and can be readily adopted by evolution. The implication of homozygous or combined deletion in diagnostic services. hematologic features and clinical follow-up of these B-CLL patients will be discussed. P0591. Cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic study of 72 CML This work has been partially supported by a grant (V-2003-Red-07-0) patients treated with imatinib. from the “Instituto de Salud Carlos III” M. Holzerova1, E. Faber1, H. Pospisilova1, I. Lakoma1, V. Divoky2, J. Nausova2, M. Divoka1, J. Voglova3, K. Indrak1, M. Jarosova1; P0589. RNASEL: a susceptibility gene for prostate cancer in the 1Department of Hematology/Oncology University Hospital, Olomouc, Czech Jewish population? Republic, 2Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Palacky University, Olo- A. Orr-Urtreger1,2, H. Matzkin3,4, N. Matarasso1,2, D. Bercovich1, A. Bar-Shira1; mouc, Czech Republic, 3University Hospital, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic. 1Genetic Institute Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Sackler Additional chromosomal abnormalities in chronic myeloid leukemia Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Department of Urology (CML) were reported to occur in chronic and accelerated phases of the Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Sackler Faculty of Medicine, disease, and also during treatment with interferon and, more recently, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. with imatinib. The aim of our study was to determine frequency and Prostate cancer (PC) is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy in clinical importance of additional chromosomal changes in 72 patients men in the western world, including Jewish men in Israel, and one of treated with imatinib. the leading causes of cancer-related death. A positive family history is At the initiation of imatinib treatment, 51 patients had only Ph the strongest risk factor for PC and twin studies estimated that 42% chromosome, whereas Ph chromosome with additional changes was of PC risk may be attributed to heritable factors. Highly penetrant observed in 21 patients. The most frequent additional changes were susceptibility genes are predicted to account for about 9% of PC cases der(9) deletion in 8 patients, trisomy 8 in three patients and double diagnosed through age 85 and 43% of early onset disease (less than Ph chromosome in two patients. The remaining 9 patients displayed 55 years). Genome-wide linkage scans in hereditary prostate cancer different aberrations. After 12 month of treatment the cytogenetic and (HPC) families have revealed multiple loci possibly harboring candidate molecular cytogenetic response to imatinib was analyzed. Eleven susceptibility genes, although confirmation studies regarding most loci patients died within the first year of treatment. The cytogenetic and/or have been inconsistent. RNASEL/HPC1, localized at 1q24-25 is a molecular cytogenetic response were presented in 51 (84%) patients candidate prostate cancer susceptibility gene that has been studied (complete response in 7, major response in 41, minor response in 3), 10 extensively in various patient populations worldwide. We identified (16%) patients were non-responders. All patients with der(9) deletion the 471delAAAG frameshift mutation in RNASEL, the first Ashkenazi (n = 8) have responded to the treatment, one has achieved a complete founder mutation in a known hereditary prostate cancer candidate cytogenetic response. Four patients developed new chromosomal gene. We reassessed the frequency of this nonsense mutation in aberrations, two of them in the Ph-positive clone. prostate cancer patients, and in patients with breast/ovarian, bladder The results of cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic study in 72 and colon cancer, and in average risk control population (968 patients CML patients after 12 months of imatinib therapy revealed 84% of and 510 controls, 2.5% and 2%, respectively). Screening the entire responders including the patients with der(9) deletion. It confirms RNASEL gene, we detected another novel RNASEL splice site efficacy of imatinib treatment and ability to overcome the adverse mutation in 1/121 PC patient using DHPLC, but no deletions were prognostic significance of der(9) deletions in CML patients. detected, using MLPA, in 300 PC patients. Our results suggest that Supported by grants IGA NC7490 and GA301/04/1239. while RNASEL might represent a prostate cancer susceptibility gene, RNASEL variations identified to date may account for only a limited P0592. Non Hodgkin lymphoma: Incidence of Bcl2/IgH number of PC cases in Ashkenazi men. rearrangement in Mexican patients and its relevance as marker for minimal residual disease. P0590. Large genomic rearrangements in BRCA1 and BRCA2 R. Arana1, G. Ignacio2, S. Kofman1, Grupo Múlticentrico Mexicano de Hema- genes in Spanish breast/ovarian cancer families tología; S. Gutiérrez Enríquez1, O. Diez1, M. Cornet1, M. Simón1, M. Domènech1, J. 1Hospital General de México O.D. and Medicina, UNAM, México D.F., Mexico, Sanz2, T. Ramón y Cajal2, C. Alonso2, M. Baiget1; 2Hospital Regional #1 Gabriel Mancera IMSS, México D.F., Mexico. 1Genetics Service, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, In the folicular lymphoma present the t(14;18)(q32;q21) which joints 2Oncology Service, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. one of the J segments of the heavy chains of immunoglobulins (IgH) H Background: Germ-line mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 cause a in 14q32 with the Bcl-2 gene in 18q2. Objective: To determine the substantial proportion of inherited breast and ovarian cancer. Most incidence of the Bcl2-IgH rearrangement in Mexican patients with of the mutations described are nonsense, frameshift and splice folicular lymphoma and with NHL of intermedium and high grade. site alterations. Missense mutations have also been detected, their Methods: 300 patients were evaluated 155 had low grade lymphoma, pathological significance being unclear. The frequency of large 115 intermedium to high grade and 27 the grade was not determined. rearrangements in both genes is not well documented. We screened The analysis was made in blood samples (BS) in 64 cases or bone these rearrangements using the MLPA method (multiplex ligation- marrow (BM) in 228. The Bcl-2/IgH rearrangement was amplified by dependent probe amplification) in order to estimate their contribution PCR using primers for J and exon-intron 3 region of Bcl-2 (MBR and HCancer genetics 208 MCR regions). The Bcl-2/IgH rearrangement was used as marker vera. Also, almost 15% of chronic myeloid leukaemia patients gain to determine minimal residual disease stage in cases ranging from trisomy 19 as an additional cytogenetic anomaly. 8 to 35 months of evolution. The incidence and tissue type analysis In our case FISH analysis did not revealed cryptic BCR/ABL fusion. was compared using chi-square statistics. Results: In the low grade Thus, the cytogenetic investigation proves once again, its value for folicular NHL the Bcl-2/IgH was positive in 79% with a breakage in the diagnosis and classification of chronic myeloid disorders. MBR region in 115 cases and in MCR in 5. In the intermedium to high grade NHL cases it was present in 33% with a breakage in 35 cases in P0595. Tobacco carcinogen metabolism genes, tobacco MBR y 2 in MCR. Regarding the tissue type it was positive in 86% of smoking and gastric cancer risk in the European population cases in BM and in 42% in BS, with p<0.0001. The frequency of Bcl- N. Sala1, G. Pera2, F. Rico3,1, N. García3,1, A. Agudo2, E. Riboli4, G. Capellà3, C. 2/IgH rearrangement in Mexican patients was high, highlighting the A. González2; relevance of the molecular analysis in the diagnosis and its use as a 1IDIBELL-IRO-Centre de Genètica Mèdica i Molecular, l'Hospitalet de Llo- marker for minimal residual disease cases. bregat, Spain, 2IDIBELL-ICO-Servei d'Epidemiologia i Registre del Càncer, l'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3IDIBELL-ICO-Laboratori Recerca Translacio- P0593. NBS1 germline mutations in children with acute nal, l'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 4IARC, Lyon, France. lymphoblastic leukemia Gastric cancer (GC) results from a multi-stage carcinogenic process M. Mosor1, I. Ziółkowska1, D. Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska2, J. Nowak1; in which interactions between environmental and genetic factors play 1Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2Polish Academy of Sciences, an important role. This study was aimed at analysing the association 2. University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland. between GC, tobacco smoking and polymorphisms in the CYP1A1 Alternations of the NBS1 gene are associated with Nijmegen (T461N, I462V and 3801T>C), CYP1A2 -154A>C, NAT2 (R64Q, breakage syndrome (NBS). NBS is an inherited chromosomal G286E, R197Q and 481C>T) and EPHX1 (Y113H) genes involved instability disorder which is characterized by immunodeficiency and in carcinogen metabolism. The study includes 278 GC cases and increased predisposition to lymphoid malignancies. Nibrin, the product 1101 paired controls from the Eur-Gast case-control study nested of NBS1 gene, is functionally involved in double strand DNA break within the EPIC cohort. Genotyping was performed by real-time PCR repair system. Heterozygous carriers of the NBS1 Slavic mutation and probe melting curve analysis in a LightCycler. Association was have an increased risk of malignant tumors including ovarian,familial analysed by conditional logistic regression models. Interaction was breast and prostate cancer. So far reports on NBS1 mutations in analysed by the likelihood ratio test (LRT). Analysis of smoking habits lymphoproliferative diseases are controversial. The aim of the present revealed that 65% of cases and 55% of controls were ever smokers study was to analyze the mutations in all 16 exons of the NBS1 gene (OR=1.64 IC 95%: 1.22-2.33). Polymorphism analysis revealed that in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). To discriminate the CC genotype of the exon 3-28T>C (Y113H) SNP in EPHX1 was between germinal and somatic mutations DNA was isolated from either a risk factor for GC in univariate codominant (OR=1.72, IC:1.07-2.77) leukemic or normal oral epithelium cells. All samples were analyzed by and recessive (OR=1.61, IC:1.02-2.53) models. Regarding interaction, PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism and identified by direct tobacco smoking did not modify the risk associated with the EPHX1 sequencing. The five NBS1 heterozygous mutations were detected in variant. However, NAT2 G286E and CYP1A1 I462V were risk factors 9 of 114 ALL cases and only 2 in 160 control individuals (OR=6,771; only in smokers (OR =2.88, IC: 1.38-6.03, LRT for interaction p=0.01, p=0,0094). The most frequent mutation was I171V in exon 5 (5/114 and OR=3.05, IC: 1.69-5.50, LRT p=0.08, respectively for smokers cases versus 1/160 in controls). Mutations D95N, R215W, V210F and carrying the NAT2 and the CYP1A1 variants vs. wild type never 657del5 were observed in single individual. In addition we identified smokers). These results are the first to suggest a positive interaction 16 rare sequence variants: IVS7-18G/A, IVS7-29C/T, IVS15+88G/C. between tobacco smoking and the NAT2 G286E and the CYP1A1 The germline origin of the observed mutations was confirmed in all I462V polymorphisms in gastric carcinogenesis. cases. The obtained results suggest that NBS1 heterozygous germline We acknowledge QLG1-2001-01049 grant from the European mutations can be considered as a risk factor in the development of Commission. acute lymphoblastic leukemia. This work is supported by Ministry of Sciences and Informatics grant P0596. Cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic characterization no PBZ-KBN-090/P05/2003 of a Endometrial Stromal Sarcoma presenting a t(10;17)(q22;p13) translocation. P0594. Trisomy 19 in a case of BCR/ABL negative chronic W. Emberger1, S. Sodia1, R. Pfragner2, S. Regauer3, O. Reich4, H. Zierler1, E. myeloproliferative disorder Petek1, K. Wagner1; A. A. Arghir1, M. Nedelcu2, N. Berbec1,3, A. Lungeanu1; 1Insitute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Insitute of 1"Victor Babes" National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2"Sf. Ioan" Clinical Pathophysiology, Graz, Austria, 3Insitute of Pathology, Graz, Austria, 4Depart- Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Phar- ment of Obstetrics and Gynecology University Hospital, Graz, Austria. macy, Bucharest, Romania. Endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESS) are rare neoplasms with In this paper we report the case of a 52 year-old patient with a BCR/ variable clinical presentation, as a common feature local myometrial ABL negative chronic myeloproliferative disorder and trisomy 19 as a invasion is combined with extrauterine metastases. Cytogenetic sole chromosomal anomaly, at diagnosis. aberrations have been described in 30 cases, they showed a broad The patient has been referred for cytogenetic investigation as a step variety of chromosomal aberrations with non-random involvement of of the diagnosis algorithm. The hematologic investigation revealed chromosome 6, 7 and 17. peripheral blood leukocytosis and bone marrow hypercellularity The most common translocation of this tumor seems to be a (granulocyte and erythroid series), with no significant reticulin fibrosis. t(7;17)(q15-q21;q12-q21) generating a JAZF/JJAZ1 fusion gene. A Both classical and molecular cytogenetics methods were applied. second translocation, a t(10;17)(q22;p13) has been described in two Chromosomal studies were performed on GTG-banded slides obtained of the 30 ESS cases. from bone marrow direct preparation and short term cultures (24h and We report on a female patient, age 59 years at time of diagnosis of 48h). FISH with Vysis dual colour, dual fusion BCR/ABL probes was a metastasing ESS. In addition the family history of the patient was applied on fixed cytogenetic slides. positive for breast cancer. Cytogenetic evaluation of the tumor revealed 90% of bone marrow cells were hyperdiploid with trisomy 19 as sole a complex karyotype. Multicolour FISH was performed and combined chromosomal abnormality (karyotype: 47,XY,+19). No numerical analysis of G-banded and M-FISH metaphases revealed a reciprocal or structural anomalies were identified in the remaining 10% of the t(10;17)(q22;p13) and a t(12;13)(q24;q14). metaphases. Therefore the t(10;17)(q22;p13) is a recurrent translocation in ESS So far, trisomy 19 as a sole chromosomal abnormality has been and because it is an uncommon translocation in other neoplasms, it described by various authors in myeloid malignancies, particularly seems to be a ESS specific aberration. in acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome. As a part A detailed breakpoint characterization using FISH with band specific of complex karyotypes, trisomy 19 has been encountered in chronic BAC clones is performed. myeloid disorders such as idiopathic myelofibrosis and polycythemiaCancer genetics 209 P0597. Hypermethylation of the Fanconi Anemia gene FANCF in P0599. Cytogenetic and molecular characterization of t(4;12) bladder carcinoma involving the ETV6 gene with a novel translocation partner on K. Neveling1, A. Florl2, C. Hader2, S. Herterich1, H. Höhn1, H. Hanenberg3, M. chromosome 4 in a case of acute myeloid leukemia. Knowles4, A. Baumer5, W. A. Schulz2, D. Schindler1, R. Kalb1; S. Sodia1, W. Emberger1, H. Zierler1, P. M. Kroisel1, E. Petek1, S. Hojas2, K. 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Germany, 2Depart- Wagner1; ment of Urology, University of Düsseldorf, Germany, 3Department of Pediatric 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Hematology and Oncology, University of Düsseldorf, Germany, 4Cancer Re- Austria, 2Landeskrankenhaus Fuerstenfeld, Fuerstenfeld, Austria. search UK Clinical Centre, St James University Hospital Leeds, United King- We report a 55 years old female patient with idiopathic myelofibrosis and dom, 5Department of Medical Genetics, University of Zürich, Switzerland. systemic mastocytosis, first diagnosed in 2002.Cytogenetic investigation Bladder carcinomas frequently show extensive deletions on 9p and/or of a bone marrow sample showed a normal karyotype. Transformation 9q, potentially including the loci of the Fanconi anemia (FA) genes to a AML FAB M0 was diagnosed after two years. Cytogenetic analysis FANCG and FANCC. Using FANCD2 immunoblotting, the proficieny of revealed following karyotype :46,XX,t(4;12)(q26;p13). Detailed the FA/BRCA pathway of 22 established bladder carcinoma lines was molecular cytogenetic studies confirmed the involvement of ETV6 tested. A single cell line proved defective for FANCD2 monoubiquination on 12p13. The ETV6 gene (also known as TEL) is the main target of and particularly hypersensitive towards mitomycin C. Exploiting this chromosomal translocations affecting chromosome band 12p13. The sensitivity for functional complementation analysis after transduction rearrangements fuses ETV6 to a wide variety of partner genes in both of BFTC 909 with retroviral vectors (separately expressing six FA myeloid and lymphoid malignancies. At present, more than 40 distinct genes of the nuclear core complex), MMC sensitivity of the line was translocations have been described, some of them have also been restored to normal specifically with the FANCF vector, not by FANCC or characterized at the molecular level. As a rare recurrent translocation FANCG as originally expected. M-FISH revealed the presence of two in acute leukemia t(4;12)(q11-q12;p13) has been characterized at chromosomes 11 in this hypo-tetraploid line (DNA index 1.75). CGH the molecular level, a fusion gene between ETV6 and CHIC2 could did not suggest loss of heterozygosity of 11p15 and sequencing of be identified. In our case the involvement of ETV6 could already the FANCF gene of BFTC 909 failed to identify mutations. Methylation be demonstrated but the breakpoint on chromosome 4 is different of cytosine residues in the FANCF promotor region and beyond was (4q26) from the upper described translocation. Therefore a molecular indicated by methylation-sensitive HpaII-restriction assay and bisulfite cytogenetic search for the novel translocation partner to ETV6 is DNA modification. There was no evidence for FANCF promotor performed. hypermethylation in surgical specimens of 10 bladder carcinomas. FANCF silencing has also been observed irregularly in malignancies P0600. Genomic deletions in MSH2 or MLH1 genes in patients such as AML and carcinomas of the pancreas, cervix, ovary and with Lynch syndrome detected by MLPA prostate. Epigenetic interruption of the FA/BRCA pathway and/or A. Krepelova1, K. Pavlikova1, P. Vasovcak1, A. Mrakotova1, A. Puchmajerova1, silencing of other genes in the area of 11p13-11p15, reportedly a hot M. Papezova2, L. Foretova3, P. Plevova4; spot of methylation, constitutes a cellular response at unclear genetic 1University Hospital Motol and 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague end in a subset of human tumors. 5, Czech Republic, 21st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Univer- P0598. NBS1 germline mutations in a series of 550 Polish sity Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic. pediatric patients with sporadic hematological malignancies Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, Lynch syndrome) K. H. Chrzanowska1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, E. Popowska1, M. is an autosomal dominant condition predisposing to colorectal, Gładkowska-Dura1, J. Małdyk2, D. Perek1, A. Wakulińska1, M. Gajdulewicz1, K. endometrial, including other cancers, caused by germline mutations in Spodar1, M. Syczewska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, Polish Pediatric Leukemia/ mismatch repair genes. Successful detection of a pathogenic mutation Lymphoma Study Group; enables predictive testing in relatives at risk for the disease. While 1Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2University of Medical the majority of mutations - nucleotide substitutions, short insertions Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. or deletions - could be detected by standard PCR and sequencing- Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a human autosomal recessive based screening methods, genomic deletions escape detection when disease with defects in DNA repair, which is characterized by immune using such protocols. Recently, multiplex ligation-dependent probe dysfunction, radiation sensitivity, and a strongly increased risk of amplification (MLPA), has been applied for examination of genomic cancer, in particular of lymphoid origin. To examine the role of the deletions. Hereby, we studied the type and frequency of genomic Slavic founder mutation 657del5 and the R215W variant allele in rearrangements in MSH2 or MLH1 genes in patients with HNPCC in the constitutional susceptibility to childhood lymphoma and leukemia, we Czech Republic. Genomic DNA from 53 patients fulfilling Amsterdam screened by PCR-SSCP analysis remission DNA samples from 550 criteria II was investigated. Initially, mutation screening was performed children treated at 13 Hematology and Oncology Centers making by combination of PCR-amplification of individual exons of the MSH2, up the PPLLSG. Frequencies of heterozygosity for the mutations MLH1 and MSH6 genes, DGGE and direct sequencing. This screening 657del5 and R215W in the control group, matched by place of patient revealed a pathogenic mutation in 37/53 (70%) of patients (30 in residence, were calculated as 0.0060 and 0.0027, respectively. We MLH1, 5 in MSH2, and 2 in MSH6 gene). In 16 patients, classified as found 5 carriers of the 657del5 mutation among the patients: 3/272 mutation-negative after the mutation screening, the presence of a gene patients with childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and 2/215 rearrangement was analysed by MLPA. With this method we identified children and adolescents with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL); no 3 deletions in the MSH2 gene (exons 1-2, exon 3, exons 9-16) and one carrier was found among 63 patients with Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). deletion in the MLH1 gene (exons 1-13). Genomic rearrangements in R215W was not detected in any studied group. The patient group is either MSH2 or MLH1 genes were found in 4/16 (25%) previously characterized by an increased odds ratio (range from 1.48 to 1.85 with mutation-negative patients and the overall mutation detection rate in 95% CI) for the occurrence of mutation 657del5 in comparison with the our patients reached approximately 77%. total Polish population; the Yates corrected chi-square test confirmed Supported by Grants NR/8294-3 and VZ00000064203. that the occurrence of mutation 657del5 is indeed higher in patients with ALL and NHL (p<0.05). Nonetheless, NBS1 gene heterozygosity P0601. A rare chromosomal translocation in a B-CLL patient. is not a major risk factor for lymphoid malignancies in childhood and A. Zatterale1, V. Altieri1, G. Gentile1, R. Calzone1, F. Donadio1, S. Russolillo2, L. adolescence. Mastrullo2; This work was supported in part by grants No 3P05A16622 and PBZ- 1Genetics Dept. ASL Napoli 1 - Elena d'Aosta Hospital, Napoli, Italy, 2Haematol- KBN-090/P05/17 from the State Committee for Scientific Research, ogy Dept. ASL Napoli 1 - S. Gennaro Hospital, Napoli, Italy. Poland. Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is a disorder of morphologically mature but immunologically less mature lymphocytes and is manifested by progressive accumulation of these cells in the blood, bone marrow and lymphatic tissues. Bone marrow routine cytogenetic analysis of B-CLL usually fails to identify abnormal clones due to a low rate ofCancer genetics 210 spontaneous mitoses, a poor response to mitogen stimulation and/ formation. Using MacroArray technique we analyzed expression of or a bad metaphase quality. Nevertheless recent studies utilising oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, cell cycle regulators and others fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) suggest that prognostically genes encoded proteins involved in signal transduction. Comparison significant chromosomal abnormalities should occur in B-CLL more of obtained data with tumor grade allowed us to give shape to gene frequently than previously recognised. expression profilings reflecting G2 tumor grade. A case of a man, aged 77, affected by B-CLL confirmed by the immunophenotypic profile, not responding to therapy (clorambucil and P0604. The HPC1/RNASEL 471delAAAG founder mutation in cortisone), is presented. Ashkenazi women with breast/ovarian cancer. Combining both conventional and molecular cytogenetic techniques in N. Levanon, E. Dagan, R. Gershoni-Baruch; bone marrow cells we found a deletion involving the chromosome 13 Dept of Medical Genetics, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. long arm (13q21-qter) and an additional chromosomal rearrangement, 471delAAAG is a 4-bp deletion mutation recently identified in the involving chromosomes #2 and #18 (q32;q12). HPC1/RNASEL gene as a founder mutation associated with prostate It is already known that BCL-2 gene is localized in 18q21 band and cancer in patients of Ashkenazi descent. The objective of this study was overexpressed in about 85% of B-CLL tumours without any visible to determine whether this mutation confers increased risk for breast chromosomal rearrangement in that region. and ovarian cancer in this population. The mutation frequency was Then in this case we could hypothesize a position effect enhancing the thus determined in 260 breast/ovarian cancer patients sub-grouped on BCL-2 gene expression. account of their being carriers of the BRCA1/2 predominant Ashkenazi Moreover it could be hypothesized that cryptic rearrangements could mutations (130 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and 130 non-carriers matched occur in those cases with BCL-2 gene overexpression and without any for morbidity and age at disease onset. Asymptomatic women from visible chromosomal rearrangements. high-risk families sub-grouped as carriers or non-carriers of BRCA1/2 A major chromosome 13 deletion (13q14) characterizes about 46% mutation (n=94) were also tested. Additionally, 200 healthy individuals B-CLL cases. Our finding shortens the critic region in agreement with from the general population were used as a comparison group. PCR previous evidence showing that the RB gene in 13q14 is not involved products containing the 471delAAAG mutation were analyzed by in B-CLL. the WAVE DHPLC apparatus (Transgenomics. All abnormal DHPLC profiles were confirmed by restriction assays designed to differentiate P0602. Mutation analysis of the BRCT domain proteins MDC1 between the wild type and the mutant allele. In all the cohorts studied, and 53BP1 in German breast cancer patients only two BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, with breast and ovarian cancer, S. Beußel1, T. Klose1, N. Enßen-Dubrowinskaja1, B. Wieland1, M. Bremer1, J. H. respectively, were found to carry the 471delAAAG mutation. Our data Karstens1, C. Sohn1,2, T. Dörk1; contradict previous observations as regards the prevalence of the 471 1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 4-bp deletion in the general Ashkenazi population estimated previously Germany. at 4%. As such, the 471delAAAG mutation does not seem to contribute The Mediator of DNA Damage Control 1 (MDC1) and the p53-Binding to cancer morbidity in this selected population. Protein 1 (53BP1) are central modulators of ATM signaling after DNA double-strand breaks and share a common motif with BRCA1, the P0605. Overexpression of cyclin D2 and D3 genes in human BRCT domain. We thus considered these two genes as candidate acute leukemia cells. breast cancer susceptibility genes and performed a mutation analysis of D. Szczesniak-Stanczyk1, B. Marzec1, J. Kocki1, M. Cioch2, A. Dmoszynska2, the whole coding sequence in 24 German patients who had hereditary J. Wojcierowski1; breast cancer without identified BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. Selected 1Medical Genetics Department, Medical Academy, Lublin, Poland, 2Department mutations were subsequently screened in hospital-based series of 133 of Haematology, Medical Academy, Lublin, Poland. patients with bilateral breast cancer, 133 patients with unilateral breast The cyclins are considered to be molecules involved in basic pathway of cancer and 133 random individuals. One amino acid substitution of cell division. The overexpression of these positive cell cycle regulators MDC1 was observed more often in bilateral breast cancer than in seems to be one of the factors responsible for incorrect regulation of the population controls (p<0.01). Our study also uncovered a polyvariant cell cycle machinery and consequently uncontrolled cell proliferation. allele of the MDC1 gene, harbouring a 123 bp insertion within the The most important cyclins for the G1 phase of cell cycle are D type coding region, that occurred at a modestly increased frequency in the cyclins. Their level and activity decide about start of cell division. breast cancer cohorts compared with the population controls (OR=2.1, In our research we examined the level of D type (D1, D2, D3) cyclins 95%CI 0.7-6.3). Immunoblot analyses of lymphoblastoid cell lines from genes expression in bone marrow samples obtained from 26 patients an insertion carrier revealed only subtle changes in the expression with acute myeloblastic leukemia and 19 with acute lymphoblastic and radiation-induced phosphorylation of this variant MDC1 protein. leukemia before treatment. The obtained results were compared with In the 53BP1 gene, one common missense substitution was less periferial blood lymphocytes. For the assessment of cyclins’ mRNA abundant in the homozygous state in breast cancer patients than in we used semi-quantitive method - The Multi-Probe RNase Protection population controls (p=0.02), and a rare two-amino-acid deletion was Assay System (Pharmingen) with hCYC-1 set of probes. Proteins were identified in three breast cancer patients. In summary, while our data detected by immunocytochemistry. do not provide evidence for truncating mutations of MDC1 or 53BP1 The results we obtained shows the leukemic cells reveal significantly in hereditary breast cancer, the association of frame-conserving gene high levels of cyclin D2 and D3 mRNA than lymphocytes. The level of alterations with breast cancer deserves further investigation. cyclin D1 mRNA was similar in leukemic blasts and in lymphocytes. All D type cyclins protein was localized in cell nucleus in all examined P0603. Gene expression profiling in endometrial cancer cells. T. Kubiatowski, K. Rózynska, K. Futyma, A. Filip, B. Marzec, R. Tarkowski, G. Cyclins D2 and D3 are connected with disturbances of cell differentiation. Polak, J. Kotarski, J. Wojcierowski; The increased level of D2 and D3 cyclins expression seems to be Medical Academy of Lublin, Lublin, Poland. concerned with incorrect cell differentiation in acute leukemia. Maybe, Endometrial cancer is one of the most common neoplasms of reproductive the blocking of cyclin D2 and D3 genes expression or protein activity system. According to data accumulated in last decades it has been will cause proper cell differentiation. concluded that microsatellite instability and PTEN, K-ras, β-catenin gene mutations are crucial for endometrial cancer etiopathogenesis. P0606. Genotyping of CYP3A5 and MDR1 polymorphisms in Moreover, it is well known that all genes encoded proteins involved Bulgarian patients with colorectal cancer in cell cycle regulation, cell differentiation or surrounding tissues D. T. Petrova1, S. Y. Atanasova2, D. Toncheva1, M. Oellerich2, V. Armstrong2, N. infiltration are candidate for lesions leading to tumor and metastases von Ahsen2; development. Complexity of molecular mechanisms leading to 1Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Georg-August-University, Depart- endometrial cancer development stress that only experiments based ment of Clinical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany. on array technique can help to collect enough data to understand all Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) may contribute to the interactions between different molecular pathways crucial for tumor cancerogenesis. Genetic variants in xenobiotic metabolising enzymesCancer genetics 211 and transporters might be responsible for a higher susceptibility to in 135 unrelated NBCCS patients, the largest cohort studied so far. colorectal cancer. 44 novel mutations were identified. Our results underline the high We investigated the frequency of CYP3A5 polymorphisms (CYP3A5*6, frequency of de novo PTCH gene mutations, and help us to revisit CYP3A5*3, CYP3A5*3B and CYP3A5*2) and MDR1 SNPs (3435C>T the clinical diagnosis criteria. However the non-detection of PTCH and 2677G>T) in Bulgarian patients with colorectal cancer. We mutations pinpoint the non-exploration of other genetic events. So new analysed tumor and normal tissue of 30 patients. The results, presented molecular diagnosis strategy based on multiplex genomic PCR has in table 1, are compared with the results of 36 healthy controls. We been set up to explore the occurrence of PTCH genomic rearrangement found no evidence of somatic mutations in the tumor samples as in NBCCS patients. Preliminary results will be presented. genotypes always matched with those of the corresponding normal Beside, it is unclear how germinal mutation of PTCH result in the tissue samples. No significant difference was observed in the studied predisposition to BCC in NBCCS patients. To answer the question, we allele frequencies between patients and controls. Enlarged number of generated an unique collection of NBCCS fibroblast and keratinocyte patients and controls will be included in further studies. primary strains from skin of NBCCS patients harboring a known Table 1. SNPs frequencies in patients with colorectal cancer and germinal PTCH mutation. Although UV and gamma irradiation have controls (allele-1 - wild-type alleles; allele-2 - variant alleles; N=number been shown to contribute to BCC in NBCCS patients, NBCCS of studied individuals; n=number of alleles or number of heterozygous, keratinocytes are neither photosensitive nor radiosensitive. Then, homozygous) we reconstructed NBCCS skin in vitro. Preliminary results suggest the crucial role of abnormal mesenchymal/epithelial interactions in Patients Controls SNPs (N=30) (N=36) predisposition of NBCCS patients toward BCC development. n frequency n frequency P0608. Investigation of molecular-genetic predictors in selection CYP3A5*6 of personalized therapy for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) Allele-1 60 1 72 1 L. Benesova1, M. Minarik1, M. Pesek2, M. Jelinkova1, F. Bruha2, P. Muken- Genotypes 30 1 36 1 snabl2; (1/1) 1Genomac International Ltd, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty hospital Pilsen, CYP3A5*3 Pilsen, Czech Republic. Allele-1 52 0.867 69 0.958 Lung cancer is serious civilisation disease with high incidence and Allele-2 8 0.133 3 0.042 Genotypes 22 0.733 33 0.917 mortality. Over 6000 new cases are diagnosed in Czech republic (1/1) 8 0.267 3 0.083 each year. Despite to development of new drugs prognosis remains (1/2) very poor. Most patients are treated by combined chemotherapy, radiotherapy and recently also by targeted biological therapy. The CYP3A5*2 Allele-1 60 1 72 1 associated expenses are significant, probability of remission is Genotypes 30 1 36 1 less than 50% and side effects of combined therapy are serious. (1/1) Recent advances in research offer several genetic markers enabling prediction of therapy response for each individual patient. For example CYP3A5*3B such molecular predictors can be used to indicate targeted biological Allele-1 60 1 72 1 Genotypes 30 1 36 1 therapy to spare the patient adverse effects of cytostatics or to avoid (1/1) ineffective chemotherapy. Here we report investigation of several molecular predictors for MDR(3435C>T) rational selection of treatment for patients diagnosed with non-small Allele-1 31 0.517 41 0.567 cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We present utility of several molecular- Allele-2 29 0.483 31 0.433 Genotypes 8 0.267 13 0.361 genetic markers including somatic mutations in EGFR and k-ras (1/1) 15 0.500 15 0.417 genes from tumor tissue complemented by monitoring of inherited (1/2) 7 0.233 8 0.222 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ERCC1 and ERCC2/XPD (2/2) genes from patient's blood samples. The obtained molecular profiles are used to design the most effective combinations for chemothrerapy MDR(2677G>T) Allele-1 35 0.583 49 0.681 or targeted biological therapy. Allele-2 25 0.417 23 0.319 Genotypes 11 0.367 17 0.472 P0609. Microsatellite instability in Czech patients with colorectal (1/1) 13 0.433 15 0.417 cancer (1/2) 6 0.200 4 0.111 M. Papežová1, A. Křepelová1, P. Plevová2, L. Foretová3, V. Kebrdlová1; (2/2) 11st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic. P0607. Human genetic and skin in vitro studies in Gorlin Detection of microsatellite instability (MSI) is a part of mutational syndrome analysis of colorectal cancers (CRC). Characteristic phenotypic feature P. Gorry1,2, F. Brellier3, V. Musani4, M. Avril5, S. Levanat6, A. Spatz7, T. Mag- of MSI indicates loss of mismatch repair (MMR) in tumor cells. Loss naldo3; of MMR can be caused by somatic mutation or epigenetic inactivation 1Dpt of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 2Laboratory of of that gene. Cancer Genetics, Institut Bergonie, Bordeaux, France, 3Laboratory of Genetic We studied MSI in 199 tumors from 142 patients with colorectal cancer. Instability & Cancer, CNRS UPR2169, Institute G. Roussy, Villejuif, France, Of these, 35 patients fulfilled Amsterdam criteria (group A+), 68 patients 4Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, were familial (group A-) and 39 were sporadic cases (group Spor). 5Dept of Dermatology, Institute Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 6Laboratory of We used method of fragmentation analysis (ABI Prism 310 Genetic Molecular Oncology Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 7Dept of Pathol- Analyzer) with fluorescent labelled primers; three mononucleotide ogy, Institute Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (BAT-RII, BAT-25, BAT-26) and five dinucleotide (D2S123, D3S1029, Gorlin syndrome or Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) D5S346, D17S250, D18S58) repeat loci were analysed. Tumors were is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by developmental classified as MSI-H (high degree of MSI, 2 or more loci with MSI), abnormalities and cancer predisposition to basal cell carcinoma MSI-L (low degree of MSI, 1 unstable locus) and MSS (stable, no MSI (BCC). The NBCCS gene is the PATCHED (PTCH) tumor suppressor detected). We detected 72 tumors with MSI-H, 10 tumors with MSI-L gene encoding for the Sonic Hedgehog receptor. While mutations and 117 MSS tumors. In 41 of MSS tumors LOH was detected. reports and clinical studies have been published, the clear clinical Results correlated with mutational analysis of MMR genes (hMLH1, h delimitation of the disease and the molecular understanding of the MSH2, hMSH6) and immunohistochemical detection of their proteins. BCC predisposition are missing. The work was supported by Grant Agency of Charles University (Grant Through a clinical research network, we screened for PTCH mutations No. 17/2001).Cancer genetics 212 P0610. Genomic instability patterns in patients with sporadic P0612. Tumor characteristics of BRCA 1- associated familial colorectal cancer breast cancer from Russian population A. J. Dimovski1, T. Josifovski2, M. Panovski2, Z. Sterjev1, L. Suturkova1, A. L. N. Lyubchenko1, N. I. Pospehova2, A. A. Lushnikova1, S. M. Portnoy1, V. V. Stefanovska3, G. D. Efremov3; Bryuzgin1, A. V. Karpukhin2, R. F. Garkavtseva1, S. A. Tjulandin1; 1Faculty of Pharmacy, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 1N.Blochin Cancer Research Center, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, The for- 2Research Center For Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. mer Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 3Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Cancer arising in carriers of mutation in BRCA 1/2 genes differs from Arts, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. sporadic breast cancer of age-matched control. It is generally accepted that colorectal cancer (CRC) can progress 195 breast or/and ovarian cancer patients with strong cancer history through either chromosomal instability (CIN) or microsatellite instability from cancer-genetics registry of Russian N.N.Blokhin Cancer Research (MSI). We evaluated the pattern of genomic instability in 91 sporadic Center were screened for germline mutation in BRCA 1/2 genes using colorectal cancer patients by analyzing the MSI status and loss of a CSGE and direct sequencing. heterozygosity (LOH), as evidence for CIN, in 8 microsatellite markers Results: 57 BRCA 1/2 mutation carriers have been detected. High located on chromosomal arms 2p, 3p, 5q, 17p and 18q. Five of the frequency of mutation 5382 insC (76.4% of all revealed mutations) was markers were from the NCI-recommended panel for MSI testing, while shown. A multivariant analysis was performed, it includes 32 cases the others were located in the regions harboring tumor suppressor of BRCA 1-linked breast cancer (BC). Control groups consisted of 57 (APC, p53) or mismatch repair (MLH1, MSH2) genes important for patients with sporadic BC selected on the basis of age and disease CRC development. MSI was detected in 11 cancers (12.1%) that were stage. primarily located in the right colon, with mucinous histotype and lower Mean age in the groups studied was 39 years in cancer patients and stage at diagnosis. The LOH of at least one chromosomal arm was 41 years in control. Mean menarche age was 13.3 years in BRCA- detected in 57 (62.3%) of cancers, of which the most common was carriers and 13.7 years in sporadic cancer patients. In 4 patients with 18q (84.2%) followed by 5p (54.4%) and 17p (45.6%). Four out of pathological BRCA genotype (12.2%) breast cancer developed during 11 patients from the MSI group also exhibited LOH of at least one pregnancy. Histopathological characteristics of BRCA-associated chromosomal arm indicating a significant overlap between the two breast cancer were: (1) infiltrated ductal carcinoma (89.8%/87.7%); types of genomic instabilities. In 27 patients (29.67%) we did didn’t (2) high grade - 58.2%/29.2%; (3) prominent lymphocyte infiltrate detect any evidence of CIN or MSI. Our data indicate a significant (60,2%/34.5%); (4) negative receptors of estrogen -77,6%/38.8%; (5) overlap between CIN and MSI phenotypes and suggest that in almost complete clinical response to primary chemotherapy (anthracyclin- 1/3 of all cases the molecular mechanism is not related to either CIN based treatment) followed by surgery (98.1%/38.2% ) compared to the or MSI type of genomic instability. control group (p<0,05). Mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)-related sequences were found P0611. Spectrum of chromosomal abnormalities in by specific PCR in 39% of sporadic BC patients and in 42% familial hematological malignancies BC, while these sequences were detected in about 57% of BC patients B. B. Ganguly1, N. N. Kadam1, M. B. Agarwal2; during pregnancy or shortly after delivery. MMTV-related retroviral 1MGM Centre for Genetic Research & Diagnosis, Mahatma Gandhi Mission's agent might be considered as BC risk factor, especially in familial and New Bombay Hospital, Navi Mumbai, India, 2Bombay Hospital Instiitute of gestational BC cases. Medical Sciences, Mumbai, India. Malignant disorders are no longer considered as “killer-disease” owing P0613. RB1 Loss of the heterozygosity analysis in colorectal to continuous refinement of cytogenetic and molecular technologies, cancer patients from Singapore and development of molecular medicines. Among all neoplastic A. S. Lee1, P. Kadam2, C. P. Yean3, E. K. Weng3, F. Seow-Choen3, L. P. San2; diseases, hematological malignancies are well characterized with 1Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Division of Medical Sciences, National the underlying genetic causes and treatment facilities. Chromosomal/ Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 2Department of Paediatrics, National genetic abnormalities are considered important parameters for University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 3Department of Colorectal Sur- classification and risk evaluation of myeloproliferative disorders. gery, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. We present the spectrum of chromosomal abnormalities in different The RB1 gene is a tumour suppressor gene involved in many important hematological malignancies detected in 75 cases referred for roles in cell division, differentiation and apoptosis in many cell types. diagnosis. Based on morphology and immunophenotyping, they Allelic loss of RB1 has been observed in retinoblastoma as well as in were classified as acute lymphocytic leukaemia (ALL-12), acute a number of other tumours including prostate cancer (53%), bladder promyelocytic leukaemia (APL-4), chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML- cancer (61%), breast cancer (32.5%) and ovarian cancer (61%). We 15), multiple myeloma (MM-3), myeloplastic syndrome (MDS-15), determined the frequency of loss of heterozygozity (LOH) of the RB1 Burkitt’s leukaemia (BL-2), acute myeloid leukemia (AML-13) and gene in 55 colorectal cancer patients from Singapore. The patients others (13). Normal karyotype was detected in 26 patients, whereas comprised 36 male and 19 female patients with a median age at surgery others were detected with numerical or structural abnormalities. CML of 60.1 years. LOH analysis was done using Genescan analysis on the patients were presented with Philadelphia chromosome, BCR-ABL ABI 377 sequencer at three intragenic (D13S153, Rbi4 and Rb1.20) rearrangements, and even three-way translocations, viz. t(9;22;11) and two extragenic (D13S218 and D13S137) microsatellite markers and t(5;9;22). Constitutive abnormality, pericentric inversion in 9, was for each sample. LOH at one or more marker was observed in 31% observed as genetic predisposition of early onset of myelodysplastic of our patients. No statistically significant differences in occurrence of syndrome in two cases (16y and 18y), who further acquired deletion in LOH between males and females or with Dukes’ staging of tumours 13q, and der(3),t(10;11),+9 respectively. Inversion in 16 (2), t(15;17) (2) were observed. LOH at RB1 occurred in patients with Dukes’ stages and t(8;21) (4) were recorded in AML and APL patients. MDS patients A and B, suggesting involvement of this gene in the early stages of had a number of deletions and numerical abnormalities and complex colorectal carcinogenesis in these patients. rearrangements. Presence or absence of characteristic abnormalities in different patients helped classifying the disorder accurately and treating P0614. Molecular Analysis of Complex BCR-ABL1 Gene patients accordingly. In many instances, additional abnormalities Rearrangements in Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia directed concomitant therapy for combating the secondary clone. S. M. Benjes1, L. C. Walker1, P. S. Ganly1,2, R. L. Spearing2, C. M. Morris1,3; Expression or amplification of different oncogenes, its correlation with 1Cancer Genetics Research Group, Department of Pathology, Christchurch clinical presentation and treatment outcome will be presented. School of Medicine & Health Sciences, Christchurch, New Zealand, 2Haematol- ogy Unit, Canterbury Health Laboratories, Christchurch Hospital, Christchurch, New Zealand, 3Cytogenetics Unit, Canterbury Health Laboratories, Christ- church Hospital, Christchurch, New Zealand. Leukaemia often happens when DNA that encodes genes at different chromosomal sites spontaneously recombines in progenitor cells of the haematopoietic system. In one subtype, chronic myeloid leukaemiaMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 213 (CML), the BCR-ABL1 fusion protein is responsible for the clinical chromosome 3 aberrations are among the most recurrently observed phenotype, and is expressed after recombination occurs between the aberrations in these tumors: deletions of the 3p arm are often found and BCR gene on chromosome 22 and the ABL1 gene on chromosome several tumor suppressor genes have been proposed. Amplifications 9. In about 90% of CML patients, this recombination results in a and/or gains of the 3q arm are present in a majority of tumors and have cytogenetically visible, simple reciprocal exchange involving the long been linked to a poor prognosis for the HNSCC patients. However, the arms of chromosome 9 and 22. In the remaining cases, recombination oncogene targeted by these amplifications/gains has not been isolated between BCR and ABL1 can be more complex involving additional yet even if some candidates have been proposed. chromosomal sites that may be visible cytogenetically or cryptically To better dissect these aberrations, we have analyzed a series of 30 concealed within a normal appearing chromosome complement. Lung SCC and 50 Head and Neck SCC (tumors of advanced stages: Previously, we isolated BCR gene fragments linked to other participating T3 and T4) by array CGH, using a home-built chromosome 3 dedicated chromosomes from four patients with complex rearrangements. array composed of 307 BAC clones. This screening allowed us to Unexpectedly, coding regions were found disrupted at the additional narrow down the common region of amplifications/gains to a small 3q26 chromosome-BCR recombination site in two cases. A combination genomic segment (< 2 megabases), highly amplified in approximately of inverse-PCR and DNA sequence analysis has now been applied 20 % of these tumors, and gained in more than 80 %. Bioinformatic to isolate and characterize genomic features at BCR recombination analyses show that this consensus region contains only 6 known sites in a new series of 20 CML patients having complex BCR-ABL1 Refseq genes. To discriminate between these candidate oncogenes, rearrangements. By this approach, BCR fragments linked to additional we are currently analyzing their expression levels in SCC with or participating chromosomes have been isolated from seven further without 3q26 amplification as well as the functional consequences of patients. Preliminary sequence analysis shows a disrupted coding their overexpression in cellular models. This work should pinpoint a region in one case at the BCR recombination site and in a further new major oncogene of the squamous cell carcinogenesis, commonly five cases the breakpoints map 95 bp and up to ~25 kb from coding amplified and overexpressed in consequence. domains. Additional gene involvement has potential to influence the biology and pathology of the leukaemic disease, with further study P0617. Prevalence of the FMR1 mutation in Taiwan assessed by required to substantiate and extend these novel findings. large-scale screening of newborn boys and analysis of DXS548- FRAXAC1 haplotype P0615. Detection of mitochondrial DNA mutations in gastric C. Tzeng1, L. Tsai2, W. Hwu3, S. Lin4, M. Chao5, Y. Jong5, S. Chu6; adenomas 1Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Taipei Municipal R. A. Caruso1, L. Rigoli1, C. Di Bella2, F. Verginelli3, C. D. Salpietro2, R. Mariani- Women's and Children's Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 3National Costantini4; Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 4Bureau of Health 1Department of Human Pathology,University School of Medicine, Messina, Promotion, Department of Health, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 5Kaohsi- Italy, 2Department of Paediatrics, University School of Medicine, Messina, Italy, ung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan Republic of China, 6Bud- 3Department of Oncology and Neuroscience, and Center of Excellence on Ag- dhist Tzu Chi Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan Republic of China. ing (Ce.S.I.), University G. d'Annunzio, Chieti, Italy, 4Department of Oncology If carrier women could be identified in time and take appropriate and Neuroscience, and Center of Excellence on Aging (Ce.S.I.), University G. measures, fragile X syndrome can be prevented. Wide screening d'Annunzio, Messina, Italy. of women to be or in their early pregnancy was considered a good Alterations of oxidative phosphorylation in tumor cells are thought to approach to identify carriers without misdetection. Nevertheless, we play a role in cancer growth. Recently, a high frequency of mitochondrial argued against the cost-effectiveness of implementing such a screening DNA (mtDNA) mutations have been reported in human tumours. To program in Taiwan, due to the lower carrier rate found in our pilot study. determine the frequency and distribution of mitochondrial mutations in To reliably estimate the prevalence of mutant FMR1 gene in Taiwan, we gastric adenomas of Italian patients, we screened the displacement- anonymously screened 10,046 newborn boys using bloodspot PCR. loop (D-loop) region and the hypervariable regions 1 (HV1) and 2 Among them, the sample from one boy, who was most likely a victim of (HV2) of mtDNA. DNA was extracted from 24 samples of matched FXS, failed repeatedly in PCR amplification. The estimated prevalence adenomas and normal tissues embedded in paraffin blocks. of premutation (55-200 CGG repeats) and intermediate alleles (45-54 We performed the amplification and automated direct sequencing of CGG repeats) were 1:1,674 (n=6) and 1:143 (n=70), respectively. All the following mtDNA regions: L15990-H617; L15990-H16434; L16431- these estimates were constantly lower than that reported in Caucasian H162; L039-H407; L361- H617. populations, with variable statistic significance. Furthermore, when In 9/24 adenomas, but not in normal tissues, some mtDNA mutations comparing analyses of the distribution of alleles at the two most often have been identified: heteroplasmic transition G:C/A:T at nucleotide investigated microsatellite loci, DXS548 and FRAXAC1, between position (np) 16004, heteroplasmic transition C:G/T:A at np16495 (2 100 control and 28 unrelated fragile X chromosomes, we found no cases); a 1-base-pair A:T insertion at np288 (1 case); heteroplasmic apparent founder haplotype prevalent among the fragile X patients. C:G/G:C transition at np16168 (1 case); a 1-base-pair C:G insertion Because a few founder haplotypes were reportedly prevalent in two at np16244, heteroplasmic C:G/T:A transition at np16495 (1 case); thirds of fragile X alleles in Caucasians and in Chinese from central heteroplasmic T:A/G:C transition at np10, heteroplasmic A:T/T: China, we thus suggested that lack of founder fragile X chromosomes A transition at np202 (1 case); heteroplasmic C:G/G:C transition at might result in a relatively low prevalence of mutant FMR1 gene in a np16168 (1 case); homoplasmic C:G transition at np16013, a 1-base- population, as observed in Taiwan. pair A:T insertion at np288 (1 case); heteroplasmic C:G/T:A transition at np16356 (1 case). In our cases, the mtDNA mutations were found P0618. Impaired mitochondrial glutamate transport in autosomal only in the gastric adenomas, but not in matched normal tissues. Our recessive neonatal myoclonic epilepsy findings suggest that mtDNA is mutated in a subset of gastric tumours, F. Molinari1, A. Raas-Rothschild2, M. Rio1, G. Fiermonte3, F. Encha-Razavi1, L. and that the disruption of the mtDNA repair system can be involved in Palmieri3, F. Palmieri3, Z. Ben-Neriah2, N. Kadhom1, M. Vekemans1, T. Attie-Bit- gastric adenomas of Italian patients. ach1, A. Munnich1, P. Rustin1, L. Colleaux1; 1INSERM U393, Paris, France, 2Hadassah University Medical Center, Jerusa- P0616. Oncogene identification in Squamous Cell Carcinomas lem, Israel, 3University of Bari, Bari, Italy. : mapping of chromosome 3 aberrations by array CGH and Early myoclonic encephalopathy (EME) with suppression burst (SB) is an functional analysis of candidate oncogenes. early onset malignant epilepsy syndrome characterized by a typical EEG T. Hussenet1, J. Exinger1, C. Hammer1, R. Redon2, B. Wasylyk1, E. Brambilla3, pattern, namely suppression-burst, in which higher-voltage bursts of slow D. Muller4, J. Abecassis4, S. du Manoir1; waves mixed with multifocal spikes alternate with isoelectric suppression 1IGBMC, Illkirch - Graffenstaden, France, 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, phases. The lack of consistent neuropathological features suggests Hinxton, United Kingdom, 3Institut Albert Bonniot, Grenoble, France, 4Centre that etiology may vary from case to case. EME has been reported in Paul Strauss, Strasbourg, France. nonketotic hyperglycinemia (MIM 605899), propionic acidemia (MIM We are interested in mapping chromosomal aberrations in Squamous 606054) and some malformative disorders. However, in most cases, the Cell Carcinomas (SCC) and analyzing their consequences. Indeed, underlying mechanism of these disorders remains unknown.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 214 Here we report on genetic mapping of an autosomal recessive EME to (~98.5 %), with an increased sequence similarity (~99.4 %) within chromosome 11p15.5 and identification of a missense mutation (Pro the 3.0-kb breakpoint cluster. Several recombination-associated 206 Leu) in a gene encoding one of the two mitochondrial glutamate motifs were identified in the hotspot and/or in its vicinity. Interestingly, symporters (GC1, SLC25A22). The mutation co-segregated with the an average of 10-fold increase of a translin motif over the normal disease and altered a highly conserved amino-acid. Functional analysies distribution within the LCRs was recognized. showed that glutamate oxidation in patient cultured skin fibroblasts was Furthermore, a heterozygous inversion of the interval between the strongly defective. Further studies in reconstituted proteoliposomes LCRs was detected in all fathers with a child carrying a deletion in the showed defective [14C]glutamate uniport and [14C]glutamate/ paternally derived chromosome. The functional significance of these glutamate exchange by mutant protein. Moreover, expression studies findings remains to be elucidated. showed that, during human development, SLC25A22 is specifically expressed in the brain, within territories proposed to contribute to the P0621. MEFV gene is a probable susceptibility gene for Behçet's genesis and control of myoclonic seizures. disease These findings provide the first direct molecular link between glutamate A. Dursun1, N. Imirzalioglu2, B. Tastan3, Y. Soysal2, C. M. Yakicier4; mitochondrial metabolism and myoclonic epilepsy and suggest 1ZKU Medical Faculty Medical Genetics Dept., Zonguldak, Turkey, 2Military potential insights into the pathophysiological bases of severe neonatal Medical Academy Medical Genetics Dept., Ankara, Turkey, 3Military Medical epilepsies with suppression-burst pattern. Academy Dermatology Dept., Ankara, Turkey, 4Bilkent University Molecular Biology and Genetics Dept, Ankara, Turkey. P0619. Rapid Throughput Sequence-Based Mutation Scanning Behcet’s disease (BD) is a rare, chronic multisystem inflammatory of L1CAM: An Improved Method Based on Meta-PCR disorder. Epidemiologic findings suggest that both genetic and M. Panayi, A. Wallace, R. Elles; environmental factors contribute to the development of BD. National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Manchester), Central The prevalence of BD is higher in the Middle Eastern and Manchester&Manchester Children's NHS Trust, United Kingdom. Mediterranean populations. Another chronic inflamatory disease Mutations in the L1CAM gene are responsible for four related L1 Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF), is also known to be highly disorders; X-linked hydrocephalus, MASA (Mental retardation, Aphasia, prevalent in these populations. The prevalence of BD is higher in the Shuffling gait, and Adducted thumbs) syndrome, X-linked complicated FMF patient population than in populations known to be rich in BD. spastic paraplegia type I (SPG1) and X-linked Agenesis of the Corpus Both BD and FMF have some pathophysiological features in common Callosum (ACC). The main clinical features of this spectrum are and they result from inappropriate activation of neutrophils. Clinical Corpus callosum hypoplasia, mental Retardation, Adducted thumbs, manifestations of both diseases can mimic each other and coexistence Spastic paraplegia and Hydrocephalus (CRASH). Since there is no of both diseases in the same patient has been reported. biochemically assayed disease marker, molecular analysis of the Given that BD and FMF have similar pathophysiological, epidemiological L1CAM gene is the only means of confirming a clinical diagnosis. and clinical features, we hypothesized that the gene responsible for The challenge for a comprehensive mutation scan in a large multi- FMF, MEFV, may also play a role in the pathogenesis of BD. exon gene such as L1CAM is to fulfil demand for rapid and accurate Therefore, we screaned common MEFV gene mutations (E148Q, screening while reducing cost and turn-round time. Our previous M680I, M694V, and V726A) in 42 BD patients who had no symptoms mutation scanning technique involved the labour-intensive method of or family history for FMF in addition to 66 healthy controls. Fifteen SSCP/heteroduplex analysis and sequencing of the 28 coding exons. patients (36%) displayed MEFV mutations (9 M694V, 5 E148Q and Here, we report a cost-effective high-throughput direct sequence one M680I) and mutation rates were significantly elevated compared analysis strategy for L1CAM. to 66 (11%) healty controls (p=0.0034). The whole coding region of L1CAM is amplified and sequenced in 8 The occurence of frequent MEFV mutations in BD patients provides separate fragments (6 Meta-PCR fragments and 2 long PCR reactions). evidence that MEFV gene is involved in the pathogenesis of Behcet’s Sequencing reactions are analysed on an ABI3730 automated disease. sequencer and scanned for mutations using the trace subtraction Patient Group Control Group P value software in the Staden Package. Panels of 10 patients can now be analysed for all 8 fragments in Mutation Frequency 15/27 7/59 0.0034 approximately 8 weeks. To date, five previously unreported sequence M694V 9(3*)/33 4/62 0.0367 alterations and one known pathogenic stop mutation have been identified from a total of 30 patients screened. One of these patients E148Q 5/37 1/65 0.0321 was a re-test with a previously negative SSCP/HA result, further M680I 1/41 2/64 0.9999 confirming the increased sensitivity of this improved mutation scanning method. P0622. Mutation screening of the entire retinoblastoma gene (RB1) in 252 retinoblastoma cases P0620. Identification of a 3.0-kb major recombination hotspot in E. J. Doherty1, N. Grace1, J. Sibbring2, R. Elles1; Sotos syndrome patients with a common 1.9-Mb microdeletion 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Re- N. Matsumoto; gional Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Liverpool Women's Hospital, United Department of Huma Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Kingdom. Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. Retinoblastoma is the most common cause of ocular malignancy in Sotos syndrome (SoS [MIM 117550]) is a congenital dysmorphic childhood occurring due to inactivation of both alleles of the tumour disorder characterized by overgrowth in childhood, distinctive suppressor gene, RB1. Individuals with familial, bilateral or unilateral craniofacial features and mental retardation. Haploinsufficiency of multifocal retinoblastoma are carriers of a germ-line mutation. Only a the NSD1 gene due to either intragenic mutations or microdeletions small proportion of isolated, unilateral retinoblastoma (IUR) patients is known to be the major cause. The common ~2.2-Mb microdeletion carry a germ-line mutation, 1.7-17%, the majority having somatic encompasses whole NSD1 and neighboring genes and is flanked by mutations in tumour tissue only. In total, we have screened peripheral low-copy-repeats (LCRs). Here we report the identification of a 3.0-kb blood DNA from 144 patients with bilateral retinoblastoma and 108 major recombination hotspot within these LCRs, where we mapped patients with unilateral retinoblastoma. Our screening strategy has deletion breakpoints in 78.7 % (37/47) of SoS patients with the involved preliminary analysis by combined SSCP/heteroduplex common microdeletion. The deletion size was subsequently refined as analysis of all 27 exons of the retinoblastoma gene (RB1) followed 1.9 Mb. Sequencing of breakpoint fragments from all the 37 patients by bidirectional sequencing of subsequent shifts. Recently, we revealed junctions between a segment of the proximal LCR (PLCR-B) have introduced RB1 dosage analysis to identify larger duplications and its corresponding region of the distal LCR (DLCR-2B). PLCR-B and deletions of the gene. To date, we have identified mutations in and DLCR-2B are the only directly orientated regions, whereas the 85% of patients with bilateral retinoblastoma and in 16% of patients remaining PLCR and DLCR are in inverted orientation. PLCR with a with unilateral retinoblastoma. Additionally, we provide a service size of 394.0 kb and DLCR of 429.8 kb showed overall high homology for mutation screening in DNA extracted from paraffin-embeddedMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 215 retinoblastomas (for unilateral patients where germline screening P0625. Analysis of His1096Gln mutation in Wilson disease has proved negative). We have identified both somatic mutations in patients from Russia. 13 retinoblastomas of this type. We describe the detailed analysis of E. V. Beshalova1, M. Shadrina1, P. Slominsky1, A. Karabanov2, I. Ivanova-Smo- these cases. With the use of RB1 dosage analysis we hope to increase lenskaya2, S. Limborska1; our mutation-detection sensitivity and provide an improved service to 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of retinoblastoma patients. Neurology, Moscow, Russian Federation. Wilson disease (WD) is an inherited autosomal recessive disorder P0623. L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria; Three Iranian cases and caused by a defect in a copper transporting P-type ATPase (ATP7B). review of litreture More than 100 mutations in the ATP7B gene have been identified Y. Shafeghati1, G. Vakili2, A. Entezari2; in the disease. Most of these mutations are rare and were found in 1Genetics Research Center, University of Welfare Science and Rehabilitation, only a single family. But some mutations have been reported at Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Research Center, University of Wlfare Sci- higher frequencies: in Eastern Europe up to 38% of WD patients are ence and Rehabilitation, Islamic Republic of Iran. homozygous for the substitution His1096Gln. To investigate a role of Background: L-2-Hydroxyglutaric aciduria is a rare and novel the His1096Gln mutation in the Russian population we have carried autosomal recessive inherited neurometabolic disorder. Since its out screening for this mutation in 43 patients with “abdominal” WD first description by “Duran” in 1980 about 46 cases have been and 120 patients with “neurological” WD. The frequency of the mutant reported. Occurring mostly in childhood, it is characterized by slowly allele 1069Gln is 25.6% in patients with “abdominal” WD and 41.6% in progressive neurological dysfunction with cerebellar ataxia, pyramidal patients with “neurological” WD. The observed differences between the sign, intellectual decline, seizure and extra pyramidal symptoms. MRI two groups are significant (X2 = 7.00; p=0.0082). Moreover interesting scanning is highly characteristic and screening for organic acid (L-2- differences have been revealed in the distribution of His1096Gln Hydroxyglutaric acid) in urine, serum, and CSF is diagnostic. mutation genotypes between analyzed groups. Homozygous variants Materials & Methods: We investigated three Iranian children aged (4, of His1096Gln mutation have not been identified in patients with 14, 16 years) suspected of this rare disorder by urinary organic acid “abdominal” WD, whereas in the patient group with “neurological” assay and MRI scanning. Symptoms were suggestive of one of the WD the frequency of homozygotes for this mutation was 18%. This leukoencephalopathies accompanied with macrocephalia. difference in genotype distribution is statistically significant (X2=9.26; Results: Affected cases were evaluated because of mild to moderate p=0.0098). These data confirm that mutations of His1069Gln are the psychomotor retardation and regression. Head circumferences were most frequent in patients with WD in Russia and are the main reason above 2 standard deviation. Urine levels of L-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid for the development of the disease. were strongly increased. MRI scanning of the brain showed hyper intense signals on T2 weighted images of the sub-cortical white matter P0626. Y Chromosome Microdeletion Analysis in Infertile Men and basal ganglia in all of them. M. Solak1, H. Samli1, M. Samli2, A. Ozgoz1; Conclusions: Because of its inheritance pattern (autosomal recessive), 1Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Afyon, and the high rate of consanguineous marriages in Iran, the prevalence Turkey, 2Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Urology, Afyon, of this disorder may be high among mentally handicapped patients, Turkey. especially those with macrocephaly. So we should consider this entity in 30 % of cases that are diagnosed to have severe male infertility are differential diagnosis of mentally retarded patients with macrocephaly. due to genetic irregularities. Severe oligoasthenoteratozoospermia and azoospermia are accepted to be the most frequent symptoms in these P0624. Analysis of some genes which may be involved in cases. There are important genes that have roles in spermatogenesis pathogenesis of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in on Yq11. It is thought a series of spermatogenetic disorders are related Russian population. to microdeletions in this region.12 azoospermic and 11 oligozoospermic M. Shadrina1, P. Slominsky1, A. Zherebtsova1, G. Levitsky2, A. Alekhin2, V. cases were referred for genetic couselling to our department during Skvortsova2, S. Limborska1; 2001-2004. Two spermogram samples 2-3 weeks apart, hormone 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Department of profiles, transrectal and scrotal USG examination when needed, and Fundamental and Clinical Neurology, Russian State Medical University, Mos- peripheral chromosomal analysis were performed. The following 15 cow, Russian Federation. sequence-tagged sites on the Y chromosome were analysed by PCR: The underlying causes of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis AZFa (sY81, sY82, sY84), AZFb (sY127, sY142, sY164, RBM1), AZFc (SALS) remain unknown until now. Current evidence suggests that (sY145, sY152, sY153, CDY, BPY, DAZ1, DAZ2, DAZ3). Peripheral genetic factors triggering focal initiation and then spreading of motor chromosome analysis revealed 47, XXY in only one case in the neuron degeneration may be implicated in ALS pathogenesis. Various azoospermic group. Y chromosome microdeletions were detected in hypotheses have been suggested as potential contributors of disease 4 out of 12 azoospermic cases (33%) and in 1 out of 11 oligospermic such as oxidative damage and excitotoxicity. In this connection, such cases (9%). genes as hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1A) which plays an essential Y chromosomal microdeletions are transmitted from a father to role in cellular and systemic homeostatic responses to hypoxia and a son via ICSI and also the microdeletions may be expanded may be involved in oxidative damage, glutamate transporter gene during such transmission. Genetic counseling for infertile (SLC1A2) and ionotropic glutamate receptor genes (GRIA1and GRIA2) couples contemplating ICSI is important if the male carries Y which are involved in excitotoxicity can play a causal role in SALS chromosomal microdeletions. development. To investigate a role of these genes in SALS, we studied polymorphisms in these genes in 72 patients with SALS in Moscow P0627. A 6.2-kb TaqI fragment of CYP21 gene in congenital andu nrelated control population from Russia. The comparative adrenal hyperplasia analysis for IVS9-675C>A polymorphism of HIF1A, Gly603Ala C. H. Huang1, F. J. Tsai2, H. H. Lee3,4; polymorphism in the SLC1A2 gene, SNP polymorphism (rs545098) 1Department of Gyn/Obs, Taipei Municipal Ho-Ping Hospital,, Taipei, Taiwan of GRIA1 gene and SNP polymorphism (rs9307959) of GRIA2 gene Republic of China, 2Department of Medical Genetics,China Medical University has not revealed any significant distinction between the frequency Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China, 3Department of Medical Re- of different alleles and genotypes for these gene polymorphisms in search, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 4College SALS patients and controls from Russia. We conclude that none of of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of the investigated gene polymorphisms is associated with SALS and, China. probably, these genes are not involved in the development of SALS in Approximately 75% of defective CYP21 genes are attributable to the Russian population. the process of intergenic recombination of the DNA sequence from the highly homologous CYP21P pseudogene in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). Such a defective CYP21 gene shows a 3.7- kb fragment produced by TaqI digestion from analysis of a PCR amplification product. Otherwise, CYP21P, mutations of IVS2 -12A/Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 216 C>G combined with 707-71delGAGACTAC, and the chimeric CYP21P/ inherited cartilage disorder caused by mutations in the gene for the CYP21 gene show a 3.2-kb fragment. Therefore, the 3.7- and 3.2-kb hypertrophic cartilage extracellular matrix structural protein, collagen fragments produced by TaqI digestion respectively are crucial markers X (COL10A1). Thirty heterozygous mutations have been described of the CYP21 and CYP21P genes during the analysis of the C4-CYP21 to date, almost equally divided into two mutation types, missense repeat module. Herein, we present one CAH carrier with a CYP21 mutations and mutations that introduce premature termination signals. haplotype containing a 6.2-kb TaqI fragment, which was caused by a The COL10A1 mutations are clustered in the 3’ region of exon 3, mutation of C to G at the TaqI site (TCGA) located downstream of the which codes for the C terminal NC1 trimerization domain. The effect CYP21gene as determined by analysis of a PCR amplification product of COL10A1 missense mutations have been examined by in vitro and DNA sequencing. expression and assembly assays and cell transfection studies, which suggest that a common consequence is the disruption of collagen X P0628. ARNSD, GJB2 Mutations and the Δ (GJB6-D13S1830) trimerization and secretion, with intracellular degradation. We present Deletion in Kurdish Population data regarding the effect of COL10A1 nonsense mutations in cartilage N. Mahdieh1, C. Nishimura2, K. Ali-Madadi3, H. Yazdan4, Y. Riazalhosseini5, S. in two patients with SMCD, demonstrating that mutant mRNA is Arzhangi5, R. Smith6, H. Najmabadi1; completely removed by nonsense mediated mRNA decay. We propose 1University of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Repub- that, for both classes of mutations, functional haploinsufficiency of lic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, Department of COL10A1 in cartilage is the underlying basis of the clinical phenotype Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 3Welfare & Reha- observed in SMCD. bilitation Organization of Kermanshah, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Rehabilitation Organization of Kermanshah, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic P0631. Towards a genotype-phenotype correlation in individuals of Iran, 5University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 63Molecular Otolaryngol- with Börjeson-Forssman-Lehmann Syndrome ogy Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, W. Just1, J. Mücke2,3; Iowa, IA, United States. 1University of Ulm, Dept. of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2Medical Practi- Introduction: Non-syndromic hearing impairment is the most common tioner of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, St. Ingbert, Germany, 3University of form of deafness, affecting approximately 1 in 1000 neonates. In Saarland, Saarbrücken, Germany. approximately half of cases, the deafness is inherited, and of inherited Börjeson-Forssman-Lehmann Syndrome (BFLS) is seen as an congenital deafness, mutations in GJB2 make up the largest fractional XLMRS with severe mental retardation in connection with progredient contribution in many world populations. In this study, we analyzed microcephaly, facial dysmorphology, gynecomastia, trunk obesity, 209 persons from 77 Kurdish families segregating severe-to-profound hypogonadism, and without any development of an adequate language autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness (ARNSD) to determine so far. BFLS is caused by mutations in the PHD protein family gene the frequency of GJB2 mutations in this population. PHF6. The majority of published mutations are missense mutations Mutation screening of GJB2 was performed by allele-specific PCR, with or nonsense mutations, which lead to a truncated form of the protein. DHPLC analysis of all samples excluding 35delG homozygotes. Direct We had published the first triplet nucleotide deletion in PHF6, which sequencing was completed on samples with abnormal elution profiles. caused only moderately mild symptoms of BFLS. This deletion maps The Δ (GJB6-D13S1830) mutation was identified by PCR-based to Exon 10 of PHF6. This part of the gene is not present in all PHF6 amplification across the breakpoint region. We identified 6 mutations transcripts, since at least two transcript isoforms of this gene exist. in exon 2 (35delG, R32H, delE120, R184P, R127H, and V153I). Based This deletion may be found only in isoform I. on these data, GJB2 mutations account for approximately 18.8% of Here we report on two other cases of BFLS: one sporadic case and severe-to-profound congenital deafness in the Kurdish population. another family with two affected sons, one healthy son, and their mother We are going to continue our study on Non-GJB2 deafness family by who as a carrier shows only very mild facial symptoms of BFLS. PHF6 (DFNB) Haplotype and linkage analysis to find out the other genes that sequence analysis of the sporadic case revealed the recurrent R342X may be defect in Kurdish population in the west of Iran. mutation. The mutation in the family with mild symptoms of BFLS is again a triplet nucleotide deletion in isoform I of PHF6. However, this P0629. Molecular studies in 11 Silver-Russell syndrome patients. mutation is different from the earlier published sequence variant. P. Capkova, R. Vrtel, A. Santava, J. Zapletalova, J. Santavy; It seems that severe cases of BFLS are due to single nucleotide University Hospital of Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic. changes in either isoform of PHF6, whereas mild form of BFLS may Introduction: Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS; Silver et al. 1953; be diagnosed preferentially by a loss of nucleotide triplets in isoform Russell 1954) is characterised by intrauterine growth retardation, I of PHF6. short stature in later life, typical craniofacial abnormalities including a relatively large, prominent forehead, a small triangular face, asymmetry P0632. Molecular confirmation of complete mole of head and limbs, and other less constant abnormalities. The majority M. Brouckova1, V. Hejda2, D. Stejskal1, M. Brestak1; of cases of SRS are sporadic; occasionally a familial occurence with 1GENNET, Praha, Czech Republic, 2ÚPMD, Praha, Czech Republic. autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive or X - linked inheritance is We used Fluorescent Quantitative PCR for confirmation of paternal reported. uniparental diploidy at molar pregnancies. 15 different highly Objectives: To define the frequency of uniparental disomy (UPD) in polymorphic STR markers (Ampfestr Identifiler PCR Amplification Kit the group of SRS patients. -Applied Biosystems, USA) together with amelogenin marker were co- Material and methods: Eleven patients with SRS syndrome and amplified from DNAs isolated from product of conception tissue with their parents were typed with short tandem repeat markers from karyotype 46, XX and mother’s blood. Paternal uniparental diploidy chromosome 7. Chromosomal investigations were also performed in was confirmed if all 15 STR polymorphisms of product of conception all patients. were monoalelic and more than one polymorphism could not be Results: Maternal UPD was detected in one SRS patient (maternal inherited from mother. Our method can reliably confirm paternal origin uniparental heterodisomy), accounting for approximately 9 % of of 46, XX karyotype at product of conception with its significant clinical the tested SRS patients. In one patient the balanced chromosomal consequences. Partial and complete mole can be distinguished by rearrangement 46,XY,der(5;8)(q31.3;q21.3)mat. was revealed. ultrasound and histological appearance but cytogenetic and molecular Conclusion: The etiology of SRS syndrome has been heterogenous genetic evaluation should be considered whenever there is a question which makes diagnosis so far difficult. The responsible genes are still of the diagnosis particularly to prevent malignancies. unidentified. P0633. Chaperone-procollagen interactions differ with mutation P0630. Molecular pathogenesis of metaphyseal dysplasia, location in osteogenesis imperfecta Schmid type (SMCD). A. Ashok, A. M. Barnes, J. C. Marini; R. Savarirayan, S. Freddi, R. Wilson, S. Lamande, J. F. Bateman; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia. Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) or brittle bone disease, is caused by Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (MIM156500) is a dominantly mutations in type I procollagen. The heterotrimeric procollagenMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 217 molecule consists of a central triple helical domain flanked by C and Seventy JCA children (51girls, 19 boys) were included in our study. N-terminal propetides and mutations in these regions results in OI. The mean age of patients was 11.56 ±4.17 years. Osteocalcin gene As both fibroblasts and osteoblasts secrete mutant collagen, the HindIII polymorphism and serum levels of intact osteocalcin, calcitonin, bone-specific pathophysiology of OI has not yet been delineated. parathyroid hormone, Ca2+, phosphate, common alkaline phosphatase However, in OI cases with mutations in the helical region of collagen, was tested in all patients. OP was detected by dual-energy X-ray osteoblasts secrete a greater proportion of the mutant collagen forms absorptiometry in lumbar spine (L1-L4). than fibroblasts. As interactions with ER chaperones can direct the Using the data of BMD we selected the children in two groups: with fate of proteins between secretion and degradation, we hypothesized OP - 39 children (55.7%) and without OP - 31 children (44.3%). There that differential interactions of mutant procollagens with chaperones in weren’t significant difference in genotypes frequency in those groups. osteoblasts and fibroblasts may be responsible for the ‘permissiveness’ But we investigated sex differences in genotypes distribution. There of osteoblasts to mutant collagen survival. was significant difference in genotypes frequency between JCA girls Using confocal microscopy, collagen and chaperone-specific with and without OP. antibodies, we compared the intracellular localization of procollagens Boys Girls Children and chaperones in control versus OI fibroblasts. Normal procollagen Boys Girls Children without without without and procollagen with a helical mutation displayed a distinct reticular Genotypes with OP with OP with OP OP OP OP pattern of immunofluorescence in the ER that overlapped with calnexin, (n=13) (n=26) (n=39) (n=6) (n=25) (n=31) but not with Hsp-47, PDI and BiP. In contrast, procollagens with C- propeptide mutations displayed a diffuse pattern of ER localization that Presence 4 4 13 7 17 11 co-localized with Hsp-47, PDI and BiP, but not with calnexin. These of H (30,8%) (66,7%) (50,0%) (28,0%) (43,6%) (35,5%) (HH+Hh) chaperone interactions are maintained in normal and OI osteoblasts. Our novel findings demonstrate a clear correlation between the type Absence of 9 2 13 18 22 20 of mutation and both the subcellular localization pattern of procollagen H (hh) (69,2%) (33,3%) (50,0%) (72,0%) (56,4%) (64,5%) and the nature of chaperone interactions in both fibroblasts and p 0,14 0,003 0,15 osteoblasts. P0636. Role of polymorphism in the CYP1A1, EPHX1 GSTM1, P0634. Leukemia inhibitory factor gene mutations contribute to GSTT1 and GSTP1 genes in the development of chronic embryo implantation failure in infertile women. occupation bronchitis R. Sima1, M. Kralickova2, T. Vanecek1, P. Sima3, Z. Ulcova-Gallova2, Z. Rokyta2; L. Akhmadishina, S. Mingazova, G. Korytina, D. Yanbaeva, A. Bakirov, T. 1SPAU FN Plzen, Plzen, Czech Republic, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gy- Victorova; necology FN Plzen, Plzen, Czech Republic, 3Department of Immunology and Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Ufa, Russian Gnothobiology, Institute of Microbiology CAS, Praha, Czech Republic. Federation. The successful implantation requires a functionally normal embryo The aim of this study was to investigate the possible roles of metabolic at the blastocyst stage and an adequately receptive endometrium. gene polymorphisms in the development and progression of chronic Their cross talk is complex, promoted mainly by cytokines produced occupational bronchitis and received by both, the endometrium, and the blastocyst. As it Polymorphisms in the genes encoding CYP1A1, EPHX1, GSTM1, was shown, leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) is one of the essential GSTT1 and GSTP1 were investigated in Russian patients with chronic cytokines in this regulation. The defects in the embryo - endometrium occupational bronchitis (N=95); chronic dust bronchitis (N=40) and communication may result in the implantation failure. chronic toxic bronchitis (N=50) and in ethnically matched healthy We designed a LIF gene mutation screening method that is based individuals (N=205) living in Ufa, Bashkortostan (Russian Federation) on the Temperature Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (TGGE). The by PCR-RLFP. population to screen consisted of 176 clinically characterized women The AG genotype of CYP1A1 gene was associated with increased risk with diagnosed infertility including a subgroup of 57 women with of chronic occupational bronchitis (χ2=6.35, p=0.01). idiopathic primary infertility and history of infertility treatment and The frequency of the GG genotype of GSTP1 was significantly higher failure of in vitro fertilization (IVF) or intracytoplasmatic sperm injection in patients (8.4% compared to control 2.0%, χ2=5.49 p=0.02). (ICSI). The control population comprised of 75 healthy fertile subjects The combination of AA genotype of CYP1A1 and GG genotype of that conceived spontaneously and delivered successfully. GSTP1 have associated with increased risk of occupation bronchitis Six positive samples were detected by TGGE. The consequent DNA (χ2=4.66 p=0.03; OR=4.21). sequencing proved that all of them were potentially functional LIF gene The distribution of the EPHX1 and GSTM1 genotypes did not mutations, the G→A transitions at the position 3400 of the LIF gene. significantly differ between patients and healthy subjects. This mutation causes the V64M exchange in the AB loop region of the Our findings support that the polymorphisms of the CYP1A1 and GSTP1 LIF protein. genes, which code for enzymes with dramatically altered activities, All six positive women were infertile. Four of them were diagnosed with probably play a substantial part in susceptibility to development and primary and two of them with secondary infertility. No positive samples progression of chronic occupational bronchitis. were identified in the control group. The results suggest that LIF gene mutations can contribute to embryo P0637. Mental retardation and autism associated with a 1.2 Mb implantation failure and consequent infertility and decreased pregnancy Xq25 duplication encompassing the glutamate receptor gene rates in ART. GRIA3 This study was supported by the Grant No: GA CR 301/05/0078 G. Borck1, R. Redon2, M. C. de Blois1, N. P. Carter2, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier- Daire1, L. Colleaux1; P0635. Osteocalcin gene HindIII polymorphism and bone 1INSERM U393 and Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker - En- mineral density in children with juvenile chronic arthritis in fants Malades, Paris, France, 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome St.Petersburg. Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, United Kingdom. M. Kostik, P. Glazkov, I. Vorontsov, V. Larionova; Chromosomal imbalances are a frequent cause of mental retardation Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian (MR) but rearrangements smaller than 5 megabases (Mb) are frequently Federation. undetectable due to the limited resolution of routine chromosome Osteopenia (OP), or low bone mineral density (BMD) for age, is a analysis. Recently, genome-wide screening for submicroscopic frequent complication in children with juvenile chronic arthritis (JCA). deletions and duplications has become possible with array-based Osteocalcin is a biochemical marker that is often used in the assessment comparative genomic hybridisation (array-CGH). In the course of a of bone turnover in OP patients. Previous studies have suggested an systematic screening for submicroscopic chromosome imbalances in influence of osteocalcin gene HindIII alleles on bone metabolism. In children with syndromic MR by array-CGH, we identified a small Xq25 the present study we investigated whether this polymorphism is related microduplication in a boy with MR and autism. to BMD in JCA patients. The patient, a 15 year-old boy, was referred to our DepartmentMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 218 because of developmental delay, speech delay, autistic disorder of them are nonfunctional chimeric CYP21P/CYP21 genes due to and sleep disturbances. He also presented facial dysmorphism unequal crossingover during meiosis. and progressive scoliosis. High-resolution karyotype and FRAXA We established a PCR based approach which permits differential screening were normal. We first performed array-CGH using a DNA amplification of the CYP21 and CYP21P genes, followed by direct microarray with ~1 Mb resolution. Gain of chromosomal material was probing for presence of know mutation sites in a secondary PCR detected for two clones in Xq25. This result was confirmed using a analysis. The chimeric CYP21P/CYP21 gene, the deletion of the tiling path BAC microarray covering the whole X chromosome and the CYP21 gene and mutations 656A/C>G, P30L, G110del8, I172N, duplication was found to span 1.2 Mb between BACs RP6-64P14 and cluster E6 (I236N+V237E+M239K), V281L, Q318X, R356W, F306+1nt RP13-158L7. The duplication was also detected in the phenotypically were detected in our patients. A total of 89 unrelated CAH patients normal mother. However, she had a biased X chromosome inactivation from Czech Republic with 21-hydroxylase deficiency were examined. (81%/19%), supporting the involvement of the duplication in the The most frequent mutation, chimeric CYP21P/CYP21 gene, was patient’s phenotype. found on 68 mutant alleles (40.0%). Following frequent mutations were Interestingly, the duplicated region encompasses the glutamate 656A/C>G (27.9%) and I172N (12.3%). After genotype-phenotype receptor subunit gene GRIA3. This gene has been proposed as a correlation it was found that the mutations P30L and V281L were candidate gene for MR and bipolar disorder based on its disruption characteristically identified in mild - late onset patients, the mutations by a balanced translocation in a female patient. Our results provide 656A/C>G and I172N were usually seen in simple virilizing patients additional evidence that abnormal GRIA3 expression may be involved and remain mutations were presented in severe affected patients with in X-linked MR. salt wasting phenotype. Supported by scientific project CEZ MZ/98/0001/00209627 from the P0638. Y-position cysteine substitution in type I collagen (α(I) Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic and grant S 4031209 AV R888C) is associated with Type IV Osteogenesis Imperfecta CR. W. A. Cabral1, A. Ashok1, E. Makareeva2, A. D. Letocha1, N. Scribanu3, S. Leikin2, J. C. Marini1; P0640. Effects of C-propeptide Mutations in Type I Collagen on 1NIH, NICHD, Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, Bethesda, MD, United Extracellular Matrix Deposition and Fibrillogenesis States, 2NIH, NICHD, Section on Physical Biochemistry, Bethesda, MD, United A. M. Barnes1, S. Milgrom1, E. Moriarty1, J. Cassella2, W. Cabral1, J. Pace3, J. States, 3Georgetown University Medical Center, Dept of Pediatrics, Washing- C. Marini1; ton, DC, United States. 1NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2CEASR, Univ. of Derby, Derby, The most common structural mutations in type I collagen causing United Kingdom, 3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. osteogenesis imperfecta are substitutions for glycine residues in the Type I collagen C-propeptide mutations have been found in a small uninterrupted Gly-X-Y triplets. X and Y position residues have been number of patients with Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI). The mutations shown to be important for normal interchain interactions; it is not are not expected to be present in collagen fibrils in tissues, because known whether substitutions at these residues cause or modify clinical the C-propeptide is cleaved before fibril assembly. Thus, their conditions. We have delineated a Y-position substitution in a father pathophysiological mechanism will differ from helical mutations. We and son with mild type IV OI. The 12 yr old proband and his father identified 5 novel C-propeptide mutations by RT-PCR and sequencing had sustained several fractures, and had osteopenia and moderate of COL1A1 cDNA. Four involved substitutions at conserved residues: joint laxity. Both had an α1(I) Arg888Cys substitution, which was W1097C, D1233N (Type III OI), T1120I and P1266H (Type IV OI). The confirmed in gDNA by MboI digestion. Proband type I collagen had 5th proband (Type II OI) had a 6 nt deletion at the E51/I51 junction less overmodification than expected from a glycine substitution at this causing an in-frame insertion of all but 2 nt of I51 in cDNA. We compared position, supporting a minor effect on helix folding. There was also a proband fibroblasts with a lethal C-propeptide mutation (D1263Y; faint, reducible α1(I) dimer, which was demonstrated in about 10% of Pace, J Med Gen 2002), 3 mutations adjacent to the C-propeptide heterotrimers in media and cell layer of cultured fibroblasts by [35S] (G898S, G967C, G997S) and control cells. All mutant collagens cysteine labelling, compared to the theoretical maximum of 25%. In showed backstreaking of α1(I) steady-state collagen. Incorporation matrix deposited in culture, collagen containing mutant dimers and of pro-α1 chains with point substitutions required 3-6X longer than monomers efficiently formed mature crosslinks. Although differential control or G898S (~20 minutes). Pro-α1 chains with an intronic scanning calorimetry revealed only local helix destabilization, in insertion incorporated after 3 hours. Processing assays suggested vitro processing of procollagens and western analysis of matrix delayed C-propeptide cleavage from secreted collagen containing C- deposition extracts suggest this mutation interferes with processing propeptide or helical mutations. Overmodified collagens incorporated at propeptidase cleavage sites far removed from the mutation. In vivo, into fibroblast matrix in culture and formed mature cross-links. Skin proband dermal fibril diameters have a wider range than in controls. and bone fibrils from two probands (T1120I, P1266H) were examined These data suggest that X and Y position substitutions in type I by EM. Proband dermal fibril diameters are ~10% larger than control. collagen may have a significant clinical role as the cause or modifier of SEM revealed disorganized bone fibrils with variable diameters. These connective tissue disease. investigations provide insight into the pathophysiological mechanism by which mutations not expected to be incorporated into ECM structure P0639. The molecular-genetic analysis of congenital adrenal alter matrix organization and weaken connective tissue. hyperplasia (21-hydroxylase deficiency) E. Hrabincová1, D. Novotná2, S. Koloušková3, F. Votava4, J. Kytnarová5, R. P0641. Developing a successful screening strategy for X-Linked Gaillyová6, E. Šilhánová7, L. Kozák1; Retinitis Pigmentosa. 1Center of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Brno, Czech Republic, N. Hart-Holden1,2, J. Rice1,2, S. Ramsden1,2, A. Wallace1,2, R. Elles1,2; 2Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Aca- 3Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Prague-Motol, Prague, Czech demic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, Manchester, Republic, 4Department of Pediatrics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech United Kingdom. Republic, 5Department of Pediatrics, 1st Faculty of Medicine Prague, Prague, Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is the name for a genetically and Czech Republic, 6Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Brno, phenotypically heterogeneous group of progressive retinal disorders Brno, Czech Republic, 7Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital with a combined incidence of approximately 1 in 3500. Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic. There are autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a group of recessively recessive (XLRP) and sporadic forms of the disease and to date inherited diseases, in which cortisol secretion is impaired. More than approximately 36 loci have been implicated. 95% of all cases of CAH are due to deficiency of steroid 21-hydroxylase. XLRP is the most severe form of the disease with affected males The disease is caused by mutations in the CYP21 gene encoding the showing symptoms before the age of 20 and with total blindness by the steroid 21-hydroxylase. More than 90% of these mutations result age of about 35. Mutations in the RPGR gene account for approximately from intragenic recombinations between CYP21 gene and the closely 70% of XLRP cases, with a mutation hotspot in the highly repetitive linked CYP21P pseudogene. It was described that approximately 20% region known as ORF15. A second gene, RP2, yields approximatelyMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 219 10% of XLRP mutations, with a mutation hotspot in exon 2. X-linked (Xp21.1) inborn error of metabolism involving the urea cycle. We have developed a high-throughput, semi-automated sequence The algorithm for differential diagnosis of urea cycle defects (UCDs) detection strategy for detecting mutations in ORF15. To date over 130 is complex. OTC deficiency is the most common UCD. Molecular cases have been screened and reported. To extend the service we analysis of OTC is useful as an initial reflex to clinical presentation of are screening for mutations in RPGR exons 1-14 and RP2 exons 1- hyperammonemia. Dye-binding/high-resolution thermal denaturation 5. When this work is complete we aim to detect 80% of XLRP cases (DB/HRTD) chemistry and the new high throughput LightScannerTM which will account for approximately 8% of all RP. instrument were used to scan the OTC gene in 20 OTC deficient No effective approach to prevention, stabilization or reversal currently patients. Primers amplify the coding regions and a minimum of 12 exists for the majority of RP cases and consequently pre-symptomatic bases of donor/acceptor splice site sequence. A single PCR product testing is controversial. We ensure that all testing is offered within the was used to amplify each of the 10 exons in a 96-well microtiter plate. context of genetic counselling and have demonstrated a high level of A common amplification protocol is employed. OTC is X-linked, thus demand for this service in families who have previously found it difficult specimens from males were co-amplified with a known wild-type to obtain testing within an accredited laboratory environment. male control to force heteroduplex formation. Fragments ranged from 146-266 bp. The saturating dye LCGreenTM Plus was included P0642. Quantification of TSPY gene and probable identification in the PCR reaction. Post-PCR, the 96-well plate was transferred to of gonosomal aberrations in infertile men using capillary the LightScanner for thermal denaturation. Fluorescent signal change electrophoresis was monitored during thermal denaturation generating a unique A. R. Singh1, R. Vrtel1, R. Vodicka1, E. Krejcirikova1, L. Dusek2, D. Svabova1, J. melting profile for each sample. Melting profiles were compared Santavy1, A. Santava1; using automated analysis software. Samples with deviant profiles 1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub- were recovered for DNA sequencing to characterize the causative lic, 2Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. nucleotide change. Nineteen mutations (13 reported, 5 novel) were TSPY gene is a multicopy gene distributed on the Y chromosome in 6 identified. Known mutations: R23X, K46delA, IVS3+1G>A, R92X, clusters. In the normal population there are 20-40 copies. The TSPY R129H, N161S, A140P, N199S, IVS8+1G>T, C303G, R320X, V339L, gene is known for its role in testicular carcinomas and seminomas and and T343K. Novel mutations: R26K, L57Q, A217E, Q235H, E239G, probably also has role in spermatogenesis. We are investigating the and W265X. Rapid evaluation of OTC using DB/HRTD can speed relation of TSPY gene copies with azoospermia and oligospermia. diagnosis of OTC deficiency in affected patients. We used RQF PCR (Refined quantitative florescent PCR) to determine the copy number of TSPY genes. Patients with azoospermia and P0645. Revised structure of human GLI2 gene reveals existence oligospermia were compared with normal fertile males. The AMEL of the repressor domain and a novel mechanism for activator gene on the X and Y chromosome was used as an internal quantitative generation control. In addition to the number of copies we were also able to P. Kogerman1,2, M. Speek1, O. Njunkova1,2, I. Pata2, E. Valdre2,3; identify chromosome aberrations and mosaics of sex chromosomes 1Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia, 2National Institute of Chemi- in our study. cal Physics and Biophysics, Tallinn, Estonia, 3East Tallinn Central Hospital, We present our preliminary results in this poster; more detailed study Tallinn, Estonia. is needed to reach conclusive results. Mammalian Gli proteins are important transcription factors involved Supporting grant: Grant agency MH CR, NR/7821-3 in Sonic hedgehog signal transduction pathway. Because of the association of Gli2 with mammalian development and with human P0643. Simultaneous detection of copy number changes and disease, we have studied the structure and expression of human CpG methylation of all genes in the Chromosome 15 imprinted GLI2 gene. We show that human GLI2 contains a hitherto unknown region with a novel method; Methylation-specific MLPA (MS- repressor domain encoded by exons 3-6 which is well conserved MLPA) among vertebrates. GLI2 has two alternative 5’ noncoding exons, A. O. H. Nygren1,2, H. M. B. Duarte1,2, R. N. C. P. Vijzelaar2, S. I. Lens2, J. P. 1a and 1b. Additionally, in ovary and testis we detected two novel Schouten2, A. Errami2; alternative splice forms of GLI2 generated by either skipping of exon 1Department of Clinical and Human Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3, or exons 4 and 5. These two variants display different characteristics 2MRC-Holland BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. in the GLI-dependent transactivation assay. Our results suggest that in Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) and Angelman Syndrome (AS) are addition to proteolytic processing, alternative splicing may be another autosomal dominant disorders and the vast majority of the cases are important regulatory mechanism for the synthesis of human GLI2 caused by copy number changes in the chromosome 15 imprinted protein variants with or without repressor and activator properties. region or by uniparental disomy. The recently developed MLPA method has increased the possibilities for multiplex detection of copy P0646. Molecular genotyping of CYP21 gene in Slovak patients number changes in a routine laboratory. Here we describe a novel with congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase robust method: the Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent deficiency. Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA) which can detect changes in both R. Sepsiova1, Z. Pribilincova2, R. Behulova3; CpG methylation as well as copy number of up to 40 chromosomal 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 22nd sequences in one simple reaction. In MS-MLPA, ligation of MLPA Pediatric Clinic, Children`s University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Centre of probe oligonucleotides is combined with digestion of the genomic DNA- Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia. probe hybrid complexes with methylation-sensitive endonucleases. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency Digestion of the genomic DNA-probe complex, rather than double is one of the most common inherited metabolic diseases. Enzyme 21- stranded genomic DNA, allowed the use of DNA derived from formalin hydroxylase plays important role in the steroid biosynthesis of cortisol treated paraffin-embedded tissue samples. We successfully used MS- and aldosterone in adrenal cortex. Enzyme deficiency is caused by the MLPA to detect copy number and methylation status of all genes in defects in 21-hydroxylase gene (CYP21). About 90% of affected alleles the chromosome 15 imprinted region in DNA samples of patients with are generated through non-homologic recombination with adjacent Prader-Willy syndrome (PWS) or Angelman syndrome (AS). pseudogene CYP21P. We performed the first molecular-genetic analysis of 45 Slovak patients (88 unrelated chromosomes) to detect the mutations P0644. Comprehensive mutation scanning in the ornathine in CYP21 gene using PCR, allele-specific PCR, enzyme digestion and transcarbamylase (OTC) gene using dye binding/ high resolution direct sequencing. Among 45 patients, 38 were diagnosed as the salt- thermal denaturation wasting type, 4 as the simple virilizing and 3 as the nonclassical type. J. T. McKinney1, J. A. Harbour1, L. Caldovic2, M. Lynch2, M. Tuchman2, S. F. Genotyping analysis of 87 affected alleles revealed I2splice mutation Dobrowolski1; to be the most frequent (43,7%) in our group of patients. Eighteen of 1Idaho Technology, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Children's National 87 alleles (20,7%) carried large deletions and large gene conversions Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States. were found in 11,5% of affected alleles. Point mutations Ile173Asn, Ornithine transcarbabmylase (OTC, OMIM #311250) deficiency is an Leu308insT, Val282Leu, Gln319STOP and Arg357Trp were presentMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 220 rarely, with the frequency 5,7%, 4,6%, 3,4%, 1,1% and 1,1% respectively. P0649. FBN1 mutation screening in infants and the importance Two alleles carried combination of 2 mutations: I2splice+Val282Leu and of a family mutation database Leu308insT+Gln319STOP. Genotype of 2 of 45 patients did not reflect P. Comeglio, G. Arno, A. H. Child; the expected phenotype. PCR analysis was not able to detect any St. George's Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom. mutation in 5 affected alleles. Subsequent sequencing analysis of two Mutations in the FBN1 gene have been characterised at the molecular of them revealed no sequence changes in comparison with reference level in patients affected by Marfan syndrome and Marfan-related CYP21 sequence. Further analysis is performed to detect potential disorders. Starting with genomic DNA extracted from peripheral mutation of the 3 remaining alleles. blood, we analysed the FBN1 gene using PCR, SSCP and/or dHPLC analysis, and automatic sequencing of abnormal bands/peaks. P0647. Comprehensive alpha- and beta-thalassemia genotyping Accurate molecular diagnosis is useful in long-term prognosis, genetic by means of reverse-hybridization teststrips counselling and preventive healthcare. H. Pühringer1, H. Najmabadi2, E. Baysal3, W. Krugluger4, H. Y. Law5, V. Vip- We analysed a consecutive series of 451 patients, of which 18 were rakasit6, C. Oberkanins1; infants, and our results are comparable with those reported by other 1ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Genetics Research groups. Molecular diagnosis is especially useful for early diagnosis Center, Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic when the clinical symptoms are not yet evident. Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Department, Al Wasl Hospital, Dubai, United Arab A total of 210 relatives (of which 29 were infants) of 82 patients for whom Emirates, 4Dept. Clinical Chemistry, Municipal Hospital Rudolfstiftung, Vienna, a mutation had been identified, here or at another facility, were tested Austria, 5Genetics Service, KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore, for the presence of that particular mutation. Prenatal and postnatal Singapore, 6Dept. Paediatrics, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, screening and tests in adults are very simple and straightforward, Thailand. underlining the importance of knowing in advance the location of the Alpha- and beta-thalassemia (thal) are among the most common putative mutation. The identification of a mutation allows for timely inherited diseases throughout Southeast Asia, India, the Middle East, preventive management of mutation carriers and reassurance for parts of Africa and the Mediterranean area. Mutations in the beta-globin unaffected family members. gene, or in one or both of the two alpha-globin genes, are leading to Prenatal molecular diagnosis is carried out via chorionic villus biopsy or structural abnormalities (e.g. sickle cell anemia) or to haemoglobin amniocentesis. After counselling, it is the patient's decision to consider imbalance due to the reduced synthesis or complete absence of the termination when the mutation is clearly causative. A viable alternative respective globin chains. Unlike the prevalence of point mutations in is postnatal buccal swab diagnosis, which permits suitable treatment beta-thal, the majority of alpha-thal alleles are derived from single or early in life if the mutation is present. double gene deletions. We have developed reverse-hybridization assays (StripAssays) for the P0650. Reduced cajal body number in a patient with rapid and comprehensive genotyping of alpha- and beta-thalassemia. happloinsufficency for COIL The tests are based on multiplex DNA amplification (including gap- E. L. Engenheiro1, T. Carvalho2, I. Marques Carreira3, L. Ramos4, V. PCR) and hybridization to teststrips presenting a parallel array of Kalscheuer5, Z. Tumer1, M. Carmo-Fonseca2, N. Tommerup1; allele-specific oligonucleotide probes for each variant. 1The Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Copenha- The entire procedure from blood sampling to the identification of gen, Denmark, 2Instituto de Medicina Molecular da Faculdade de Medicina de mutations requires less than 6 hours, and hybridization/detection Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Servico de Citogenética da Faculdade de Medicina may be carried out manually or essentially automated using existing da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Hospital Pediátrico de Co- instrumentation. The tests are simple and convenient, and require imbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, very small amounts of samples, which is of particular importance for Germany. prenatal diagnosis. Although the spectrum of alpha- and beta-thal Here we report a one-way translocation t(11;17)(p15.15;q23.2)del(1 mutations is known to be highly population-specific, the broad range of 7)(q23.2)mat in a proband and mother with developmental delay and variants covered by the StripAssays should make them globally useful dysmorphic features, both happloinsufficient for COIL. COIL encodes diagnostic tools. (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at) for p80 coilin, the molecular marker of the Cajal Bodies (CBs), which are subnuclear domains that contain a wide variety of components, P0648. Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) - Basal including factors involved in splicing, pre-rRNA processing, histone pre Genetic Aspects mRNA 3´ maturation as well as transcription factors. The nuclear coiled M. Gazdikova, A. Boday, P. Goetz; body is located in the interchromatin space between the nucleolus and Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd School of Medical, Charles Uni- the nucleus. CBs have recently been implicated in the assembly and/ versity, Prague, Czech Republic. or modification of the RNA-processing machinery. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is a clinical disorder characterized The breakpoint on chromosome 17 was shown by Fluorescence In by an inattentiveness, impulsivity and hyperactivity. The occurrence of Situ Hybridisation (FISH) using bacterial artificial chromosomes this disorder alters between 3 and 6% of the children population afflicted (BACs) to include a deletion of ~1Mb, which includes COIL. The with boys predominating over girls at a ratio of 3:1 or more. CBs of LBV transformed cell lines from the 2 translocation carriers At present, the existence of more than thirty genes of the dopaminergic, were immunolabeled with anti-coilin antibodies and antibodies that noradrenergic, serotoninergic and GABAergic systems is described recognise a CB U2 snurp specific protein. Both happloinsuficient cell which may take part in the development of the hyperkinetic disorder. In lines presented CBs in only ~2% of the cells, as opposed to the control these genes, polymorphisms occur frequently that may affect function cell line, which presented ~20%. A mouse knockout has shown that of gene products or modify gene expression. full-length coilin is essential for proper formation and/or maintenance We investigated the association between ADHD and the polymorphisms of CBs and recruitment of snRNP and SMN complex proteins to CBs in the genes of the dopamine receptors (DRD2, DRD3, DRD4 and (Tucker et al. 2001). If CBs, key organelles involved in RNA processing DRD5), dopamine transporter (DAT1) and dopamin-ß-hydroxylase in general, are reduced in haploinsuffient patients for COIL, and main (DBH) involved in metabolism of dopamine and serotonin transporter molecules necessary for RNA processing are thus absent or reduced, (5-HTT). We examined the occurrence of the risk alleles in a group of this may lead to alterations in splicing and RNA transcription with 83 children with ADHD from Czech population at the age of 3 to 12 potential phenotypic consequences. years and 92 controls. Also we assess the relationship between the presence of these alleles and the development and relevance of the P0651. MLC1: a novel protein in distal astroglial processes hyperkinetic disorder and of comorbide psychiatric diseases. P. K. I. Boor1, K. de Groot1, Q. Waisfisz1, W. Kamphorst1, C. B. M. Oudejans1, Preliminary results suggest association between A1 allele of the TaqA1 J. M. Powers2, J. C. Pronk1, G. C. Scheper1, M. S. van der Knaap1; polymorphism (DRD2) and ADHD in our study cohort. Homozygous 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2University of individuals for this risk allele were more frequent in the patients than in Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, United States. the controls. In the other genes, risk alleles were presented at absolute Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC) is majority in the group of ADHD children. a progressive cerebral white matter disease in children. The disease isMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 221 histopathologically characterized by myelin splitting and intramyelinic atrophy of both upper limb muscles, especially of shoulder girdles vacuole formation. We have shown that the disease can be caused (MRC<3/5). A wide screening was performed to exclude other causes by mutations in the gene MLC1. Missense and splice site mutations, of “man-in-the barrel syndrome”. Molecular analysis of the survival as well as various kinds of deletions have now been found in this motor neuron gene and X-linked spinobulbar muscular atrophy was gene. Furthermore, in some MLC patients without mutations in the negative. Genetic investigation of the five exons of the Sod1 gene intron-exion bouderies or exons the expression of the MLC1 mRNA by DHPLC and direct sequencing of the PCR products, showed a is reduced, as shown by quantitative RT-PCR suggesting mutations variant profile of exon 4 caused by a heterozygous T→C substitution in regulatory elements outside the MLC1 open reading frame. So at position 1126 of the gene (Leu106Pro). This mutation was not found far, there does not appear to be a correlation between the geno and in more than 150 control subjects from southern Italy. In conclusion, phenotype. MLC1 encodes a novel protein, with a putative transport Sod1 mutations have been actually described in a small percentage of function, which is mainly expressed in brain and leukocytes. MLC1 apparently sporadic cases of ALS and, our patient is the first case of is a plasma membrane protein, which contains an even number of sporadic lower motoneuron disease with a mutation in the sod1 gene. transmembrane domains. MLC1 is predominantly expressed in distal astrocytic processes in perivascular, subependymal and subpial P0654. Mutations of the PKD1 and PKD2 genes in families with regions. In gliotic tissue the expression of MLC1 is upregulated. The autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease localization suggests a role for MLC1 in a transport process across the J. Stekrova1, J. Reiterova2, J. Zidovska1, M. Merta2, M. Kohoutova1; blood-brain and blood-CSF barrier. Elucidation of the function of MLC1 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Depart- will contribute to a better understanding of not only the pathophysiology ment of Nephrology,Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. of the disease, but also of the role of astrocytes in normal brain tissue. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most Our recent work is aimed at characterization of the possible transport common hereditary renal disease. The disease is caused by mutations function. Since there is evidence for a second gene involved in MLC, of PKD1 (affecting roughly 85 % of ADPKD patients) and PKD2 (14 we have started a genome wide scan. % of ADPKD patients) genes, though in several ADPKD families the PKD1 and/or PKD2 linkage was not found. P0652. Epidemiology of Huntington´s disease in Spain from the PKD1 locus (MIM 601313) was linked to the short arm of chromosome experience of symptomatic genetic testing 16, at 16p13.3 and so far 237 different germline mutations have been M. A. Ramos-Arroyo, A. Valiente, S. Moreno-Laguna, A. Pérez-Juana, M. reported. PKD2 locus (MIM 173910) was localized to 4q13-23 and Artigas-López, B. Hernández-Charro; 61 different germline mutations were identified. Patients with PKD 2 Servicio de Genética. Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain. mutation have milder clinical course (later onset of the disease and its Objectives: DNA molecular testing for Huntington´s disease (HD) complication) in comparison with PKD1 patients. allows us to identify cases with atypical symptoms and/or absence >The direct detection of mutations in the non-duplicated region of the of family history. The aim of this study is to provide information on PKD1 gene was performed in 78 nonrelated individuals. We detected the epidemiology of HD from the experience of nine years of direct ten mutations/polymorphisms in 32 families/individuals; 9 mutations/ testing. polymorphisms unique. We identified 2 nonsense mutations, 5 Patients and methods: Determination of the CAG repeats of the IT15 missense mutations/polymorphisms and 4 mutations/polymorphisms gene was performed in 317 patients by PCR analysis. In all cases, in splice site. demographic, clinical and family history were carefully reviewed. The PKD2 mutation was performed in 121 nonrelated individuals. We incidence of HD was calculated on the bases of the number of clinically detected twenty five mutations ; 10 mutations unique for Czech symptomatic cases newly diagnosed by genetic testing per million population. We identified the nonsense mutations in 9 patients, the inhabitants and per year. frameshifting mutations in 13 patients and 3 missense mutations.<br / Results: HD diagnosis (CAG repeat length ≥36) was confirmed in Establishment of localisation and type of mutations and their genotype 52% of all symptomatic cases. Of them, 76 (45.8%) referred a positive - phenotype correlation in ADPKD families will improve DNA diagnosis family history and in 21 cases (12.7%) family history was negative. and could help to assess the clinical prognosis of ADPKD patients New mutation events were genetically proven in three families and Supported by the grant projects IGA MZ CR NE/7633-3 highly suspected in another, estimating that the minimum new mutation rate for HD in our population is over 4% with a potential mutation rate P0655. Different mechanisms preclude mutant CLDN14 proteins of 8%. More than 16% of all HD cases had late onset (>59 years). The to form tight junctions in vitro. incidence rate for the Autonomous Communities of Navarra and the M. Wattenhofer1, A. Reymond1,2, V. Falciola1, A. Charollais1, D. Caille1, R. Lyle1, Basque Country, based on the number of newly diagnosed cases by X. Estivill3, M. B. Petersen4, P. Meda1, S. E. Antonarakis1; genetic testing, was 4.7 per million per year. 1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Center for Inte- Conclusions: The incidence and mutation rates of the HD seem in grative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Genes and our population is two to three times higher than previously reported Disease Program, Center de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain, 4Depart- for other European countries. Late onset of symptoms may be more ment of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece. frequent than previously estimated Mutations in claudin 14 (CLDN14) cause non-syndromic DFNB29 deafness in humans. The analysis of a murine model indicated that this P0653. A novel Sod1 mutation in a patient with Brachial phenotype is associated with degeneration of hair cells, possibly due Amyotrophic Diplegia to cation overload. However, the mechanism linking these alterations F. L. Conforti1, P. Valentino2, T. Sprovieri1, R. Mazzei1, A. Patitucci1, A. Maga- to CLDN14 mutations is unknown. To investigate this mechanism, riello1, R. Nisticò2, D. Pirritano2, A. L. Gabriele1, C. Ungaro1, A. Clodomiro2, G. we compared the ability of wild type and missense mutant CLDN14 Peluso1, M. Zappia2, M. Muglia1; to form tight junctions. Ectopic expression in LM cells of wild type 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, CLDN14 protein induced the formation of tight junctions, while both University “Magna Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy. the c.254T>A (p.V85D) mutant, previously identified in a Pakistani Over 100 mutations have been described spreading through the entire family, and the c.301 G>A (p.G101R) mutant, identified in this study Sod1 coding region, but also in the intronic and regulatory regions. This through the screen of 183 Spanish and Greek patients affected with gene, located on chromosome 21q22, is implicated in the autosomal sporadic non-syndromic deafness, failed to form such junctions. dominant form with late onset of the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, However, the two mutant proteins differed in their ability to localize ALS. Until now, all the Sod1 mutations reported are associated to this at the plasma membrane. We further identified hitherto undescribed pathological phenotype. In this study we describe for the first time a new exons of CLDN14 that are utilized in alternative spliced transcripts. We Sod1 mutation in a patient with Brachial Amyotrophic Diplegia (BAD). demonstrated that different mutations of CLDN14 impaired by different The patient was a 77-year-old man with a 5-month history of severe, mechanisms the ability of the protein to form tight junctions. Our results bilateral arm weakness and wasting. Family history was unremarkable indicate that the ability of CLDN14 to be recruited to these junctions is for neurological disorders. Neurological examination showed a peculiar crucial for the hearing process. posture of the “man-in-the-barrel”. There was severe weakness andMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 222 P0656. 769G→A Mutation in INHα1 and CGG - Repeats in FMR1 syndromic deafness in various ethnic groups. Because population- genes pilot testing in Ukraine specific differences are relatively common, in this study we sought G. Livshits, N. Hrischenko, S. Kravchenko; to determine the prevalence and spectrum of GJB2 mutations in Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics (National Academy of Sciences of two isolated ethnic groups: the Baloochi and the Sistani populations Ukraine), Kiev, Ukraine. of southeastern Iran. Consanguinity and assortative mating are very Premature ovarian failure (POF) is characterized by loss of ovarian common in these populations. We analyzed one hundred Baloochi and function before the age of 40 years. It occurs in 1% of all women, Sistani families suffering from autosomal recessive non-syndromic and in 0,1 % of women under age 30 years. The inhibin, is a potential hearing impairment. We performed mutation screening of GJB2 using candidate for POF due to its role in the negative feedback control of an allele-specific PCR assay to detect the 35delG mutation. The FSH, which has a pivotal role in the recruitment and development negative or heterozygous cases for the 35delG mutation were screened of ovarian follicles during folliculogenesis. The functional mutation by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and in any of the inhibin genes would lead to a decrease in the amount sequencing analysis. Surprisingly, we did not find the 35delG mutation, of bioactive inhibin and as a result to increase in the concentrations the most common GJB2 mutation in the white population and in other of FSH and hence result in POF. As well it have been shown that parts of Iran, in any of the Baloochi or Sistani patients. We identified fragile X permutations to occur more frequently in women with POF GJB2 mutant alleles in 18 chromosomes (9%) including R127H, than in the general population The frequency of 769G→A mutation K122I, W24X, 167delT and M93I. Among them, W24X had the highest in INHα1 among women population (n=61) was established as 5,6%. frequency (10 chromosomes). Based on these data, the hot-spot The CGG - repeats number in FMR1 gene analyses in group of 215 mutations in the GJB2 gene in the Baloochi and Sistani population with women (oocytes donors) revealed that the frequency of persons with non-syndromic hearing loss may be different from other ethnic groups high risk alleles (more 42 copies) is 2,3%. The results of our research in Iran. In addition, these results further indicate the existence of an can be the background for genetic testing of mutations in INHα1 and ethnic bias in the distribution of GJB2 mutations in western Asia. FMR1 genes among the women of reproductive age with the purpose of POF prognosis and/or prevention the birth of children with fragile X P0659. Spectrum of GJB2 mutations in patients with autosomal syndrome. recessive non-syndromic deafness in Yazd province of Iran M. Moghanibashi1, M. Seifati2, H. Khodaie2, M. Mirab2, K. Kahrizi1, Y. Riazal- P0657. Informativity of FMF molecular diagnostics hossein1, A. Dehghani2, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Abhaji2, M. K. Javan1, R. J. H. T. F. Sarkisian, H. Ajrapetyan, G. Shahsuvaryan, A. Sarkissian; Smith3, H. Najmabadi1; Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia. 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Research Center of Meibod, Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF, MIM 249100) is recessively Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laborato- inherited and widely spread in Armenian population. FMF is an ries, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. autoinflammatory disorder characterized by self-limited recurrent episodes of fever and serosal inflammation, caused by mutations in Hearing loss is the most common sensory defect in humans, affecting the MEFV gene, mapped on 16p13.3 locus. We have demonstrated 1 of 1000 neonates, with over half of these cases predicted to be the correlation between spectrum of MEFV mutations and clinical hereditary in nature. Most hereditary hearing loss is inherited in a severity of the disease, including development of renal amyloidosis. recessive fashion. Mutations in GJB2, encoding connexin26 subunit In collaboration with Prof. Amselem and Dr.Cazeneuve (Hospital Henri Beta 2, are major cause of inherited deafness in the most populations. Mondor, France) the complete screening of MEFV gene in patients We studied 95 probands from 95 families with autosomal recessive with a clinical diagnosis of FMF (according to established criteria) nonsyndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) in Yazd Province, central identified a few patients without mutated alleles depending on the Iran. Mutations Screening of GJB2 was performed by Amplification ethnic background. These results revealed the FMF-like syndromes in Refractory Mutation System (ARMS)-PCR to detect 35delG mutation. some cases without MEFV mutations. All samples excluding 35delG homozygotes were analyzed by DHPLC Colchicine largely prevents the development of renal amyloidosis in and sequencing. The frequency of GJB2-related deafness was found FMF, but once the latter is established the effect of colchicines remains to be 7.4% in this population. We identified 5 mutations (35delG, controversial. The homozygous genotype M694V/M694V (10 exon) is 312del14, 314del14, R127H and 167delT) and three polymorphisms associated with a severe phenotype of FMF. We demonstrated that (V153I, V27I and E114G) in this study. Interestingly, 312del14, rather the genotype might predict response to colchicine given to children than 35delG, was the most common mutation found. Nine alleles with renal amyloidosis. FMF patients homozygous for M694V mutation (56.25% of GJB2 mutant alleles) carried the 312del14 mutation. not only present a more severe phenotype but also show a limited In descending frequency, other common mutations were 35delG, response to colchicine at the nephrotic stage of renal amyloidosis. In 314del14, R127H and 167delT. The frequency of GJB2 mutant alleles contrast, FMF patients with other genotypes still have a good chance was 9.5 % in this population. We conclude that: 1) 312del14 is common to enter remission of the nephritic syndrome and to maintain renal deafness causing GJB2 mutation in Yazd province; 2) this mutation function. may result from a founder effect; 3) The frequency of GJB2 mutations In conclusion, our investigations on more than 5000 persons since is very low in comparison to other parts of Iran. Further studies are 1997 confirm the informativity of screening of MEFV mutations for needed to find other genes that have a causal role in ARNSHL in this prevention, treatment and prognosis of the development of FMF population. complications. P0660. Comparison of different methods for the detection of PMP22 gene deletions and duplications P0658. Predominance of W24X and absence of 35delG mutations in the Baloochi and Sistani deaf population of Iran: a different S. Stangler Herodez, B. Zagradisnik, A. Erjavec- Skerget, A. Zagorac, N. Ko- population kalj-Vokač; A. Naghavi1,2, C. Nishimura3, K. Kahrizi1, Y. Riazalhosseini1,2, H. Suraki Aliaba- General Hospital Maribor, SI-2000 Maribor, Slovenia. di4, S. Sheykhani4, N. Mahdieh1, R. J. H. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1; By a dosage mechanism, overexpression of a duplicated PMP22 gene 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation results in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A (CMT1A) whereas Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular-Cellular Biology Depart- underexpression because of PMP22 gene deletion causes hereditary ment, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolar- neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP). Several techniques yngology Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of can be used for molecular diagnosis of CMT1A and HNPP each having Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 4Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahe- advantages and drawbacks. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe dan, Islamic Republic of Iran. amplification (MLPA) is a method to detect gene dosage differences, Hereditary hearing impairment is a heterogeneous disability showing by which not sample nucleic acids but probes added to the samples different patterns of inheritance and involving a multitude of different are amplified and quantified. We evaluated applicability of MLPA for genes. Mutations in the GJB2 gene, especially the 35delG mutation, the detection of the specific 1.5 Mb duplication/deletion present in have been established as a major cause of inherited and sporadic non- CMT1A/HNPP by comparing its results with those from interphaseMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 223 fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH). are analyzed on an ABI 310 genetic analyzer. The conveniently The sample included 70 patients referred with diagnoses of CMT1A or designed product lengths and the two labeling dyes allow overlap-free HNPP. Each patient was previously analysed with FISH using clone marker identification. Automated marker designation and peak size RP5-1005H15 (M. Rocchi) and with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) labeling is carried out by a home-designed Genotyper template. assay that detects a duplication specific recombination fragment. The The presence of an extra X chromosome is diagnosed by either a MLPA was performed according to manufacturer's instructions. supernumerary peak or an increased peak area based on criteria A total of 9 duplications and 19 deletions were detected. There we developed. The quantitative feature of the test also allows the was 100% concordance between FISH and MLPA results. A single recognition of an identical extra X chromosome (error at meiosis II). duplication was missed by the PCR assay which is in accordance with Like with cytogenetic analysis, mosaic cases may not always test lower sensitivity of the PCR method. positive. In the past two years we identified 10 Klinefelter syndrome The MLPA assay allows accurate detection of deletions/duplications cases, all of which were confirmed by cytogenetic analysis. of the gene PMP22. Therefore it should become an important method While cytogenetics remains the standard method for the diagnosis for molecular diagnosis of CMT1A/HNPP. The MLPA approach`s of Klinefelter syndrome, our method offers rapid diagnosis on which primary advantages are the relative simplicity and speed although in hormonal and reproductive therapy can be based. some cases (i.e. mosaic conditions) FISH should remain the prefered diagnostic method. P0663. AP-1 and NF-kappaB activation and pro-inflammatory gene expression in foetus tracheal CF cells. P0661. Evidence for a founder effect of a deletion mutation C. Verhaeghe, C. Oury, V. M. Bours; associated with Crigler-Najjar Syndrome types I and II in Italian University of Liège, Liège, Belgium. population AIMS: Cystic fibrosis is a common autosomal recessive disorder due M. d'Apolito1, M. Carella2, V. Servedio1, N. Maiorano1, C. Lasalandra1, F. Tor- to a mutation in the cftr gene, coding for a chloride channel. The CFTR ricelli3, G. Bortone2, L. Boschetto4, A. Iolascon4,1; channel dysfunction is associated with chronic airway obstruction, 1Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy, 2Medical infection and inflammation. Since inflammation is present before and Genetics, CSS-IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 3Cytogenetics and Genet- even in the absence of pathogens, the elucidation of the inflammatory ics Unit , Azienda Ospedaliera Careggi, Firenze, Italy, 4Medical Genetics, Dpt. molecular mechanism could lead to a strategy to prevent fibrosis in of Biochemistry and Medical Biotechnologies, University Federico II – CEINGE, CF patients. Naples, Italy. METHODS: We analyzed tracheal epithelial cells isolated from cystic Crigler-Najjar syndrome types I and II (CN1 and CN2; MIM# 218800 fibrosis (CFT-2) and normal (NT-1) human fetuses for transcription and 606785) are autosomal recessive conditions, characterized by factor activation. We also performed a micro-array gene analysis non-hemolytic unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. CN1 is the most (U133 Plus arrays, Affymetrix). severe form, associated with the absence of hepatic bilirubin-uridined RESULTS: We demonstrated by mobility shift that CF cells display iphosphoglucuronate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1) activity. CN2 high NF-kappaB and AP-1 activities compared to the control cell line. presents intermediate levels of hyperbilirubinaemia as a result of an Increased NF-kappaB activity was linked to a high IKK activity and incomplete deficiency of hepatic UGT1A1 activity. Here, we present a short IkB-a half life. The gene expression analysis confirmed that the mutational analysis of UGT1A1 gene in a cohort of 32 unrelated many pro-inflammatory genes are expressed at higher levels in CFT-2 patients, originating from different Italian regions. The previously cells than in NT-1 cells. These gene code for cytokines, chemokines reported mutation c. 877T>A + 878_890del resulted segregating in and inflammation linked enzymes. five apparently unrelated Italian pedigrees. In addition a c. 878_890del CONCLUSION: Our data then confirm that pro-inflammatory was also identified in three patients. The c. 877T>A + 878_890del is mechanisms are activated in CF tracheal cells independently of any likely to be prevalent in our CN1 syndrome patients (31%, 10/32 CN1 infection or stress. chromosomes), although we found heterozygous c.878_890del in three CN-2 subjects (in one case associated with a substitution 877T>A). P0664. Quantitative analysis of TSPY gene in Turner syndrome This result suggests that the mutation c. 877T>A + 878_890del might patients be inherited from a common ancestor. We also hypothesized that R. Vrtel1, R. Vodička1, A. R. Singh1, L. Dusek2, D. Svabova3, A. Santava1, J. the c.878_890del might be originated from the same mechanism. Santavy1; To test this hypothesis, we genotyped available members of the 1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub- eight families for markers D2S2344, D2S206, D2S2348, D2S2205, lic, 2CBA Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3University Hospital and D2S336, D2S2202 and D2S338. In addition, a set of single nucleotide Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic. polymorphism (rs4399719, rs4663971, rs4148328, rs6719561) were The TSPY gene exists in multiple copies in several clusters, with been tested in all patients. assumed splicing variability. The role of the TSPY gene is not Both mutations occurred on a shared haplotype which included fully understood yet, bit it is supposed to be involved in directing D2S2348 and rs6719561 markers. The discovery of possible founder spermatogonia into meiosis. Abnormal expression of TSPY was mutations has significant clinical applications, as a directed search reported in gonadoblastomas. Our project analysed the percentage for mutations is likely to account for the majority of carriers in the of TSPY loci in different tissues of Turner syndrome patients. DNA population. from 135 peripheral blood samples, from seven ovarian and tumour samples embedded in paraffin (4 resp. 3), and two RNA specimens P0662. A rapid molecular genetic test for the diagnosis of from dysgenetic TSPY-positive patients were collected. QF PCR of Klinefelter syndrome TSPY loci and positive controls were used for quantitation. Eleven out F. H. Fodor, B. Csókay, E. Kámory, Z. Holló; of 135 patients were positive for Y sequences with extreme range of Laborigo Molecular Diagnostics, Budapest, Hungary. mosaicism or number of TSPY gene copies. Four ovarian and tumour Klinefelter syndrome is the most common genetic cause of male samples out of 7 were TSPY positive, with a range from 0.01 % to 6 %. infertility. Cytogenetic evaluation of metaphase chromosomes is in Tests of two cDNA samples were weakly positive in comparison with itself time-consuming, and the turnaround time is often very long. We negative control. The TSPY gene is a significant candidate for GBY, have developed a reliable molecular genetic method to identify the indicating a possible role of TSPY in the multistage development of presence of any extra X chromosomes, which can be completed in 3 gonadoblastoma and dysgerminoma in the dysgenetic gonads of TS working days. patients. Diagnostic analysis of Y sequences in TS patients should DNA samples are isolated from blood and subjected to fluorescent 5- include the TSPY locus. For better understanding of gonadoblastoma plex PCR for the amplification of the following markers: amelogenin, tumour genesis more detailed specific study of the TSPY gene will be which is present in both sex chromosomes in a diallelic form; X22, required. Supporting grant: Grant agency MH CR, NR/7821-3. a highly polymorphic pentanucleotide STR on the pseudoautosomal region of X and Y; DXS6803 and DXS6809, two polymorphic X-specific tetranucleotide STRs; SY134, a Y-specific marker. The PCR productsMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 224 P0665. Investigation of Interferon-Gamma Receptor-1 program. The samples were analysed for Y-chromosome microdeletions Polymorphism in Iranian patients affected with Pulmonary by multiplex PCR. For this investigation 13 primer pairs were used that Tuberculosis are homologous to previously identified and mapped sequence tagged M. Dehghan Manshadi1, M. M. Banoei1, B. Hooshiar1, M. Houshmand1, M. sites (STS). The STS primers tested on each sample were sY84, Mirsaeidi2, P. Tabarsi2, S. Zargari2; sY85 (AZFa); sY117; sY124, sY134, USP9Y (AZFb); sY141, sY153; 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB)-Tehran, sY240, sY146, sY254 (DAZ), sY255 (DAZ), sY158 (AZFc). SRY was Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Research Institute of Tuberculosis used as an internal control of PCR reactions. The PCR products were and Lung Disease,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. analyzed on a 1.8% agarose gel. In seven of the 270 infertile men Background: Tuberculosis is one of the most common infectious (2.6%) we found one deletion in AZFb and 6 deletions in AZFc (gene diseases in the world. Environmental and host genetic factors involve in DAZ) regions - thus the majority are concentrated in the AZFc region. susceptibility to infection disease such as tuberculosis. In recent years, We conclude that: a) genes damage in the AZFb region results in genetically approach has been developed and it has been reported blocks of last stage spermatogenesis; b) deletions in the AZFc region that some genes and their variants involve in this susceptibility. One of are critical for early stage spermatogenesis. The genetic consultation the interesting genes for investigator is IFN-γR1. Our studies were to and preimplantation sex analysis were recommended for the patients determine susceptibility to tuberculosis with polymorphism of IFN-γR1 where Y-chromosome deletions were found. gene. Material and Method: Study was prospective case-control. 54 P0668. A novel mutation in the sodium-channel gene SCN1A in a patients with smear positive tuberculosis have been chosen randomly. patient with severe myoclonic epilepsy (SMEI) All of patients were chosen based on having Iranian nationality, age F. Annesi1, S. Carrideo1, G. Incorpora2, A. Polizzi2, F. E. Rocca1, D. Civitelli1, I. above 15 yrs and confirmed smear positive pulmonary TB and all of C. Cirò Candiano1, P. Tarantino1, P. Spadafora1, E. V. De Marco1, G. Annesi1; healthy controls were matched in nationality and age with samples. 1Inst of Neurol Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, DNA was extracted from whole blood and PCR- RFLP technique used 2Inst of Pediatrics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy. to determine polymorphism at 395 codon of IFN-γR1 gene. Data were Severe myoclonic in infancy (SMEI) is a distinct epileptic syndrome analyzed with SPSS version 11. with the following principal features: normal development before onset; Results: Mean age of patients and control were 55 ±20 and 53 ± 13.5 seizures beginning during first year of life in the form of generalized or years respectively. Demographic characteristic had no difference within unilateral febrile clonic seizures; secondary appearance of myoclonic two groups. (P-Value >.05) one patient in case group had heterozygote seizures; and often partial seizures. SMEI is intractable and is mutation at IFN-γR1 gene . In control group there were no mutations. associated with ataxia and mental decline. Recently, mutations were Conclusion: Genetically susceptibility to TB is not in 395 colon of IFN- found in the gene (SCN1A) encoding voltage-gated sodium channel γR1 in Iranian TB sample and polymorphism of this loci has occur in alpha-subunit type I in patients with SMEI. Those mutations were 2% of TB patients and 0.96% of total study population. heterozygous and de novo. Here we describe the clinical features and genetic study of a patient with SMEI from southern Italy. The P0666. Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase C677T mutation is patient is an 11 year old boy who was born in Sicily. Onset of seizures more frequently observed in recurrent abortuses than Factor V was between 2 and 5 years of age with unilateral clonic seizures or Leiden and Prothrombin 20210 G/A mutations generalized clonic or tonic-clonic seizures. The convulsions were often B. F. Atac1, F. I. Sahin1, Z. Yilmaz1, E. B. Kilicdağ2, H. B. Zeyneloglu3; induced by fever, atypical absences were observed and the seizures 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and were resistant to therapy. Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department Mutational analysis was performed on all coding exons and splice sites of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Adana, Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of of SCN1A. We detected a novel heterozygous point mutation C3866T Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey. that resulted in a Thr1289Ile aminoacid substitution. This mutation was Miscarriage is common in 25% of conceptions without an identifiable not observed in any of the 50 control individuals.The mutant residues reason. Recurrent pregnancy losses have been investigated widely Thr1289Ile is located in S4 transmenbrane segments of the sodium since two or more successive losses affect about 5% of women of channel alpha-subunit. The S4 segments of voltage-gated channels reproductive age. Anatomical, chromosomal, endocrinological or contain multiple positively charged aminoacids that are known to have immunological problems consist only a small percentage of pregnancy a role in channel gating. losses. In addition to these factors, thrombophilic predisposition may Supported by MIUR-FIRB “Inherited channelopathies: identification of be one of the underlying causes of fetal losses. molecular markers and functional development of advanced diagnostic In the present study we have determined the prevalence of Factor V systems, and identification of pharmacological targets” Leiden (FVL), Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T and Prothrombin (Prt) 20210 G/A mutations by PCR-RFLP method in P0669. Molecular analysis of the Hexa gene in Italian patients DNA samples from 66 patients (aged between 22 and 43 years with with Tay Sachs disease: Detection of thirteen novel mutant two or more pregnancy looses) who applied to our routine diagnostic alleles laboratory. Our preliminary results strongly indicate that heterozygous A. L. E. Montalvo1, M. Filocamo2, K. Vlahovicek3, A. Dardis1, S. Lualdi2, F. Corso- MTHFR C677T mutation occurred more often in patients with fetal lini2, B. Bembi1, M. G. Pittis1; losses (30 patients - 45.45%) while no difference in the prevalence 1Unità di Malattie Metaboliche, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Laboratorio of Factor V Leiden (6.06%) and Prothrombine 20210 G/A (6.06%) Diagnosi Pre-Postnatale Malattie Metaboliche,I.R.C.C.S. G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy, mutations were detected with respect to the results normal Turkish 3International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechology, Trieste, Italy. population. The high prevalence of mutated MTHFR genotypes in fetal Tay Sachs disease (TSD; MIM # 272800) is an autosomal recessive losses may emphasize the potential protective role of periconceptional inherited lysosomal disorder, characterized by hexosaminidase A (Hex folic acid supplementation. A) deficiency, that results from mutations in the HEXA gene which encodes the alpha subunit of the beta-N-acetylhexosaminidase A. We P0667. Some aspects of spermatogenesis and male infertility in report the molecular characterization of the HEXA gene in 31 Italian Ukraine patients, twenty-two with the classical infantile TSD form and nine O. Yasinskaya1, V. Zinchenko2, L. Livshits1; patients with the late onset form (B1 Variant). Of the 29 different alleles 1Institute of Molecular Biology & Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine, 2“ISIDA-IVF” clinic, identified, thirteen were due to fourteen novel mutation including Kiev, Ukraine. two mutations being in-cis on a new complex allele, missense/null In about 50% of couples infertility is entirely due to male factors. In mutations, deletions, a single base insertion and splicing mutations. addition to chromosomal anomalies, microdeletions in the azoospermic The missense mutations p.W203G, p.A246W, p.Q374R resulted in factor region (AZF) in the long arm of the Y-chromosome have been drastic changes in highly conserved residues among the human, mouse detected in men with azoospermia or severe oligospermia. We have and rat α-subunits of Hex A. The 3D- structural analysis confirmed that screened 160 men with azoospermia and oligospermia - patients of all three mutations alter the substrate binding site. “ISIDA-IVF” clinic involved in ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection) The clinical presentation of the patients studied at the diagnosis wasMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 225 similar to what have been already reported in literature: hypotonia, P0672. DJ-1 Gene in late-onset recessive Parkinson's disease seizures, delayed milestones, cherry-red spots and startle reactions. A P. Tarantino, F. Annesi, I. C. Cirò Candiano, F. E. Rocca, D. Civitelli, S. Car- clear genotype-phenotype correlation was observed in the B1 Variant rideo, P. Spadafora, G. Annesi; group: all patients carried the known c.533G/A (p.R178H) mutation, Inst of Neurol Sciences,National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy. confirming its milder nature. It is interesting to note the contrast Mutations in DJ-1 were described as a novel cause of early-onset between the allelic homogeneity of the B1 Variant group (c.533G/ parkinsonism. We analysed the DJ-1 gene in 23 subjects with late A allele frequency: 75%) and the infantile TSD, in which almost all onset (after the age of 45 years) Parkinson’s disease (PD) screened the mutations are private and have been detected in a single or few from 18 families originating from Southern Italy with autosomal families. recessive PD (LORPD). These patients were evaluated previously P0670. Genetic analysis of three Serbian families with GEFS+ for the presence of parkin mutations (PARK2) by a combination of S. Carrideo, F. Annesi, D. Civitelli, F. E. Rocca, I. C. Cirò Candiano, E. V. De gene dosage and sequencing and were found to be negative. The 18 Marco, P. Tarantino, P. Spadafora, A. Gambardella, G. Annesi; families with LORPD were selected according to the following criteria: Inst of Neurol Sciences,National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy. reported parkinsonism in two or more siblings; a mode of inheritance Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) is a familial compatible with autosomal recessive transmission (affected siblings epilepsy syndrome tansmitted as an autosomal dominant trait with without affected parents); an age at onset of 45 years or older in all the incomplete penetrance. GEFS+ is characterized by heterogeneous affected siblings. The entire DJ-1 open reading frame was amplified phenotypes with most individuals having benign childhood seizures from genomic DNA, and PCR products were directly sequenced by disorders ranging from classical febrile seizures to febrile seizures means of forward primers. We did not find any pathogenic mutation plus where febrile seizures continue past 6 years of age or afebrile in the DJ-1 gene in any patients with LORPD. We identified at codon convulsions occur. GEFS+ is associated with mutations in SCN1A, 98 (exon 5) a G/A heterozygous substitution in four patients; this SCN1B (genes encoding respectively the alpha 1 and beta 1 voltage- change was confirmed by Msp I restriction analysis, and was found gated sodium channel subunits) and GABRG2 (gamma subunit of the in 10 out of 700 control chromosomes. Moreover we identified an 18 GABA receptor). bp insertion/deletion variant in the promoter region of DJ-1 (g.168_ A Here we aimed to study the role of SCN1A, SCN1B and GABRG2 185del) in six patients; this variant was also found in 3 out of 600 in 3 Serbian families with GEFS+. The 26 exons of SCN1A, 5 exons control chromosomes. Our results indicate that mutations in DJ-1 are of SCN1B and 9 exons of GABRG2 were individually amplified using not a common cause of LORPD. Further studies using quantitative primers based on intronic sequences. The purified PCR produtcts were PCR are needed to exclude heterozygous exon rearrangements in directly sequenced and analyzed with an automatic sequencer. We subjects with LORPD. analyzed the proband of each family and we identified polymorphisms but no mutations. These data suggest that SCN1A, SCN1B and P0673. Hematopoietic chimerism analysis after allogeneic GABRG2 genes are not involved in the aetiopathogenesis of GEFS+ peripheral stem cell transplantation in pediatric cases by using in these families. In the meantime we recruited others member of the STR polymorphisms largest family and we are performing a genomewide genetic-linkage E. Manguoglu1, S. Berker-Karauzum1, A. Kupesiz2, Z. Cetin1, G. Tezcan2, S. analysis to identify a novel GEFS+ locus in this family. Yakut1, V. Hazar2, A. Yesilipek2, G. Luleci1; Supported by MIUR-FIRB “Inherited channelopathies: identification of 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and molecular markers and functional development of advanced diagnostic Genetics, 07070, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, systems, and identification of pharmacological targets” Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, 07070, Antalya, Turkey. Allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is carried out in P0671. Mutational analysis of EPM2A and NHLRC1 genes in patients with malignant and non-malignant hematologic diseases. three patients suffering from Lafora progressive myoclonus Recently, peripheral blood has increasingly been used as a stem epilepsy cell source in children. In this study, PCR analysis of polymorphic D. Civitelli1, F. E. Rocca1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, G. Milana2, N. Cutuli2, E. V. De short tandem repeats (STR) was applied to 20 sex matched donor Marco1, F. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1, S. Carrideo1, G. Annesi1; and recipient pediatric cases, with beta-thalassemia (n=10), 1Inst of Neurol Sciences,National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, immunodeficiency (n=2), adrenoleukodystrophy (n=1), juvenile 2Laboratory of Mol Genet, Univ of Catania, Catania, Italy. myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) (n=1), aplastic anemia (n=1), Lafora's progressive myoclonus epilepsy (LD) is an autosomal- Fanconi aplastic anemia (n=1), osteopetrosis (n=1), acute myeloid recessive disorder caused by mutations in the EMP2A gene. An leukemia (n=1), acute lymphoblastic leukemia (n=1), and non- additional causative gene for Lafora’s disease was recently identified, hodgkin lymphoma (n=1). Analyses were performed at different termed NHLRC1 or EPM2B. It is a single-exon gene, encoding time points after transplantation, with a total of 55 samples studied. a putative E3 ubiquitin ligase (malin). In this study, we screened Fifteen tetranucleotide repeat loci (CSF1PO, D2S1338, D3S1358, NHLRC1 in three patients with LD who did not carry mutations in D5S818, D7S820, D8S1179, D13S317, D16S539, D18S51, D19S433, EPM2A. Probands are three Sicilian patients who received a diagnosis D21S11, FGA, TH01, TPOX, vWA) and Amelogenin were amplified by of LD after a comprehensive clinical and laboratory investigation. In AmpFlSTR®IdentifierTMPCR kit, and analyzed on an ABI PRISM®310 two of them, age at onset of LD was 14 years, in the remaining patient Genetic Analyzer. Calculations were based on relative areas of LD started at the age of 11 years. Sequence analysis of EPM2A donor and recipient peaks. Patients are evaluated according to the did not reveal any pathogenic variant in all three patients. Then, we cytogenetic, molecular cytogenetic and molecular results and clinical proceded to sequence the NHLRC1 gene. We sequenced the whole findings. Of the 20 patients, complete chimerism in 9 cases (45%), NHLRC1 exon, including non-coding sequences. In one patient we partial chimerism in 9 cases (%45) and no chimerism in 2 cases found a homozygous nonsense mutation (G199T, giving rise to a stop (%10) was observed in an average follow up time of 11.3 months. codon at aminoacid residue 67). The second patient was a compound Interestingly, in one JMML patient with complete chimerism, donor cell heterozygote for two mutations (C205G causing the P69A substitution, derived JMML developed. We conclude that after peripheral stem cell and G838A resulting in the E280K change). The last patient carried transplantation, STR based analysis of chimerism is an important tool the heterozygous E280K mutation and a known polymorphism (C332T in post-transplant hematopoietic chimerism quantification, leading to leading to the P111L substitution). All the mutations except the latter early detection of graft failure, relapse, donor cell derived disease as polymorphism were not found in 100 control chromosomes. Regarding well as minimal residual disease. the last proband, the P111L change represents a very common polymorphism and we found the pathogenic E280K variation in a P0674. SOX9 gene dosage effect in 20 XX-SRY negative sex heterozygous state. Supported by Ministero della Sanità -“Genetica reversal patients dell’Epilessia” G. Queipo, N. Najera, S. Kofman; Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico. The early developing gonads are sensitive to gene dosage, and threshold levels of expression exist to control entry into the male orMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 226 female pathway. The sex determining genes SRY and SOX9 are which is the first investigation in east and south east of Iran, indicates required to initiate and maintain the testicular development. SOX9 is a higher prevalence of this mutation in these provinces compared to the critical downstream target of SRY and is up-regulated specifically the Coastal provinces of Caspian Sea (75.4%) by which we reported in the XY gonad shortly after the onset of SRY transcription. SOX9 earlier. We are now conducting further studies for identifying other haploinsuffiency is associated with campomelic dysplasia and XY sex mutations. The distribution of this G6PD variant is more similar to that reversal (75%). A single case has been reported in a XX sex reversal found in an Italian population in comparison with other Middle Eastern patient due to a duplication of 17q23-24, containing SOX9. To evaluate countries. Although the origin of Iranian population is rather uncertain, the SOX9 gene dosage in testis determination we performed Q-PCR the closer similarity of the mutation spectrum to Italian rather than analysis using Taqman MGB probe and RNase P as internal control middle eastern populations may indicate that these populations have in 9 XX males and 11 XX true hermaphrodites (TH). All patients were a common ancestral origin. SRY negative. The SOX9 gene dose was establish comparing the ΔC T = (SOX9 C - RNase P C), ΔΔC = (patient ΔC - control ΔC) and the P0677. Searching for mutations of Cx32 and MPZ genes in T T T T T 2 -ΔΔCT formula. Preliminary results showed that 3 XX males and 4 TH families with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy from Tadjikistan had an heterozygous duplication of SOX9, while 1 XX males and 1 TH N. P. Babushkina, O. N. Odinokova, M. V. Golubenko; showed an homozygous duplication. This is the first report in which Institut of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. gene dosage effect of SOX 9 was analyzed in XX - SRY negative The purpose of the study was to search for mutations in the coding sex reversal patients suggesting that SOX9 duplications could induce sequences of Cx32 (Xq13.1) and MPZ (1q21.3-23) genes, which testis determination in the XX primordium. cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) neuropathy, in a group of patients with CMT from Tadjikistan and their relatives. Tadjikistan is situated in P0675. Scanning for Association of Mitochondrial Haplogroups South-East Asia at Pamir mountains; and the population of this region is BM, J, K and M with Multiple Sclerosis: Interrelation between ethnically isolated. We studied 35 patients from 23 families, in general Haplogroup J and MS in Persian Patients 114 individuals. Analysis of Cx32 revealed nucleotide changes in five M. Houshmand1, M. Sanati1, A. Ardlan1, F. Babrzadeh1, M. Teimori1, M. va- families. Sequencing revealed C to T substitution in the second part of kilian1, M. Akuchekian1, D. Farhud2, J. Lotfi3; coding exon which resulted in Arg142Trp change (loss of HpaII site). 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic In four families the mutation was detected in hemizygote state in sick Republic of Iran, 2Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Health, Tehran men, while sick women as well as asymptomatic female carriers were University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department heterozygous. A silent mutation (C to T substitution in the third position of Neurology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Teh- of Asp169) was identified in the same fragment in two healthy sibs in a ran, Islamic Republic of Iran. big family. In the fifth family, single-nucleotide change G>A in the third Background. Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an immunological inflammatory part of coding exon was revealed, leading to change Arg219His (loss disease of the Central Nervous System, chronically observed in young of AciI and Cac8I sites). In general, 21% of CMT-families in Tadjikistan adults. On the basis of earlier studies, potential relatedness between have mutations in Cx32. In MPZ, sequencing of exon 5 in 5 families MS and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations was postulated. revealed a heterozygous silent change G>A in Gly200. In summary, Materials and Methods. 246 individuals were examined using PCR- we describe 2 different missense (1 in 4 families, 1 in one family) and RFLP, including 70 MS patients for mitochondrial haplogroups BM, J, 1 silent mutation in exon 2 of Cx32, and 1 silent mutation in exon 5 of K and M and 176, 149 and 70 normal controls for haplogroups BM and MPZ in patients from Tadjikistan. M, J and K respectively. Results. Our analysis revealed a high proportion of haplogroup BM P0678. The Effect of ACE I/I Genotype on OSAS in MS patients (~26%) compared to normal controls (~13%) at p= T. Bilgen1, O. Guzeloglu Kayisli1, S. Ket2, Y. Gocmen3, I. Keser1, A. Cilli2, S. 0.027. There was also a slightly significant correlation found between Gumuslu3, C. Ogus2; MS patients and normal controls for haplogroup J (20.00% for patients 1Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and vs 9.39% for controls at p= 0.049), while haplogroups M and K didn’t Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Department appear relevant in MS occurrence (2.85% and 2.27% respectively at of Chest Medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine p= 1.000 for haplogroup M and 12.85% and 7.14% respectively at p= Department of Biochemistry, Antalya, Turkey. 0.399 for haplogroup K). Obstructive Sleep Apnoea Syndrome (OSAS) is a disease characterized by repeated obstruction of upper respiratory tract P0676. Study on Mediterranean Mutation as the Major Mutations during sleep. There is a quite limited number of studies on role of in G6PD Polymorphic Variant Identified in the Three Provinces in genetic factors in the etiology of OSAS. The aim of our study is to South, East and South East of Iran find out if ACE gene polymorphism and plasma ACE activity create M. Noori-Daloii1, S. Mohammad Ganji2, S. Soltanian3, S. Hejazi4, A. Yousefi4, susceptibility to OSAS in Turkish population. Ninety-seven patients, S. Hiradfar5, A. Bani-hashemi5, E. Sanee Moghadam6, M. Sanati2; in total, were included in this study. The Epworth scores, ages, body 1University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NIGEB, mass indexes, neck circumferences, apnea-hypopnea indexes (AHI), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Cellular and Molecular, Faculty average apnea durations, and minimum SaO of the patients were of Science, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of recorded. Insertion (I)/Deletion (D) polymorphism2 of the ACE gene and Biology, Faculty of Science, Researches and Sciences Campus, Islamic Azad plasma ACE activity levels were determined. When distribution of the University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Doctor Sheikh Hospital, Mashad, I/D ACE polymorphism in our patients was compared to that of healthy Islamic Republic of Iran, 6IBGO, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran. controls from a previous study in Turkish population, it was observed G6PD enzyme catalyses the conversion of Glucose-6-phosphate to 6- that risk of OSAS development increased 2.8 times in patients who phosphogluconate, with production of NADPH and ribose -5-phosphate had I/I genotype of ACE gene. The average ACE activity in the patient in the red blood cells in the pentose phosphate pathway. Its gene group with I/I genotype was observed to be significantly lower than consists of 13 exons. G6PD deficiency is the most common human that of the group with D/D genotype (p=0.019). ACE activity decreased metabolic inborn error. Acute hemolytic anemia and Jaundice are the significantly in patients with severe OSAS, compared to those with mild main clinical symptoms, triggered by infection or ingestion of Fava OSAS (p=0.017). No statistically significant difference was observed beans or oxidative drugs. Three predominant variants of G6PD called upon comparison of I/I, I/D, D/D genotypes and minimum SaO, neck 2 Mediterranean, Chatham and Cosenza have been evident in several circumference, Epworth score, average apnea duration, and AHI countries including Iran. Molecular identification of the most prevalent (p>0.005). As a consequence, these findings support that ACE I/D mutations in G6PD gene was carried out in 121males and females polymorphisms may have a role in the pathogenesis of the OSAS. with G6PD deficiency from Khorasan, Sistan-Balouchestan and Hormozgan provinces in south, east and south east of Iran. DNA was extracted from blood samples and analyzed for known G6PD mutation by RFLP. Adapting this method revealed that Mediterranean mutation at nt 563(C-->T) is predominant in these areas (72.7%). This finding,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 227 P0679. DFNB1-causing allele variants in the Iranian Turk cal School, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, population Istanbul, Germany. M. Mohseni1, F. Reihanifar2, J. Malbin2, M. Fadaie Haghi2, M. Zamani2, N. Ba- Benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC) is a rare monogenic zazzadegan1, N. Nikzat1, K. Kahrizi1, P. Imanirad1,3, C. Nishimura4, Y. Riazalhos- subtype of idiopathic generalized epilepsy exhibiting an autosomal seini1,3, R. J. H. Smith4, H. Najmabadi1; dominant mode of inheritance. The disease is caused by mutations 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation in the two homologous genes KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 that encode the Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Welfare Organization of East and subunits of the voltage-gated potassium channel. The heteromeric West Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular-Cellular assembly of these subunits form the M-current which is the primary Biology Department, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Mo- regulator of neuronal excitability. KCNQ2 is located on chromosome lecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, 20q13.3 and composed of at least 18 exons, comprizing over 50kb University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. of genomic DNA. This study reports the analysis of the KCNQ2 gene Mutations in the GJB2 gene at the DFNB1 locus have been established in a Turkish family with three BFNC patients in three successive as the major cause of autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing generations. SSCP studies of the complete KCNQ2 gene indicated a loss in many world populations. In addition to GJB2 mutations, the migration shift in exon 4 of two patients. DNA sequence analysis of the deletion Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) involving GJB6 gene (also localizes to region revealed an A>G transition that resulted in a novel substitution DFNB1 interval) has been detected in many patients heterozygous of serine instead of asparagine at position 258, which is between the for one GJB2 deafness-causing mutation. The aim of this project is to S5 domain and the pore of the potassium channel. The absence of the study the prevalence of GJB2 mutations in the deaf Turk population mutation in healthy members of the family and in a control group of 60 living in the East and West Azerbaijan provinces of Iran. Mutations German and 77 Turkish individuals excludes the likelihood of it being a screening began by amplification refractory mutation screening PCR to polymorphism and indicates that N258S substitution is the pathogenic detect the 35delG mutation. We then analyzed all samples excluding mutation leading to epileptic seizures in this family. 35delG homozygotes by DHPLC and direct sequencing for other GJB2 mutations. We screened 276 chromosomes (138 probands) for GJB2 P0682. Novel homozygous mutation associated with a mutations. Seventy five chromosomes (27%) carried GJB2 mutations common variant in familial lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase including 35delG, delE120,-3170G>A, W24X, 363delC, E129K, Q80L, (LCAT)deficiency Y155X. Among them, 35delG had the highest frequency and Q80L M. Gigante1, V. Defazio1, G. Cerullo2, E. Ranieri2, L. Calabresi3, A. Iolascon4, L. and 363delC were novel mutations which have not been reported in Gesualdo1; any other populations. Thirty five patients had biallelic GJB2 mutations 1Department of "Scienze Biomediche", University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy, (25.3%) and five probands had monoallelic GJB2 mutation. The 2DETO-Division of Nephrology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy, 3Department of Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) was not found in any heterozygous patients. Pharmacological Sciences, University of Milano, Milano, Italy, 4Medical Genet- Polymorphisms found were V153I and V27I. Based on our results, ics, Dpt. Biochemistry and M. Biotechnologies, University Federico II-CEINGE, other genes are likely to play a major role in causing nonsyndromic Naples, Italy. deafness in this population. LCAT deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder of lipoprotein metabolism, resulting from loss of function of lechitin:cholesterol P0680. MLPA analysis of the dystrophin gene in DMD/BMD acyltransferase, a key enzyme in extracellular cholesterol metabolism patients from Serbia and Montenegro and cholesterol reverse transport. The human LCAT gene has been T. Lalic1, R. Vossen2, J. Coffa3, J. Schouten3, D. Radivojevic1, M. Djurisic1, I. mapped to chromosome 16q22. The gene consists of 6 exons and Novakovic4, M. Guc-Scekic1, D. Zamurovic1, M. Breuning2, S. White2, J. den encodes a protein of 416 amino acids. In the present study, we report Dunnen2; the phenotypic and genetic characterization of one Italian patient and 1Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, his relatives with classical clinical manifestations of familial LCAT 2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3MRC-Holland, deficiency. The diagnosis was confirmed by biochemical data: the Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Faculty of Medicine,University of Belgrade, patient's α-LCAT activity and CER were totally absent, while plasma Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. levels of HDL-C, ApoA-I, ApoA-II and ApoB were severely reduced. We have designed an Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification Molecular analysis of the LCAT gene was performed. Sequence (MLPA) assay to simultaneously screen all 79 DMD exons for deletions analysis revealed a novel mutation, in the proband and his brother. and duplications in Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/ This mutation is a nucleotide T-to-G transversion (g.4896, c.1187 BMD) patients. We validated the assay by screening 133 patients T>G), converting codon 372 for leucine, a hydrophobic amino acid, from Serbia and Montenegro previously screened using multiplex into a codon for arginine, a basic amino acid (p.L372R). This novel PCR. MLPA-screening confirmed the presence of all previously mutation is near the catalytic site H377. This substitution of Leu372 detected deletions. In addition we detected seven new deletions, with Arginine, a positively charged amino acid with a different steric 10 duplications, one point mutation, and we were able to precisely size, may affect the typical α/β hydrolase fold configuration of the determine the breakpoints of all rearrangements (21 were unknown catalytic triad and cause the lost of LCAT activity. from the previous study). Overall, unrelated patients from Serbia and Interestingly, the two brothers were also homozygous for a common Montenegro contained 64% deletions and 7% duplications, figures not variant in exon 5 (p.S208T), never detected in homozygous status. significantly different from other studies. In two brothers we identified In conclusion, our findings suggest that homozygous p.S208T variant a complex rearrangement involving two duplications and a triplication. could act as modifier allele, amplifying the effect of the p.L372R To facilitate MLPA-based screening in laboratories lacking specific mutation and increasing the risk of cardiovascular events. equipment, we designed the assay such that it can also be performed using agarose gel analysis and ethidium bromide staining. The P0683. Two point mutations in the vWF gene leading to MLPA-assay as described provides a simple and cheap method for Normandy Type von Willebrand Disease deletion and duplication screening in DMD/BMD patients. The assay I. D. Fidancı1, Y. Pekçeren2, H. Çağlayan1; outperforms the Chamberlain and Beggs multiplex-PCR test, and 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Boğaziçi University, İstanbul, should be considered as the method of choice for a first DNA analysis Turkey, 2Department of Hematology, University of İstanbul, İstanbul, Turkey. of DMD/BMD. von Willebrand disease (vWD) is a common autosomally inherited bleeding disorder characterized by a qualitative and quantitative P0681. A novel missense mutation (N258S) in the KCNQ2 gene in deficiency of vWF protein in the plasma. Three primary vWD types are a Turkish family afflicted with BFNC type 1, type 2 and type 3. Normandy Type results from mutations in the Ö. Yalçın1, H. S. Çağlayan1, Ö. Çokar2, K. Ağan3, C. A. Bingöl3, A. Dervent2, O. vWF gene region coding FVIII binding site. The protein vWF consists Steinlein4; of eleven domains. Each domain in subunits plays a role in interaction 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, with, proteins and in the multimerization of vWF itself. For example, the Turkey, 2Department of Neurology, University of İstanbul Cerrahpaşa Medical FVIII binding site is found within the mature vWF subunit and encoded School, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Neurology, Marmara University Medi- by exons 18 to 23 of the gene. In this study, three patients, who are twoMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 228 sisters and a brother, clinically diagnosed as vWD and suspected to be were more severely affected compared to patients having random XCI Normandy Type were tested for mutations in exons 18-21 and 24 of the and missense mutations. vWF gene. The sequencing results in all three patients revealed a C→ The present study will help our understanding of the molecular basis of T transition at n. position 2446 in homozygous condition. This study RS in Turkish population. confirmed Normandy Type of vWD in this family by DNA analysis. In addition, DNA samples of 3 hemophilia A patients who did not have P0686. Caring for PKU families in the National Research Center: inversions or point mutations in their F8 gene as a result of complete an Egyptian Experience DNA sequencing, were tested for mutations in the same exons of the L. K. Effat; vWF gene. Sequencing results indicated that, one patient had a T→ Division of Human Genetics and Genome Research, National Research Center, C transition at n. position 2362 in homozygous condition. This study Giza, Egypt. showed that hemophilia A was a misdiagnosis for this patient. Many countries have reported extensive data about PKU, describing the scope and problems of screening to the mutational patterns. P0684. Molecular pathology of acute recurrent and chronic However, no large-scale data has been reported from Middle East pancreatitis in children. The CFTR, SPINK1, PRSS1 and and Africa. This presentation focuses on PKU in Egypt, as a model SERPINA1 genes defects analysis. developing country. A team working in the National Research center A. Sobczynska-Tomaszewska1, D. Bak1, B. Oralewska2, G. Oracz2, A. Norek3, cares for about 100 PKU families within this context and trying to reach M. Teisseyre2, K. Czerska1, J. Socha2, T. Mazurczak1, M. Zagulski4, J. Bal1; an optimum economic perspective. 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2The Children’s Memorial Health The clinical group offers genetic counseling, guided diet management, Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Lodz University of Technology, Lodz, Poland, 4Institute growth and neurological assessment and IQ evaluations. For each of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. patient, phenylalanine level estimation was used for biochemical Mutations in four genes: PRSS1, SPINK1, CFTR and SERPINA1 are diagnosis and monitoring. thought to be a cause or a factor predisposing to pancreatitis. The aim A molecular study targeting six mutations (IVS10, R261Q, of this study was to evaluate the impact of these defects into molecular R252W,Y277D, E221G and V245V) was initiated using PCR and pathology of chronic (CP) and acute recurrent pancreatitis (ARP). 92 restriction analysis. The results revealed the presence of IVS10 (17%), children with CP or ARP and 55 family members were investigated. In V232V (17%) and R261Q (7%). VNTR analysis was analyzed among 31 patients (33.7%, P=0.001) we identified mutations in at least one PKU and normal individuals. The 7, 8 and 9 repeat units were the out of four examined genes. Mutations in the SPINK1 and the PRSS1 most common among PKU cases whereas 9, 3 and 7 were prevalent gene were found most frequently (8.7% vs 6.5% of total alleles). among normals. PRSS1 mutations were identified mainly in CP patients, while the Small-scale manufacturing was initiated to locally produce low N34S SPINK1 mutation was recognised with comparable frequency phenylalanine food and milk products with promising success. in CP and ARP patients. The frequency of identified mutations in the A support group was founded by Dr Laila Effat and interested parents CFTR alleles was similar to the control group (4.9% vs 5%, P=1.000). to offer help to PKU families and to raise the awareness and knowledge Frequency of mutations E264V and E342K in the SERPINA1 gene of PKU in the community, particularly the issue of preventing mental was lower than in the control group (P<0.001). Analysis of disease retardation with early diagnosis. This multifaceted approach lays course in patients with identified mutations in the examined genes and background for future implementation of PKU screening program in their families showed, that presence of molecular defect (especially, the country and sets an example for tackling this problem in a third the N34S SPINK1 mutation) is not always associated with disease world country. phenotype.The PRSS1 defects seem to be strongly causative for CP or ARP whereas defects in SPINK1 and CFTR are suggested to be P0687. Detection of mutations in the gene encoding neutrophil only disease-modifiers. The SERPINA1 variants are not associated elastase in congenital and cyclic neutropenia with CP or ARP. G. Ahangari1, A. Farhoudi2, Z. Chavoshzadeh2, A. Ramyar2, S. Jamshidi1; Work partially financed by State Committee for Scientific Research 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Re- grant KBN #3P05E 132 23. public of Iran, 2Department of Immunologyand Allergy, Children hospital center, Tehran Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P0685. Molecular Analysis of MeCP2 Gene in Patients with Rett Congenital neutropenia and cyclic neutropenia are disorders of Syndrome neutrophil production predisposing patients to recurrent bacterial I. Baris1, S. Ayta2, G. Dizdarer3, M. Eraksoy2, E. Battaloglu1; infections. Recently, mutations have been detected in the neutrophil 1Bogazici University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, elastase (ELA2) gene in cyclic neutropenia and severe congenital Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Neurology, diseases. Division of Child Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3SSK Tepecik Education Hospital, Peripheral blood was obtained from 21 patients with cyclic and Child Neurology, Izmir, Turkey. congenital neutropenia. Total RNA was isolated from fresh-polymorpho- Rett syndrome (RS) is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental prep separated cells using standard RNA techniques. RNA was disorder caused by mutations in MeCP2, encoding methyl-CpG-binding analysed by PCR amplification of reverse transcribed RNA using a protein 2. RS affects almost exclusively females with an incidence of total of ten specific primers. Mutation analysis was performed by direct one in 10 000-15 000 and more than 99.5% of cases are sporadic. sequencing. We amplified five exons of the ELA2 gene separately and Mutations in the MeCP2 gene were identified in approximately 35- sequenced each exon. We found most mutations in exons 3 and 5 and 80% of sporadic RS cases. Because the MeCP2 gene is subject to X a lower number of mutations in exons 2 and 4; no mutation was found chromosome inactivation (XCI) in females, the severity of the disease in exon 1. varies with the type of mutation and the pattern of XCI. In conclusion, mutations in the neutrophil elastase gene were found In this study, the genetic basis of Rett syndrome was investigated in all the patients we studied. However in congenital neutropenia the in samples from 24 sporadic classical RS patients (2 male and 22 mutations were more severe. females). Screening of the MeCP2 gene in these patients using RFLP, SSCP and subsequent sequencing analyses revealed eleven point P0688. Molecular Analysis of the Williams Syndrome Critical mutations, three novel deletions and a silent polymorphism (S293S). All Region through Fluorescence in situ hybridization and patients were heterozygous for the mutations except one patient that quantitative Real-Time PCR. was heterozygous for mutations P152R and R106W. They were found C. Venegas, S. Cuevas, N. Nájera, K. Nieto, S. Kofman-Alfaro; to be de novo mutations since the family members tested negative for Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico. them. Total skewed pattern of XCI was determined in nine patients Williams Syndrome (WS) is a contiguous gene deletion disorder and six of them were carrying MeCP2 gene mutations. Intact mutant caused by haploinsufficiency of several genes in 7q11.23, including mRNA was found to be present in patients with novel deletions by RT- the elastin locus (ELN). Clinically the WS-phenotype is characterized PCR analyses. The findings were in accordance with the previously by elastin arteriopathy, supravalvular aortic stenosis, connective tissue published data. Patients with skewed XCI and TRD domain mutations abnormalities, dysmorphic face, growth and mental retardation, visuo-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 229 spatial and cognition impaired and behavioural problems. About 95% P0691. Mutation detection in the Neutrophil Elastase gene, of the patients with the classical phenotype present a deletion of WS ELA2, in an Iranian case affected with Kostmann syndrome Critical Region (WSCRD). Most patients had the WSCRD of 1.5 Mb. V. Hadavi1, R. Kariminejad1, M. Horwitz2, H. Najmabadi1, K. F. Benson2, K. Wil- Nevertheless, recent studies have demonstrated a deletion of ~ 850 liams2, J. Luty3, M. H. Kariminejad1; Kb. The aim of the present study was to identify through fluorescence 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Is- in situ hybridization (FISH) and quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) the lamic Republic of Iran, 2Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, WSCRD in a sample of 16 Mexican patients with clinical diagnosis University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Pediatric Hematology, of WS. FISH analysis was performed with a LSI probe that included NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States. the ELN, LIMK-1 and D7S613 genes. qPCR was done with FKBP6, Originally described Kostmann in 1956, the disease is a rare autosomal CLDN3, and GTF2I probes and RnaseP probe as internal control. recessive disorder of neutrophil number. The absolute neutrophil count The gene dosage were established comparing the ΔCT=(gene CT- is characteristically less than 500/mm3. Severe persistent neutropenia RnaseP CT), ΔΔCT= (patient ΔCT-control ΔCT) and 2 -ΔΔCT formula. results in an increased susceptibility to frequent bacteria infections. Fourteen patients harboured the WSCRD, one patient had no deletion Neutropenia occurs in 1-2 cases per million population. and the other one showed apparently an atypical pattern of deletion. Heterozygous mutations in the gene, ELA2, located on 19p13.3, In conclusion, we propose that the gene dosage analysis mediated encoding neutrophil elastase, are the commonest cause of severe qPCR allows a more accurately determination of the WSCRD size. congenital neutropenia, a leukemia predisposing condition. Mutation of the ELA2 gene prevents the maturation of neutrophils before they P0689. Molecular profile of hypothyroid myopathy can enter circulation. M. Aguennouz1, C. Rodolico1, A. Toscano1, S. Benvenga2, S. Volinia3, C. Here we describe a patient with Kostmann syndrome who demonstrates Buemi1, F. Trimarchi2, C. Messina1, G. Vita1; somatic mosaicism in the bone marrow of multiple different ELA2 1Dept. of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, University of Messina, sequences representing acquired mutations of constitutionally wild type Italy, 2Dept. of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Messina, Italy, alleles. The proband is the first and only offspring of a second cousin 3Dept. of Embryology and Morphology, University of Ferrara, Italy. couple. Initial infection occurred shortly after birth, and fever began Background: an overt myopathy during hypothyroidism may occur. on the second day. A typical pattern of recurrent fevers, Urinary Tract The mechanisms whereby decreased circulating levels of thyroid Infections, Irritability, localized site(s) of infection, Pneumonia, Boils, hormones may interfere with muscular function are still uncertain. Cutaneous abscess and Omphalitis have been observed. Increased Although the molecular actions of thyroid hormones have been studied bone marrow monocytes (9%), and eosinophils (3%) and decreased thoroughly, their pleiotropic effects are mediated by complex changes neutrophils (2%) also have been observed. The patient is suffering in expression of unknown number of target genes. from severe anemia, growth retardation and malnutrition.The patient, Objective: the purpose of the study is to study muscular gene expression from an ethnically isolated population where recessive inheritance in hypothyroid myopathy in order to elucidate the pathogenesis of such might be expected, has Kostmann Syndrome in the absence of a a disease. family history of neutropenia. Sequencing of PCR-amplified genomic Materials and Methods: three groups of patients with hypothyroid DNA from peripheral blood that has been done in the University of myopathy were subdivided in relation of TSH levels: patients with Washington School of Medicine by Dr. Marshall Horwitz revealed two TSH lower than 100 mU/l; patients with TSH about 100 mU/l; patients novel, apparently heterozygous ELA2 mutations, V69L and V72L. with TSH upper than 100 mU/l. Muscle specimens from age- and sex- matched normal subjects undergoing orthopedic surgery will be used P0692. Screening for Cys 282Tyr and His 63Asp mutations of as controls. Microarray experiments were performed using amplified HFE gene in Kazakhs and Uygurs populations of the Central RNA isolated in muscle specimens. A GeneChip microarrays panel of Asia cDNA human Gene Array containing approximately 40000 genes from N. Khusnutdinova1, R. Khusainova1, G. Cvyatova2, E. Khusnutdinova1; human genome (MWG-Affymetrix) was used. 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Kazakhstan Results: we found a correlation between TSH levels and the number Republican Perinatal Centre, Almata, Kazakhstan. of genes down-regulated. Patients with TSH levels upper than 100 Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive mU/l had at least 1500 down-regulated genes. These were involved genetic disorder of iron metabolism. Two major missense mutations in energy metabolism, mRNA maturation, signal transduction cellular in HFE gene responsible for HH have been described: Cys282Tyr, trafficking. Discussion: Microarray analysis is an effective tool for accounting for 80%-90% of HH chromosomes, and His63Asp, which is identifying genes differently involved in the response of skeletal muscle associated with a milder HH form comprising from 40% to 70% of HH to hypothyroidism chromosomes. The availability of molecular genotyping for accurate HH diagnosis has led to increased interest in population screening to P0690. Might there be a link between mannose binding lectin promote early diagnosis and therapy of this disease. For evaluation of polymorphisms and vitiligo? carrier frequencies we have screened for Cys282Tyr and His63Asp H. Onay1, M. Pehlivan2, S. Alper3, F. Ozkinay1, S. Pehlivan4; mutations in HFE gene in populations of Kazakhs (N=260) and Uygurs 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, (N=116) in Central Asia. We have detected both of the mutations in the Turkey, 2Ataturk Education and Research Hospital,Department of Internal populations studied, suggesting that hereditary hemochromatosis is Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of likely to be present in Asian populations. The frequency of Cys282Tyr Dermatology, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University Faculty of Science, Department of mutation carriage was 2.4% in Khazakhs and 1.7% in Uygurs. The Biology, Izmir, Turkey. frequency of Cys282Tyr mutation is lower than in European populations Mannose binding lectin (MBL) is a calcium dependent lectin that causes (8.65%) and in Turkic speaking populations of the Volga-Ural region predisposition to infections and autoimmune diseases. In this study (3.95%). We detected His63Asp mutation in heterozygous state in we aimed to examine the presence of any association between MBL 16.0% of Kazakhs and in 16.4% of Uygurs, which is a lower frequency gene variants and vitiligo. Codon 54 (allele B) and codon 57 (allele than in Europe (24.75%) and the Volga-Ural region (21.70%). These C) polymorphisms in exon 1 of the MBL gene, were investigated in data confirm the decreasing frequencies of these two mutations samples from 50 healthy controls and 40 patients diagnosed as having from north to south and from west to east. These results led us to vitiligo. PCR-RFLP was used in order to investigate the polymorphisms recommend performing of molecular genetic testing in groups at risk. in the MBL gene. The B allele frequency was significantly higher in the patient group (20%) compared to the control group (3%). The P0693. Molecular and cytogenetic analysis of Leukemic patients AB genotype was found 35% and 6% of the patient and healthy for 7 common translocations control groups, respectively. These results suggest that the codon A. H. Taromchi, R. Kariminejad, M. Zanganeh, N. Miraftabi, T. Nayeb-Bagher, 54 polymorphism in the MBL gene may play a role in susceptibility to S. Voghouie, S. Asia, S. Jalilnejad, Z. Golkar, H. Najmabadi; vitiligo. Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. We have analysed 304 leukemic patients by multiplex reverseMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 230 transcription-polymerase chain reaction(RT-PCR) method for rapid and cardiac involvement, as well as in the more severe Hutchinson- diagnosis and screening of patients with 7 chromosomal translocations Guilford progeria syndrome. Blood samples from fourteen WS cases including: t(1;19)(q23;p13), t(12;21)(p13;q22), inv(16)(p13;q22), were sent to us for molecular analysis. All 35 exons of the WRN gene t(15;17)(q21;q22), t(9;22)(q34;q11), t(8;21)(q22;q22), t(4;11)(q21;q23) and their splice junctions were amplified and sequenced. Four cases . Many of these translocations are related to acute and chronic, myeloid presented biallelic disruptive mutations. In three cases, only one and lymphoid leukemias. Multiplex RT-PCR detects hybrid mRNAs mutated allele of WRN was identified. As dominant alleles of WRN transcribed from the fusion genes produced by translocations. Parallel have not been described, it is likely that a second mutation for each of cytogenetic analysis was performed on 120 of 304 patients too. these cases escaped detection, possibly due to large deletions, or to Leukemic cell samples from patients admitted to Kariminejad- point mutations in the introns affecting splicing. The cases with no or Najmabadi clinic were subjected to RNA isolation and cDNA only one mutated WRN allele are being analysed further for mutations synthesis were performed by random priming method on total RNA. in LMNA. To achieve maximal sensitivity a nested PCR protocol was used and a housekeeping gene was considered as internal positive control . Bone P0696. Mutations in the hemochromatosis gene (HFE) and marrow culture were done and prepared cells were harvested with multiple sclerosis conventional methods and slides were prepared by GTG technique S. Ristić1, L. Lovrečić2, B. Brajenović-Milić1, N. Starčević-Čizmarević1, S. Šega and studied. Jazbec2, J. Sepčić1, M. Kapović1, B. Peterlin2; We have studied 304 patients with the following indications and 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Rijeka, results: Croatia, 2Department of Medical Genetics, UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia. From 216 CML patients 109(50.5%) was positive for t(9;22)(q34;q11),from In the present study we have investigated wheather HFE gene 65 AML patients 3(4.6%) was positive for inv(16)(p13;q22) and polymorphism may play a role in the disease behavior of Croatian 3(4.6%) was positive for t(8;21)(q22;q22) and 15(23%) was positive and Slovenian MS patients and their potential genetic susceptibility for t(15;17)(q21;q22), from 23 ALL patients 1(4.3%) was positive to MS. We genotyped 314 MS patients and 400 healthy controls for t(9;22)(q34;q11) , 1(4.3%) was positive for t(4;11)(q21;q23) and for the C282Y and H63D mutations by polymerase chain reaction/ 2(8.7%) was positive for t(12;21)(p13;q22). restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis. Our .From 304 patients 120 cases were analysed cytogenetically and results showed no significance differences in the distribution of the correlation between these results will be discussed. two mutations between MS patients and controls suggesting that HFE RT-PCR is rapid and sensitive method for screening of translocations polymorphisms do not influence the susceptibility to MS. However, we and is also the best tool for monitoring of minimal residual disease observed that MS patients carrying the mutant C282Y allele exhibited but other numerical and structural abberations can be detected by earlier onset of disease symptom relative to others genotypes. Also, cytogenetic analysis. our data indicate that a gradient of risk of iron overload associated with different HFE genotypes may contribute to the progression of MS, but P0694. A Pilot detection study of alpha(1) antitrypsin deficiency it warrants further study in a larger series of MS patients. in a targeted population in Iran F. Mirzajani, S. Zare Karizi, R. Mirfakhraie, M. Hooshmand; P0697. Mutations in AHI1 gene of Joubert syndrome patients. National Institute for Genetic Engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic C. Lagier-Tourenne1, E. Boltshauser2, N. Breivik3, S. Affenberger1, C. Riether1, Republic of Iran. N. Drouot1, C. Barbot4, M. Koenig1; Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (A1AD) is a genetic disorder which is 1IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France, 2Department of Neurology, transmitted in an autosomal recessive pattern. Alpha-1-antitrypsin Children's University Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland, 3Department of Paediatrics, deficiency affects mainly the lungs and the liver leading, in the latter Aalesund Hospital, Aalesund, Norway, 4Department of Neurology, Hospital case, to neonatal cholestasis, chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis. Worldwide, Maria Pia, Porto, Portugal. approximately 1 in 2,500 individuals has alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. Joubert syndrome (JS) is a recessively inherited disorder characterised While this disorder is found in all ethnic groups, it occurs most frequently by hypotonia at birth and developmental delay, followed by truncal in whites of European ancestry. Estimates of the prevalence of A1AD ataxia and cognitive impairment, and suggestive facial features. (especially the PiZZ phenotype) have varied considerably, depending Abnormalities on axial MRI are the neuroimaging hallmarks of JS, on the ethnicity of the population used to derive the estimate. Whether and include cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and abnormalities at the the A1AD is a very rare or is a widely under-diagnosed disease in pontomesencephalic junction that lead to a characteristic “molar Iranian population still is unknown. A pilot study was carried out on 75 tooth” appearance. JS is clinically heterogeneous with some patients unrelated children clinically characterized by idiopathic liver dysfuntions presenting with various combinations of breathing abnormalities in suspected to A1AD. Biochemical tests including enzyme assay were the neonatal period, oculomotor apraxia, retinal dystrophy, retinal performed to identify the deficient cases. Molecular diagnosis tests of coloboma, ptosis, hexadactyly, and nephronophtisis or cystic dysplastic the Z and S mutation of A1AD were performed in all of the samples kidneys. JS is also genetically heterogeneous, with two known loci, on using RFLP-PCR method. The result indicates the rare incidence of Z 9q34 (JBTS1) and 11p11-q12 (CORS2), representing only a fraction and S mutation in Iran. of cases. We have identified a third locus in 6q23 (JBTS3) from the study of two large consanguineous families of Turkish and Swiss P0695. Werner Syndrome and mutations of the WRN and LMNA origin. LOD score calculation for the two JBTS3 families, including the genes in a european population. consanguinity loops, gave a maximum value of 4.1 and 2.3 at θ = 0, N. Uhrhammer1, L. Lafarge1, L. Dos Santos1, A. Domaszewska2, M. Lange2, Y. respectively, indicating linkage between the disease and the D6S1620- Bignon1; D6S1699 haplotype spanning a 13.1 cM interval. Recently, Ferland 1Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2University of Wroclaw, Wro- et al. (2004) and Dixon-Salazar et al. (2004) found mutations in the claw, Poland. gene AHI1 in 6 families with Joubert syndrome linked to 6q23. We are Werner Syndrome (WS) is a rare hereditary disorder of premature sequencing AHI1 in JS patients from 10 families. We have found so aging. The clinical spectrum includes small stature, acute voice and a far a homozygous Serine to Stop mutation (S783X) in exon 17 and a characteristic facies, plus the early onset of cataracts, diabetes, skin truncating mutation 630-633delGAAA in exon 7 in the linked Turkish changes, grey hair, and other signs. WS can be difficult to diagnose and Swiss families, respectively. Sequence analyses of the other 8 due to the variability of the patients’ presentation and the rarity of the families is in progress. disorder. Transmission is usually autosomal recessive. The gene for WS, WRN, encodes a member of the RecQ helicase P0698. Identification of mutations in the galactose-1-phosphate family involved in DNA replication. Biallelic mutations of WRN are uridyltransferase (GALT) gene in 15 Iranian patients with responsible for most patients, though in up to 40 %, no mutation can galactosemia be demonstrated. Recently, heterozygous missense mutations in the F. Nabati1, R. Mirfakhraie2, N. Naghibzadeh Tabatabaei3, S. Saki4, E. Tala- nuclear envelop proteins lamin A and C, both encoded by the LMNA chian5, M. Rafiei6, M. Houshmand3, F. Mirzajani3; gene, have been observed in WS patients with severe symptoms 1Khatam Institute of Higher Education, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2IslamicMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 231 Azad University, Science&Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, the observed splicing defects with the presence of putative cis-acting 3National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic splicing regulatory elements, we analysed the sequences of exons Republic of Iran, 4Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, and pseudoexons for the presence of ESE, ESS, and ISE (intronic 5Iran Medical science University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Tabriz Medi- splicing enhancer) motifs. We used the ESE finder program and the cal science University, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. RESCUE-ESE method to predict ESEs, and we searched for the Classical galactosemia caused by deficiency of galactose-1-phosphate recently described RESCUE-ISE predicted ISE hexamers and ESS uridyltransferase (GALT) is a severe autosomal recessive disorder. We motifs. Data from mutational analysis based on transcript studies allow report here molecular analysis of 15 unrelated Iranian galactosemia to evaluate the reliability of splicing regulatory motifs prediction by in cases confirmed to have galactosaemia . silico approaches, and contribute to identify new cis-acting regulatory Molecular testing is done in two steps: 1. The six most common elements. mutations including Q188R, K285N, S135L, L195P, X380R and Q169K are first tested using PCR-RFLP method.2) In order to determine the P0701. The molecular diagnosis of Spinal Muscular Atrophy unknown mutations the entire coding region of GALT was subjected to (SMA) in Romania the sequencing. P. Apostol1, D. Cimponeriu1, H. Stanescu2, N. Butoianu2, I. Radu1, M. Stavara- The most common molecular defect observed in the Iranian population chi1, R. Haraba1, L. Dan1, S. Magureanu2, L. Gavrila1; was Q188R (replacement of glutamine-188 by arginine) (60%). 1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Alexandru Obregia Hospital, Bu- One homozygote for S135L mutation , one heterozygote for K285N charest, Romania. mutation, three rare mutation and the presence of a deletion in the Proximal forms of SMA are of 5q and non-5q type, the former being coding region of the GALT gene were detected. by far the most frequent. All cases of 5q SMA are determined by mutations of the SMN1 gene, the differences between clinical forms P0699. Functional analysis of a human atp12 mutation in yeast being explained by the influence of other modifying genes (e.g. NAIP). S. cerevisiae. The vast majority of SMN1 gene mutations (95%) are localized in S. Seneca1, R. Van Coster2, A. Meulemans1, J. Smet2, W. Lissens1, L. De Mei- exons 7 and 8. rleir1, S. Ackerman3, I. Liebaers1; In our study, 24 clinically diagnosed children for SMA, and 16 parents, 1Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium, 2University of Ghent, Gh- were included. The patients were classified according to clinical criteria ent, Belgium, 3Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, United (age of onset, clinical evolution) and EMG tests in: SMA1 (onset < 6 States. months of life): 19 patients; SMA2 (onset: 6-18 months): 3 patients Complex V (ATP synthase) of the respiratory chain couples the proton and SMA3 (onset: >18 months of life): 2 patients. We have tested the gradient, generated by the respiratory chain, to ATP synthesis. The presence of SMN1 exon 7 and 8 using the PCR-RFLP method and ATP12 gene product is one of the proteins required for assembly PCR for NAIP exon 5. of complex V. Here, we report on the functional effect of a W94R As shown in the table, the homozygous absence of exon 7 of SMN1 mutation, present in the ATP12 gene of a patient with an ATP synthase gene was observed in all patients with SMA1 and 2, but not in those decreased activity. Until now, nuclear defects of the ATP synthase with SMA3 and parents. The four patients with SMA1 and with complex complex have not been disclosed. Both multicopy and single copy deletions had an acute evolution. We note the high prevalence (47,4%) plasmid constructs containing the human and yeast wild type ATP12 of SMN1 exon 8 deletion in our patients. Genetic counseling was gene, as well as the human mutation W94R and the yeast counterpart offered to all couples having a child affected by SMA. W103R were prepared. These constructs were introduced in a yeast The distribution of mutations in SMA patients host strain deprived of his ATP12 function, and as such respiratory deficient. ATP synthase activity of individual yeast transformants Homzygote deletion SMA1 SMA2 SMA3 was assayed by growth studies on a non-fermentable carbon source and by Blue Native Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (BN-PAGE) SMN1 exon 7 10 3 0 stained for ATP synthase catalytic activity. WT plasmid constructs SMN1 exon 8 3 0 0 rescue the respiratory defect of a yeast atp12 mutant strain. Growth on a non-fermentable carbon source was strongly impaired for the SMN1 exons 7 and 8 2 0 0 human W94R mutant, while the growth of the yeast W103R mutant SMN1 exons 7, 8 and NAIP exon 5 4 0 0 strain was normal. These results were confirmed by BN-PAGE studies and measurements of the complex V activity of the different plasmid constructs in yeast cells. CONCLUSION : Our yeast complementation P0702. Characterization of the molecular defects in the ATP7B studies showed clearly that the human W94R mutant does not confer gene in Wilson Disease patients from Bulgaria respiratory competence to an atp12 yeast strain and is the cause of the T. Todorov1, A. Savov1, H. Jelev2, E. Pantaleeva2, D. Konstantimova3, I. Kremenski1; complex V dysfunction in our patient. 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Pediatrician clinic, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical P0700. Prediction of cis-acting splicing regulatory elements in University, Varna, Bulgaria. the dystrophin gene Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of the copper S. Tuffery-Giraud, A. Disset, C. Saquet, D. Thorel, C. Béroud, M. Claustres; metabolism resulting from the absence or dysfunction of a copper Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et Chromosomique, IURC et CHU de transporting P-type ATPase, coded by the ATP7B gene. Pathogenesis Montpellier, Montpellier cedex 5, France. of the disease is caused by accumulation of copper in liver, kidneys We report a set of point mutations disrupting the correct pattern of and brain. Approximately 240 mutations in the ATP7B-gene have been dystrophin pre-mRNA splicing. We focused our attention on two types identified to date. of events of peculiar interest for the definition of splicing regulatory We screened all coding regions and exon / intron boundaries of ATP7B- elements (1) skipping-associated exonic mutations, (2) pseudoexons gene in 77 Bulgarian families using single-strand conformational inclusion in mature transcripts. We have identified four different point polymorphism (SSCP) followed by direct sequencing and characterized mutations in the coding regions of the dystrophin gene leading to the molecular defect in 84% of WD chromosomes. In 65 of patients both exon skipping. Such single base change are supposed to interfere mutations were identified. Fourteen different mutations including two with splicing by either disrupting Exonic Splicing Enhancer (ESE) non reported (D1279Y and P1352S) (Table 1) and nine polymorphisms elements or by creating negative-acting elements such as the Exonic within coding regions were observed. (Table 2). Splicing Silencer (ESS) motifs. Moreover, we identified four cases of Our results demonstrate that five mutation - H1069Q (52.60%), pseudoexon inclusion in the mature transcripts of Becker patients 2304-2305insC (9.74%), 3400delC (4.55%), G1341D (3.90%), and resulting (i) in three cases from an intronic variation which reinforces V12171218L (3.25%) are relatively common and account for 74% of the strength of a pre-existing splice site, (ii) in one case from an intronic WND alleles. deletion in the vicinity of the pseudoexon suggesting the presence of These data can be used to develop straightforward genetic testing in a regulatory element in the deleted sequence. In order to correlate this population or in other countries composed of a genetically mixed population.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 232 Table 1 . Mutations in the WND gene in Bulgarian patients P0704. Polymorphisms in the CYP1A2 gene and Theophylline metabolism in Turkish patients with COPD No Mutation Type Exon Alleles Frequency % I. Keser1, T. Bilgen1, A. Uslu2, T. Ozdemir2; 1 R616Q mutation 5 4 2.60 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, 2 2298-2299insC mutation 8 15 9.74 Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Chest 3 R778W mutation 8 1 0.65 Medicine, Antalya, Turkey. 4 R778G mutation 8 1 0.65 Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A2 gene polymorphisms are thought to 5 2530delA K844K mutation 10 1 0.65 be involved in theophylline metabolism. We analyzed the effect of 6 A874V mutation 11 3 2 genetic polymorphisms -2964 (G/A) and -1569 (T/del) in the 5’-flanking 7 R969Q mutation 13 2 1.30 region and 155 (T/G) and 731 (C/A) in the first intron of the CYP1A2 gene on theophylline metabolism in 100 Turkish patients with COPD 8 A1003T mutation 13 1 0.65 (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease ). Genetic polymorphisms 9 H1069Q mutation 14 81 52.6 were detected using PCR-RFLP technique. The frequency of the each genotype from four polymorphic sites in patients showed G/G= No Name Type Exon Alleles Frequency % 93%, G/A=7%, A/A=0% for -2964 G/A position , T/T=2%, T/del=34%, 10 3400delC mutation 15 7 4.55 del/del=64% for -1569 (T/del) position, T/T=92%, T/G=8%, G/G=0% 11 V12171218L mutation 17 5 3.25 for 155 (T/G) position, C/C=11%, C/A=58%, A/A=31% for 731 (C/A) 12 D1279Y* mutation 18 1 0.65 position. Our results suggest that the “ del ” allele at position -1569 and “C” allele at position 731 in the gene may be causal factor which 13 G1341D mutation 20 6 3.90 effect the CYP1A2 enzyme activity in chronic obstructive pulmonary 14 P1352S* mutation 20 1 0.65 disease. - Known - - 130 84.42 - Total alleles - - 154 100.00 P0705. Screening of the HFE gene mutations in patients with cryptogenic cirrhosis by PCR-RFLP technique Table 2 . Polymorphisms in the WND gene in Bulgarian patients S. Ozturk1, I. Keser1, H. Dikici2, D. Dincer2, G. Luleci1; No Name Type Exon 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, 1 L456V polymorphism 3 Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Gas- troenterology, Antalya, Turkey. 2 F764F polymorphism 8 Cirrhosis is usually accepted as cryptogenic only after an extensive 3 K832R polymorphism 10 evaluation has excluded recognizable etiologies. The prevalence of 4 T991T polymorphism 13 cryptogenic cirrhosis ranges from 5% to 30% of cirrhotic patients. We 5 A1003A polymorphism 13 performed to screen the HFE gene mutations on a series of 15 patients 6 L1015L polymorphism 13 (8 females and 7 males) with cryptogenic cirrhosis and 100 randomly 7 L1140A polymorphism 16 selected healthy controls. Following DNA extraction from peripheral 8 K1260N polymorphism 18 blood and PCR amplification, the PCR products were digested to determine C282Y, H63D and S65C mutations with RsaI, MboI and HinfI 9 K1436K polymorphism 21 restriction enzymes, respectively. We detected a heterozygote H63D mutation in a patient with idiopathic cirrhosis. The data of patients and P0703. Analysis of the JAG1 gene and clinical characterization the healthy controls were compared for the HFE gene mutations and of Polish patients with Alagille syndrome. discussed with literature. Although number of the patients is a few, our results suggests that HFE gene mutations should be screened in D. Jurkiewicz1, E. Popowska1, C. Gläser2, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, E. Ci- patients with cryptogenic cirrhosis. ara1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, P. Kowalski1, M. Gajdulewicz1, K. Chrzanowska1, K. Spodar1, I. Hansmann2, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; P0706. Relative prevalence of GJB2 gene mutations in 1The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institut für Human- autosomal recessive nonsyndromic deaf population in Kerman genetik und Medizinische Biologie, MLU Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany. province of Iran Alagille syndrome (AGS) is an autosomal dominant disorder N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Mirhosseini2, H. Ziaddini2, K. Kahrizi1, S. Arzhangi1, A. characterized by intrahepatic bile duct paucity and at least three of Astani2, Y. Riazalhosseini1, M. Mohseni1, K. Jalalvand1, C. Nishimura3, R. J. H. five main clinical anomalies: cholestasis, cardiac, skeletal and ocular Smith3, H. Najmabadi1; abnormalities and a recognizable facial phenotype. AGS phenotype is 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation caused by mutations of the JAG1 gene located on chromosome 20p12. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Rehabilitation Organization of Ker- The JAG1 gene encodes a ligand in the evolutionarily conserved man Province, Kerman, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology Notch signaling pathway, taking part in cell fate determination and Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, differentiation. In this study we present results of the JAG1 gene University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. mutation analysis and clinical characterization of 42 Polish patients Mutations in the GJB2 gene (at the DFNB1 locus) encoding the gap with clinically recognized AGS. Mutations were found in 23 patients. junction protein connexin 26, are responsible for 50% to 70% of Twenty one different mutations, including 8 frameshift, 6 nonsense, autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) in many 4 splice site and 3 missense mutations, were identified. Thirteen populations of European descent. To assess the importance of GJB2 mutations are specific for Polish population. All mutations are localized mutations in the Kerman deaf population in southeast of Iran, we in the extracellular domain of JAG1 protein. Most mutations lead to screened 65 probands (130 chromosomes) with ARNSHL. Genetic premature termination codons resulting either in creation of truncated testing began with an allele specific polymerase chain reaction proteins or in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Family studies revealed (ASPCR) assay to screen patients for the 35delG mutation (the most that the specific mutations were inherited in 6 out of 18 investigated common mutation in many world populations). Patients heterozygous cases. No apparent correlation between genotype and phenotype was or negative for the 35delG mutation were screened by DHPLC observed. A considerable interindividual and intrafamilial variability of and sequencing for other GJB2 mutations. GJB2 mutations were AGS features in investigated patients can be explained by existence detected in 12 (9.2%) chromosomes. Homozygousity or compound of genetic modifiers. heterozygousity for GJB2 deafness causing allele variants were found That study was partly supported by the Subsidies for Scientists 2000 in 5 patients (7.7%). Allele variants found were R127H (4 alleles), program of the Foundation for Polish Science and by KBN, Project No. 35delG (3 alleles), W24X (2 alleles), delE120 (2 alleles), R143W (1 3P05E12625. allele) and, V153I (5 alleles). V153I is a benign polymorphism. The dominant most frequent mutation was R127H (33.3%) rather than 35delG mutation. Since the frequency of GJB2 mutations is muchMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 233 lower in this province comparing to the rest of Iran and other parts of trimeric hybridization complex is formed consisting of one strand of the world, we propose that other genes may play a significant role in the PCR product on one hand and the bead-coupled discriminating the ARNSHL genetic load in Kerman province. oligonucleotide and an adjacent 3’ biotinylated signal oligonucleotide on the other hand. Detection and signal oligonucleotide meet at the P0707. Two different-sized D4Z4 repeat within a FSHD family site of mutation due their complementarity to the sequence up and with an high clinical variability downstream of the test locus. Subsequently, a ligase is added which A. Mosca1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, V. Dulieu2, M. Giroud3, M. Jeanpierre4, L. ligates the two nucleotides only when all nucleotides at the junction Faivre1; site are basepaired. Mismatched DNA fragments are not ligated. The 1Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d'Enfants, Dijon, France, 2Service de Rééduca- detection of the ligated DNA fragments is accompished by the read-out tion et de Réadaptation fonctionelle, Dijon, France, 3Service de Neurologie, of the biotin bound streptavidine-phycoerythrine conjugate within the Dijon, France, 4Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, Luminex analyzer. France. This highly accurate and sensitive no-wash assay can be used for Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is an autosomal economical genotyping reactions in the field of routine diagnostics as dominant myopathy characterized by progressive atrophy and well as in research. Due to the high flexiblity of the FBA up to fifty SNPs weakness of the facial, shoulder, upper and lower limbs with high can be analyzed simultaneously in a single sample. inter- and intrafamilial clinical variability. FSHD is associated with contractions of the polymorphic D4Z4 repeat on chromosome 4qter. P0710. Complex genetic analysis of the AZF region, AR and A rough and inverse correlation has been observed between the CFTR on patients with various forms of male infertility severity and age at onset of the disease and the residual repeat unit D. Mikhaylenko1,2, O. Babenko1,2, E. Kirillova3, O. Nikiforova3, N. Zaretskaya3, number. We report on a family with a significant intrafamilial clinical M. Nemtsova1,2; variability and two different-sized D4Z4 repeats. Indeed, 4/10 patients 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute presented a predominant scapular form and 6/10 patients presented a for Molecular Medicine of the Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian predominant peroneal form. The mean age at onset of symptoms was Federation, 3Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. of 38 years, but highly varied from 8 years to 58 years. We did not find Y-chromosome microdeletions (AZF region), mutations of CFTR and any correlation between the length of the repeat unit and the age of alleles CAG of the AR are the most common genetic factors for male >26 onset or the predominant location of the muscle weakness. Hypotheses infertility. AZF loci microdeletions are responsible for azoospermia and in order to explain the two different-sized D4Z4 repeats included: 1) severe or moderate oligospermia. These diseases are also associated a common ancestor compound heterozygote for two different-sized with certain allelic variants of the AR CAG-repeat. The risk of pathology D4Z4 alleles, 2) a common ancestor with de novo somatic mosaicism in men with CAG is 4 times higher than the population average. >26 with two different-sized D4Z4 repeats on the same allele secondary Congenital absence of the vas deferens in some cases is caused by a to gene conversion with intrachromosomal crossover, 3) an affected combination of mutations in CFTR. individual with an inherited D4Z4 contraction and acquired somatic The purpose of this study is the complex molecular analysis of AZFa, mosaicism with two different-sized D4Z4 repeats on the same allele b, c loci, AR and CFTR in Russian patients with various forms of male secondary to gene conversion without intrachromosomal crossover. infertility. We have investigated 76 DNA samples from unrelated patients Interestingly, the second mechanism has been recently reported of Russian origin. Y-chromosome microdeletions were analyzed using in 3 cases (Lemmers, AJHG 2004, 75: 44-53), indicating that gene 6 markers. We also determined the length of the AR CAG-repeat, the conversion might not be a rare event in FSHD. presence of delF508 and allelic variants IVS8(T)n in CFTR. We detected AZF deletions in 8 patients with oligo- or azoospermia P0708. A novel mutation in the ARS (component B) gene (10.5 % of cases). AR alleles CAG were observed in 3 cases. The >26 encoding SLURP-1 in a Turkish family with Mal de Meleda patient with absence of the vas deferens had a CFTR genotype delF508 S. Artan, M. H. Müslümanoğlu, O. Çilingir, G. Bademci; / 5T. Two heterozygous carriers of the delF508 and 5 carriers of a 5T Osmangazi University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, Es- mutation were revealed. Altogether, screening has revealed mutations kisehir, Turkey. and predisposing allelic variants in 23 (30.2 % of cases) patients with Mal de Meleda (MDM) is an autosomal recessive , transgressive male infertility. Detection of heterozygous carriers of CFTR mutations palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) associated with keratotic skin provides differentiation of the infertility and furthermore prevents cystic lesions, perioral erythema , brachydactyly and nail abnormalities.The fibrosis. ARS ( component B) gene has been mapped on chromosome 8qter and mutations have been implicated in MDM . The gene contains 3 P0711. Evaluation of Association Between Glutathione S- exons and encodes the protein named secreted lymphocyte antigen- Transferase M1 and T1 Genotypes and Myocardial Infarction 6/urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor-related protein-1 T. Cora1, M. Tokac2, H. Acar1, E. Gabakci1, M. Kayrak2; (SLURP-1). The small Turkish family with MDM has been analysed for 1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, Selçuk University, the ARS gene mutation(s). DNAs were extracted from the peripheral Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Cardiology, Meram Medical Faculty, Selçuk blood of the family members and the ARS gene were sequenced by University, Konya, Turkey. the automated DNA sequencer (ABI Prism 310). The mutation was detected in the 2nd exon of the gene.The mutation was changing of Myocardial infarction (MI) is the most frequent causes of mortality and cysteine residue to premature stop codon at the position 43. The son morbidity. Heredity is the most important risk factor for developing diagnosed as the MDM was homozygote for the mutation whereas the of MI. Association between MI and genetic basis have been not parents were heterozygote established sufficiently. We aimed to evaluate distribution of glutathione S-transferase (GST-M1) and (GST-T1) genotypes in patients with MI, P0709. Multiplex SNP genotyping using Luminex bead arrays for investigated whether polymorphisms in these genes influence B. Haberpursch1, B. van Stigt2, L. Kruska2; risk of coronary artery disease. The study population consist of 153 1Multimetrix GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Gemeinschaftspraxis für Laboratori- patients with MI admitted our Hospital to seek medical attention and umsmedizin, Mikrobiologie und Humangenetik, Mönchengladbach, Germany. 131 healty persons as a control group. DNA was extracted from whole An economical multiparameter assay based on Fluorescent Bead Arrays blood by using DNA extraction method and the GST-M1 and GST-T1 (FBA) and the Oligonucleotide Ligation Assay (OLA) is described, polymorphism were determined using a multiplex PCR technique. We which allows Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) genotyping of evaluated relation between coronary artery diseases and distribution PCR amplified samples. The method is based on the Luminex LabMAP of GST-M1 and GST-T1 polymorphisms. technology using microsphere beads available in one hundred different fluorescent color tones of red and infrared. These microspheres serve as solid phase for the SNP genotyping reaction. Each bead species is coupled to a detection oligonucleotide carrying the discriminating base at the 3’ position. After amplification of the relevant gene fragment aMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 234 P0712. Rett syndrome - MECP2 mutations in Polish patients with 1The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Medical classic form and variants of the disease. Biology and Human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 3McMaster University, Hamil- E. Popowska, E. Ciara, D. Jurkiewicz, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, D. Pieku- ton, ON, Canada. towska-Abramczuk, P. Kowalski, M. Gajdulewicz, K. Spodar, K. Chrzanowska, Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive disorder A. Tylki-Szymanska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; of cholesterol biosynthesis caused by mutations in the DHCR7 gene. Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. Forty eight Polish patients with SLOS underwent mutation analysis. Rett syndrome (RTT, MIM#312750) is a progressive neurological In total we identified 15 DHCR7 mutations. The mutation frequencies disorder affecting almost exclusively females. Mental retardation, in Polish patients were significantly different from those observed in loss of acquired skills, stereotypical hand movements, seizures, Western European populations. Two mutations, W151X (35/96 alleles, scoliosis and autonomic dysfunction are the common clinical features 38,2%) and V326L (26/96 alleles, 27,0%) accounted for 65,2% of all appearing after a few months of almost normal development. Besides observed in our cohort. By comparing clinical severity scores, and the the classic form of RTT, five distinct variants have been described. The biochemical and molecular data a genotype-phenotype correlation was prevalence of the disease is estimated to be 1 in 10000 - 15000 female attempted. Mild phenotypes are correlated with mutations affecting births. RTT results from mutations in MECP2 gene in chromosome the putative transmembrane domains TM1-TM6 or CT regions and Xq28 coding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2). To date more severe phenotypes with mutations localized in TM7 and 4L region. than 300 various MECP2 mutations have been found. The most severe and lethal cases were related with genotype 0/0. The The aim of our study was to investigate molecular basis of Rett phenotypic differences of patients with the same genotype suggest that syndrome in Polish population. MECP2 gene mutation analysis was severity of the disease may be affected by other factors. The disease is performed in 123 female patients with classic form and variants of RTT. most prevalent among populations of Central Europe (Czech Republic Genomic DNA was extracted from lymphocytes, and coding region of 1:10000, Slovakia 1:15000-1:20000). Published data indicated that MECP2A isoform was amplified with 8 primer pairs and analyzed by the incidence of SLOS may be as high as 1:1590 -1:13500 in USA SSCP analysis. Amplicons with shifted mobility were subsequently (state of Oregon) population of European ancestry while in general sequenced. Twenty five different MECP2 mutations were found in populations of the United Kingdom and the United States of America 45 probands from all analyzed families (37%), including 9 missense the incidence is estimated as 1:60000. The observations of Polish mutations, 4 nonsense mutations and 12 frameshift mutations. Nine groups indicate that the disease carrier rate is approximately 1 in 27 mutations (K305Q, E472Q, c.329delA, c.506_519dup14, c.697_ and SLOS incidence is estimated as 1:2646 to 1: 4065. 701del5, c.883delT, c.975_1186del212ins18, c.1162_1178del17, The study was supported in part by KBN, Project No. 2P05E06727. c.1353_1354insA) were specific for Polish patients. Almost all mutations are clustered in exon 4, mainly in regions coding methyl- P0715. Analysis of telomerase activity in cervical samples as a binding domain (MBD), transcription repression domain (TRD), and diagnostic biomarker of cervical dysplasia. C-terminal part of MECP2 protein. Seven recurrent mutations (R106W, A. Tsezou1, P. Oikonomou1, P. Kollia1, I. Mademtzis2, E. Kostopoulou1, I. Mes- T158M, R168X, R255X, R270X, R294X, R306C) account for 54% of sinis1, N. Vamvakopoulos1; all mutated alleles. 1University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2University Hospital of Larissa, Lar- The study was supported by KBN Project 3P05E11222. issa, Greece. Telomerase activity and human telomerase reverse transcriptase P0713. Calcium-Sensing receptor gene A986S polymorphism (hTERT) mRNA expression were investigated in cervical specimens and bone mass in hypertensive women. and were correlated with cytologic findings and the presence of HPV A. Sanz-Cantalapiedra1, J. L. Perez-Castrillón2, J. Martin-Escudero2, J. Silva2, infection. Telomerase activity was evaluated by the telomeric repeat I. Justo2, E. Velasco1, A. Dueñas2, A. Blanco Quirós1; protocol assay (TRAP) and hTERT mRNA expression by RT-PCR. 1Universidad de Valladolid. Instituto de Biologia y Genetica Molecular-CSIC, HPV DNA was detected by PCR, as well as restriction endonuclease Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Río Hortega, Valladolid, Spain. digestion. HPV DNA was detected in all 82 specimens with abnormal Only a few studies have analized the relationship between bone cytologic findings and in 4/34 normal samples. Low grade squamous mass and hypertension, finding an inverse relationship between intraepithelial lesions (LGSILs) were present in 74/82 specimens bone mineral density and hypercalciuria (the most frequent disorder (90.2%) and high grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HGSILs) of calcium metabolism in hypertension). The function of the Calcium in 8/82 (9.75%). Seven of the 8 HGSIL (87.5%) and 26/74 LGSIL Sensing receptor is to maintain the serum calcium concentration within (35.1%) specimens were hTERT positive, while all normal specimens a narrow physiological range. Activating and inactivating mutations of were hTERT mRNA negative. Telomerase activity was detected in the gene causes hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia respectively. Allele 21/74 (28.4%) LGSIL/ASCUS and in 5/8 (62.5%) HGSIL samples. A S of A986S polymorphism, is associated with higher levels of calcium correlation was observed between telomerase activity, hTERT mRNA and lower calciuria. expression and high risk HPV infection in HGSIL samples (p<0.001). CaSR acts exerting an inhibitory effect on the Na-Cl Cotransporter Telomerase activity assessment in cervical smears showed sensitivity (NCCT) of the distal convoluted tubule. and specificity for HGSILs 62.5% and 80.5% respectively, while To assess the effect of Calcium-Sensing receptor A986S polymorphism, hTERT mRNA expression assessment showed 87.5% sensitivity in 48 hypertensive women with mild-to-moderate hypertension, we and 86% specificity for HGSIL. Based on the above telomerase determined: Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, PTHi, 25(OH) vitamin assessment values it is suggested that the telomerase system might D, 1,25(OH) vitamin D, osteocalcin, deoxypiridinoline in urine, 24-hour be an appropriate diagnostic marker for cytology. However, the final 2 urine calcium and bone densitometry of the lumbar spine and studied evaluation must rely on a combination of all available test assessment by PCR Calcium Sensing receptor gene A986S polymorphism. data and clinical diagnosis. Genotype frequency was 69% for AA, 27% for AS and 4% for SS, with an allelic frequency of 82% for allele A and 18% for allele S. P0716. Mutation detection in Iranian patients affected with Cystic There wasn´t differences between patients with and without allele S in fibrosis calcium metabolism parameters, bone remodelling markers and bone F. Baldinotti1, M. Tabatabai1, V. Hadavi2, R. Kariminejad2, N. Almadani2, F. mineral density, except lower levels of phosphorus in patients without Afroozan2, H. Najmabadi2, P. Simi1; allele S (3.5+/- 0.5 vs 4.0 +/- 0.4; p=0.034). 1Laboratorio di Citogenetica e Genetica Molecolare, Azienda Ospedaliera Uni- Coclusions: The Calcium Sensing Receptor A986S Polymorphism have versitaria Pisana, Pisa, Italy, 2Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics no clinical significance in post-menopausal hypertensive women. Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Cystic fibrosis (CF), a common autosomal recessive disease, results P0714. Spectrum of DHCR7 gene mutation in 48 patients with from mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance SLOS and carrier frequency of the disease in Poland. regulator (CFTR) gene. Since the isolation of this gene, almost 1300 E. Ciara1, A. Jezela-Stanek1, M. Witsch-Baumgartner2, E. Malunowicz1, E. mutations and a large number of polymorphisms have been discovered. Popowska1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, D. Jurkie- It has been recognized as the most lethal genetic disease, CF often wicz1, P. Kowalski1, M. Nowaczyk3, G. Utermann2, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; causes death in children. The frequency and the spectrum of CFTRMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 235 gene mutations vary in different populations. Tel Hashomer Criteria The main object of this study was to determine the type of CF Total number criteria (criteria per mutations in the Iranian population and to perform prenatal diagnosis. Genotype patient) This study included 14 couples referred to our center. Using a test Major Minor panel of 31 known European mutations, we analyzed samples from Homozygote Mutation (n=11, each individual by multiplex OLA-PCR and ABI Prism 3100 genetics 17 (1.55) 14 (1.3) 20.5%) assays. At this point, for patients in whom we detected no mutation, Heterozygote Mutation (n=42, we performed SSCP and DNA sequencing. We identified the following 45 (1.07) 52 (1.24) 56.3%) six mutations in 30 of 54 CF chromosomes: dF508 (n=12), G542X (n=6), S466X (n=4), R1070Q (n=4), N1303K (n=2), 4005-1G->A (n=2). No Mutation (n=16, 23.2%) 16 (1) 15 (0.94) The overall detection rate was 41%. For the purpose of first trimester Among all cases, the frequency of Tel Hashomer criteria in homozygote prenatal diagnosis, we performed direct mutation analysis on fetuses mutations group was greater than other groups. Although the frequency from four CF families. The results showed that all four fetuses were of criteria in 16 patients who had none of these five mutations was less homozygous. than the other two groups, the number of major and minor criteria per patient was not as low as to decide not to examine mutations. P0717. The R369C mutation in the CBS gene: characterization and frequency P0719. Exon repetition mutations in Dyygve Melchior Clausen M. Janosik, B. Janosikova, J. Sokolova, V. Kozich; syndrome Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech Republic. E. Kinning1,2, C. Tufarelli1, S. Shackleton1, M. A. Aldred1, R. C. Trembath1,2; 1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2Leicestershire Genetics Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) deficiency is the most common Centre, Leicester, United Kingdom. cause of homocystinuria. More than 130 pathogenic mutations in CBS Dyggve Melchior Clausen syndrome (DMC OMIM 223800) is an gene were detected on ~550 homocystinuric alleles. One of them, autosomal recessive osteochondrodysplasia characterised by short the R369C mutation was described as a very frequent variant among stature with a short trunk, multiple bony abnormalities and mental newborns in Norway. In contrast, only four patient alleles carrying this retardation. The DMC gene on chromosome 18q21 encodes a protein mutation were detected worldwide. As the protein carrying R369C product, dymeclin with no homology to any known protein. To better was not yet characterized, we expressed this mutant by prokaryotic characterise the DMC gene we performed RT-PCR of dymeclin cDNA expression system and we examined the prevalence among in subjects from 2 kindreds and detected aberrantly sized products newborns. compared to control samples. Sequencing revealed a duplication of To characterize the R369C mutation, we expressed R369C mutant in exon 2 and repetition of 4 copies of exon 14 respectively. Fluorescent E.coli. Under physiological conditions (37°C) the mutant enzyme had dosage PCR and Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA were no detectable activity, and form aggregates. However, the addition of consistent with these findings. Southern blot analysis of the exon 14 pyridoxal-5-phosphate (PLP) increased the enzyme activity to 10% of repetition allowed us to further delineate the region of duplication and wild type enzyme. In addition, the PLP saturated enzyme was also studies underway are continuing to narrow down this region. Both activated by S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) similarly like wild type CBS. mutations lead to a frameshift introducing a premature stop codon with These data suggests that R369C is indeed pathogenic mutation, presumed loss of protein as the pathogenetic mechanism. although its activity may be stimulated. We analyzed 600 healthy newborns for the presence of R369C P0720. Three novel mutations in the second exon of CYP1B1 in mutation. The heterozygocity for the mutation was observed in 6/600 Iranian Primary Congenital Glaucoma patients samples, corresponding to expected incidence of homozygotes to 1:40.000 (95%CI 1:8.000-1:295.000). These data confirmed that B. Khoramian Tusi1,2, E. Elahi1,2, H. Amini3, R. Zareii3, A. Abdoollahi3, Y. Eslami3, R369C frequency in another European populations is also very high, M. Jabarvand3, S. Yazdani4, M. Pakravan4, N. Nilfrooshan5, Z. Behroozi6, M. Sanati2; supposingly leading to high frequency of homozygotes. 1Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Center for Ge- To conclude, the R369C mutation is a pathogenic variant which may netic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Farabi be activated by PLP and SAM and homozygocity for this variant may Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Labafi Nejad Hospital, Tehran, confers a mild clinical phenotype which may be missed by existing Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Rasool Akram Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of diagnostic procedure. Iran, 6Imam Hossein Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Supported by: Wellcome Trust grant, Research Project of Charles Primary Congenital Glaucoma (PCG) is an important cause of University No.VZ206100. childhood blindness in Iran. We aimed to determine the proportion of Iranian patients afflicted with PCG whose disease is due to mutations in P0718. Mutations and Fenotype/Genotype Relations in 69 FMF the cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) gene at locus GLC3A. Mutations Patients in both alleles of the gene result in the PCG phenotype. The gene H. Samli1, M. Solak1, O. Dogru2, E. Yuksel1, F. Ovali2; has three exons, two of which are coding. Most reported mutations 1Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Afyon, in the gene are located in the coding exons. In this part of the study, Turkey, 2Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Afyon, mutations were sought in exon 2 which is the first coding exon and has Turkey. approximately 1000 bp. Sixty six chromosomes from thirty three unrelated Iranian patients Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an inherited disorder afflicted with glaucoma at birth or before the age of 3 years old characterized by episodes of recurrent fever, arthritis and pleuritis as were studied. The second exon and neighboring intronic sequences well as development of amyloidosis. of CYP1B1 was amplified from DNA of peripheral blood in two In this study, the frequency of M694V, M694I, V726A, M680I and E148Q overlapping PCR reactions. PCR products were sequenced by the mutations and phenotype-genotype correlations among 69 patients di-deoxynucleotide termination protocol using fluorescent labeled with clinical diagnosis of FMF have been tested. The correlation nucleotides. Sequence data and chromatograms were analyzed by between genetic analysis and clinical findings were evaluated. the Sequencher software. Mutations were present in 53(76.8%) of 69 cases enrolled into Twenty alleles (30%) among the sixty six chromosomes studied study. Of 106 alleles 50(47.2%) were M694V, 9(8.5%) were V726A, had putative disease causing mutations in exon 2 of the CYP1B1 3(2.8%) were M694I, 9(8.5%) were E148Q and 9(8.5%) were M680I gene. Five distinct mutations were detected, three of which are mutations. novel. The new mutations included a nine base pair duplication In clinical evaluation according to Tel Hashomer criteria, the positive (c.N1166dupGCAACTTCA), a single nucleotide deletion (c.N553del major and minor criteria for patients with homozygote, heterozygote A), and a missense mutation (c.N887G>A; p.E173K). Additionally, and patients with no mutations were shown in table. six putative polymorphisms were identified. As reported for other Table. Total numbers of criteria stratified according to mutations populations, mutations in the second exon were less frequent than mutations in the third exon.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 236 P0721. Novel CLCN5 gene mutations in Spanish families with P0723. Quantification of cell-free fetal DNA in the maternal Dent disease circulation and its correlation with clinical outcome of E. Ramos-Trujillo1, H. González-Acosta1, C. Flores1, V. García-Nieto1, J. Ca- pregnancy macho Díaz2, E. Guillén Navarro3, S. Gracia Manzano3, F. Claverie-Martín 1; M. Korabecna1,2, A. Horinek2,3, Z. Ulcova-Gallova1,2, P. Calda2,3, K. Nouzova4, 1Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario N. S. de Candelaria, Santa H. Viskova3, D. Bezdickova2,3; Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 2Sección de Nefrología Pediátrica, Hospital Univer- 1Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 21st sitari Saint Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3General Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain. Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Gyncentrum, s.r.o., Prague, Dent disease is an X-linked renal tubular disorder characterized by Czech Republic. low-molecular-weight proteinuria, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, Objective: Recently, multiple studies has demonstrated the existence nephrocalcinosis and renal failure. This disease is associated with of cell-free fetal DNA in the blood of pregnant women. An elevation of mutations in the CLCN5 gene encoding the voltage-gated ClC- DNA concentration in maternal plasma has been determined in various 5 chloride channel that participates in the acidification of proximal cases of pregnancy complications (preeclampsia, preterm labor, tubule endosomes. Our goal was to identify and characterize CLCN5 polyhydramnion etc.) or cytogenetic abnormalities (fetal aneuploidy). mutations in Spanish patients with Dent disease. In our study, the concentration of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma Blood DNA from 11 unrelated patients and relatives was used for PCR has been measured during all trimesters of pregnancy and the results amplification. The CLCN5 coding exons and their intronic flanking were compared with clinical data. regions were analysed by automatic sequencing. Defects in pre-mRNA Methods: Fetal SRY-specific DNA quantification was carried out by splicing were analysed in blood samples by RT-PCR. real-time PCR method on the ABI PRISM 5700 and 7000 machines We identified 8 new mutations: 2 nonsense (R467X, R704X), 2 using the MGB probe and a couple of primers. Cell-free DNA isolated missense (C219R, W547G), 1 frameshift (976delG), and 3 splicing from plasma of 200 pregnant women were tested. (IVS2-2A>G, IVS3-6A>T, IVS9-30C>T). In some cases, the mutations Results: We have found statistically significant elevation of fetal DNA were shown to co-segregate with the disease. Analysis of RNA from in maternal plasma in the 3rd trimester both in the twin pregnancies with the patient with the mutation in intron 2 acceptor splice site showed two male fetuses (p = 0.037) and with one male and one female fetus an aberrant CLCN5 pre-mRNA splicing. A similar analysis of the other (p = 0.033), resp. We have seen even higher elevation of fetal DNA two intronic mutations, located at the polypyrimidine tract and near concentration (p = 0.096) for the IUGR and hypertension compared the branch site, respectively, showed no splicing defect. We also with the normal pregnancy women sample. No significant elevation found that the previously identified Alu insertion in the coding region of of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma has been demonstrated in CLCN5 led to a splicing defect that skipped exon 11. females with APA (antiphospholipide) syndrome (p = 0.511). These mutations predict structurally significant alterations of the ClC-5 Conclusion: Quantification of cell-free DNA in maternal plasma is a protein and are likely to result in loss of chloride channel function. The potentially useful marker for monitoring placental abnormalities, but absence of CLCN5 mutations in 2 patients indicates that variants in further studies concerning the mechanisms of its transfer, turnover and other genes could be associated with Dent disease. clearance in maternal plasma are needed. Funding source: Fundación Canaria de Investigación y Salud Supported by the grant no. 203/03/1025 of the Grant Agency of the (FUNCIS) Czech Republic. P0722. Molecular diagnosis of HED : a five years experience P0724. Hailey-Hailey disease as an examplary orthodisease M. Vincent1, N. Chassaing2, S. Bourthoumieu1, M. Cossee3, C. Colombies1, N. R. Kellermayer1, R. Szigeti2, A. Miseta3, M. Czako4, G. Kosztolanyi1,4; Janisse1, P. Calvas2; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary, 2County 1Medical Genetic Department, Toulouse, France, 2Medical Genetic Department Hospital of Baranya, Pecs, Hungary, 3Central Laboratory, University of Pecs, and INSERM U563, Toulouse, France, 3Medical Genetic Department, Stras- Pecs, Hungary, 4MTA-PTE Clinical Genetics Research Group, Pecs, Hungary. bourg, France. The term orthodisease has recently been introduced to define human Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is the most common diseases in which the pathogenic gene has orthologs in model organism form of over 150 different ectodermal dysplasias. This syndrome genomes. In this presentation Hailey-Hailey disease (HHD), a blistering is characterized by the triade : hypohidrosis, hypodontia and skin disorder due to haploinsufficiency of ATP2C1 is reviewed as an hypotrichosis. The X linked form, caused by a mutation in the ED1 orthodisease from a Saccharomyces cerevisiae perspective. ATP2C1 gene, represents the majority of HED. However a minority of HED is encodes the human secretory pathway Ca2+/Mn2+ ATPase hSPCA1 inherited as a dominant or recessive autosomal trait. These last result and is orthologous to the PMR1 gene initially identified in S. cerevisiae. from mutations in at least two genes EDAR and EDARADD. hSPCA1 fully complements PMR1 deficiency in yeast and pmr1Î” S. We carried out a mutational analysis of cervisiae has proved to be a valuable tool to screen ATP2C1 mutations ED1 gene in 145 unrelated HED families or sporadic cases between and address potential pathogenic/pharmacologic mechanisms in 2000 and 2005, Hailey-Hailey disease. We have recently found that a PMR1 deficient EDAR gene in 37 of 46 unrelated subjects with no mutation in ED1, yeast is less reactive to increasing levels of extracellular calcium EDARADD gene in 28 unrelated subjects neither ED1 nor EDAR similarly as HHD keartinocytes are. Additionally calcineurin inhibition HED. induced tolerance to high levels of extracellular calcium for a pmr1Î” Our investigations allowed us to better assess the implication of the strain suggesting a possible direct beneficial cellular mechanism of three loci in HED : calcineurin inhibition in the treatment of HHD. Our findings lend further 66% of HED were caused by mutation in ED1 gene (75% in affected evidence that this human skin disorder is an ideal example of an males versus 25% in affected females) orthodisease. about 25% of non ED1 HED were related to EDAR (2/3 males, 1/3 females) P0725. The novel 312-326del14 mutation of the connexin 26 gene and only one case presented a mutation in EDARADD gene. is the second common cause of non-syndromic sensorineural Review of clinical features showed no obvious phenotype/genotype hearing loss in patients with deafness from Bashkortostan correlation. We can only observe more sporadic cases in EDAR L. U. Dzhemileva, I. M. Khidiyatova, E. K. Khusnutdinova; related HED. Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. Our study supports a molecular diagnostic strategy based only on Several studies have reported that mutations in the GJB2 gene are a the implication frequency of the different genes because of the large common cause of non-syndromic hearing impairment. More than 80 variability of clinical expression and the smaller size of most of the different mutations of the GJB2 gene have been reported. Many of families making linkage analysis difficult. A exception should be made them are “private” mutations, they have been observed in only one for a consanguineous family where EDAR and EDARADD should be or a few pedigrees, but examples of very common alleles have also tested first. been identified in several populations including the 35delG mutation in Caucasians (70% of all GJB2 pathogenic alleles), the 167delTMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 237 allele in Ashkenazi Jews (carrier rate is 3-4%), the 235delC allele in the 12 exon RPE65 gene in 6 unrelated patients with sporadic form of Asian populations (80% pathogenic GJB2 alleles among Japanese). RP from Bashkortostan. All these patients carried 1308delT mutation in We report the identification of a novel 14bp deletion of the coding homozygous form and have similar fundus appearances characterised region GJB2 gene in a Russian family with autosomal dominant as a maculodistrophy. Frequency of 1308delT mutation of the RPE65 neurosensory deafness. This mutation results in the deletion of five gene among the patients with RP from Bashkortostan is 0.05 on mutant amino acids, including K105, an amino acid residue, which is highly chromosomes. 1308delT of RPE65 gene heterozygous carriers were conserved throughout evolution. The 14bp deletion co-segregates not identified in 77 healthy controls from Bashkortostan. with the diseases phenotype in these patients family, but is not found Identification of the molecular defects underlying retinal degeneration in unaffected relatives or 50 normal individuals. The 312-326del14 will allow clinicians to establish more accurate diagnoses and prospects mutation is believed to be pathological: first, because of it location and for prenatal diagnostic. conservation and, second, because no change has been observed in a series of normal control. 312-326del14 mutation of the connexin P0728. Sulfatase activities are regulated by the interaction of the 26 gene accounts for up to 3% of pathogenic GJB2 alleles among sulfatase modifying factor 1 (SUMF1) with SUMF2 patients with nonsyndromic hearing impairment from Bashkortostan. M. Cosma1, E. Zito1, A. Fraldi1, S. Pepe1, I. Annunziata1, G. Kobinger2, P. Di So, the 312-326del14 mutation in GJB2 is the second most frequent Natale3, A. Ballabio1,3; cause of non-syndromic hearing impairment in our region. 1TIGEM Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2University of Pennsylvania, Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Faculty of P0726. At least 38% of Iranian Primary Congenital Glaucoma Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy. patients carry two mutated alleles of CYP1B1 Sulfatases undergo a unique post-translational modification that F. Chitsazian1,2, E. Elahi1,2, H. Amini3, R. Zareii3, A. Abdoollahi3, Y. Eslami3, converts a highly conserved cysteine located within their active site M. Jabarvand3, S. Yazdani4, M. Pakravan5, N. Nilfrooshan6, Z. Behroozi7, M. into formylglycine. This modification is necessary for sulfatase catalytic Sanati2; activity, and it is promoted by the protein product of SUMF1, the gene 1Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Research Center mutated in Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency (MSD). A paralogous gene, for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, SUMF2, was discovered because of its sequence similarity to SUMF1. 3Farabi Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Labafi Njad Hospital, Teh- Both immunofluorescence and co-immunoprecipitation experiments ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Labafi Nejad Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic show that SUMF2 co-localizes with SUMF1 within the endoplasmic of Iran, 6Rasool Akram Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7Imam Hos- reticulum and that the two proteins form cysteine-mediated sein Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. heterodimers. Furthermore, we show that SUMF1 and SUMF2 are Glaucoma is a heterogeneous group of optic neuropathies characterized also able to form homodimers. We have previously demonstrated that by degeneration of the optic nerve, usually associated with elevated co-transfection of SUMF1 with sulfatase cDNAs greatly enhances intraocular pressure. Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), which the activities of over-expressed sulfatases. Now we obtained data becomes apparent at birth or before the age of three, is a major cause demonstrating that SUMF2 inhibits the enhancing effect of SUMF1 of childhood blindness. We aimed to determine the proportion of Iranian on sulfatases. These results suggest that SUMF1-SUMF2 interaction PCG patients whose disease is due to mutations in the cytochrome represents an additional level of control of the sulfatase activities. P4501B1 (CYP1B1) gene. Mutations in both alleles of the gene result in the PCG phenotype. The gene has three exons, two of which are P0729. Diagnosis of lysosomal storage diseases in Romanian coding. In this part of the study, mutations were sought in exon 3 which patients is the second coding exon and has approximately 600 bp. C. Drugan, T. C. Drugan, P. Grigorescu-Sido, V. Cret, I. Olteanu, G. Jebeleanu; One hundred thirty six chromosomes from 68 unrelated Iranian PCG University of Medicine and Pharmacy Cluj, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. patients were studied. The third exon of CYP1B1 was amplified Lysosomal storage diseases represent an important group among from DNA of peripheral blood by PCR. The amplified products were inherited metabolic disorders. To date, more than 40 different lysosomal sequenced by the di-deoxynucleotide termination protocol. Sequence storage diseases have been identified, characterised by a deficiency of a data and chromatograms were analyzed by the Sequencher software. lysosomal protein. We report the experience of the Romanian centre for Fifty four alleles (40 %) among the 136 chromosomes studied had the diagnosis of lysosomal storage diseases. 106 suspects originating putative disease causing mutations in exon 3 of the CYP1B1 gene. from all regions of Romania were referred to our centre for further Seven distinct mutations were detected, two of which are novel. evaluation and specific diagnosis. Initial work-up was based on clinical The new mutations were c.N1472C>T (p.R368C) and c.N1565A>G and radiological evaluation. Lysosomal enzyme assays in peripheral (p.I399V). Additionally, two putative polymorphisms were identified. leukocytes were performed according to standard techniques and Among seventy nine Iranian PCG patients in whom exon 2 and/or exon indicated specific deficiencies in 46 patients (43.4%). Gaucher disease 3 of the CYP1B1 gene were sequenced, thirty carried two putative was diagnosed in 34 patients, followed by the mucopolysaccharidoses disease causing mutations in the gene, indicating that mutations in and mucolipidoses patients (5 mucopolysaccharidosis III B patients, CYP1B1 account for disease in at least 38% of Iranian PCG patients. one mucopolysaccharidosis VII patient and one mucolipidosis II patient) and the group of sphingolipidoses - other than Gaucher P0727. Novel 1308delT mutation of the RPE65 gene in patients disease (2 GM1 gangliosidosis patients, one GM2 gangliosidosis, with nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa from Bashkortostan one metachromatic leukodystrophy and one Fabry disease patient). E. R. Grinberg, L. U. Dzhemileva, E. K. Khusnutdinova; Frequent mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene were screened Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. by PCR-RFLP and indicated an important prevalence of the N370S Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a group of inherited disorders in wich allele (56.45%) followed by the L444P (20.97%) and recNciI (4.84%) abnormalities of the photoreceptors or the retinal pigment epithelium alleles. Sporadic, unknown mutations accounted for 17.74% of the of the retina lead to progressive visual loss. RP is a clinically and mutant alleles in Gaucher disease patients. Genotype-phenotype genetically heterogeneous group of retinal degenerative diseases. correlations in Romanian Gaucher disease patients were similar to The prevalence of RP is 19 to 27 per 100,000 in general population. those reported in other Caucasian populations, but also indicated At least 40 different genes or loci are known to cause nonsyndromic specific characteristics. We conclude that lysosomal storage diseases RP. RPE65 has a crucial role in the metabolism of vitamin A in the and especially Gaucher disease may represent an important pathology visual cycle. Gu et al. (1997) estimated that RPE65 mutations account in our population, and that specific laboratory diagnosis and follow-up for approximately 5% of autosomal recessive childhood-onset severe is the key step in the accurate management of these patients. retinal dystrophy. We studied patients with RP and their relatives from Bashkortostan. We examined all 14 exons of RPE65 gene in 119 unrelated patients with RP and 77 unaffected individuals by single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis (SSCP) and direct sequencing. Patients were examined clinically and with visual function tests. We report the identification of a novel 1bp deletion (1308delT) ofMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 238 P0730. Lack of association of TaqIB polymorphism in the CETP We have done CGD screening by NBT slide test, quantitative NBT gene with HDL cholesterol levels and the risk of CAD in Turkish and flowcytometric analysis using DHR123 for the patients and their population. family. M. Alikasifoglu1, L. Tokgozoglu1, S. Humphries2, D. Aktas1, V. Sansoy3, A. Since characterization of mutation is very important for detection of Onat3, E. Tuncbilek1; carriers and prenatal diagnosis, genomic DNA from 10 unrelated 1Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 2UCL Medical School, London, United male patients with X-linked CGD was isolated and CYBB exons were Kingdom, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. amplified. PCR products were subjected to SSCP analysis on silver Genetic variants at the cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) stained polyacrylamide gels. locus have been associated with CETP activity. Several studies have Our CGD screening result over 24 patients shows that X-CGD is as reported that the CETP TaqIB polymorphism is associated with HDL common as autosomal recessive CGD in Iran, which was roughly 50%. cholesterol levels and the risk of coronary artery disease (CAD), but Sequence analysis for PCR products related to abnormal migration the results are inconsistent. We have examined allele frequencies on SSCP gels for the first seven exons of CYBB gene from X-CGD and lipid associations for the common CETP TaqIB polymorphism in a patients didn’t show any mutation up to now. sample of 317 population controls and 185 angiographically evaluated We are now continuing sequencing by ABI prism BigDye terminators. patients with CAD. The prevalence of the TaqIB2 allele was 0.42 in During the course of study any new mutation will be reported to Human population controls and 0.4 in CAD (CETP distribution does not differ Mutation Data Bank. from H-W p=0.98 and p=0.62). After adjustment for study age, sex, body mass index (BMI), diabetes, activity, alcohol and smoking, TaqIB P0733. Screening of mutations in ENG and ALK1 genes in genotype was not associated with HDL cholesterol levels and the risk hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia patients using denaturing of CAD (p=0.46). high performance liquid chromatography The CETP TaqIB polymorphism did not show a significant interaction S. Tourret1, S. Lefebvre1, S. Pinson1, H. Plauchu2, G. Lesca1, S. Giraud1; with other risk factors in influencing CAD risk. Our findings do not 1Laboratoire de Genetique, HCL, Lyon, France, 2Service de Genetique, HCL, support the hypothesis that a genetic variant resulting in lowered CETP Lyon, France. activity is associated with reduced risk of coronary atherosclerosis. Background: Our previous molecular studies of HHT patients was based on heteroduplex analysis, which allows a rapid screening at low P0731. Clinical Findings and Mutation Analysis of Capillary cost but has not a very high sensibility, needs the use of radioactivity Morphogenesis Protein 2 (CMG2) Gene in Two Sibling Patients and remains a manual technique. Methods: Our protocol was based with Juvenile Hyaline Fibromatosis on touchdown PCR using the Optimase Taq and the Wave system H. Acar1, Z. Tosun2, H. Muslumanoglu3, O. Cilingir3, N. Savaci2; (TransgenomicÒ). The 90 different mutations, previously found in our 1Department of Medical Genetics, Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, patients, covering most of the coding sequence were used to test the Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Plastic Surgery, Selcuk University, Meram sensibility of our reaction conditions.Results: All the 90 mutations (63 Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Osmangazi substitutions and 27 insertions/deletions) were detected, including Selçuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Eskisehir, Turkey. the 14 not detected by the heteroduplex technique. We subsequently Juvenile hyaline fibromatosis (JHF) is an autosomal recessive trait that screened DNA from 36 HHT unrelated patients with a confirmed clinical usually presents skin lesions, often on the scalp and ears, around the diagnosis. We found a mutation in 28 patients, corresponding to a nose and on the hands, which require recurrent excision, in the first mutation rate of 78%. Twenty mutations were found in ALK1, including years of life. Diagnosis is confirmed by histological examination of the 13 missense mutations, 4 insertions/deletions, 2 splice site mutations skin, which typically shows the presence of hyaline deposition in the and 1 nonsense mutation. Nine mutations were found in ENG, including dermis. 5 insertions/deletions, 1 missense mutations, 1 nonsense mutation, we present a 12 year follow-up of clinical findings in two siblings (one and 2 splice sites mutations which were confirmed on cDNA level. male and one female) with JHF in a Turkish family. Both patients have Ten mutations were novel. A patient had a mutation in both genes. undergone eleven operations for skin tumors and gingival hypertrophy. Segregation study is in course in his family. Conclusions: Compared to In the latest examination, they had numerous subcutaneous nodules systematic sequencing, dHPLC is a more simple and faster technique, on the scalp, face and fingers, but no gingival hypertrophy or joint with a lower cost. It appears to have a much higher sensibility than the contractures. The male patient had big tumors on his ears and heteroduplex technique and then, dHPLC is a good screening method osteolytic bone lesions on his hands, more than in his sister. for a frequent disorder like HHT, caused by mutations in, at least, two In molecular genetic analysis, we undertook mutation screening of the different genes. capillary morphogenesis protein 2 (CMG2) gene, which was mapped to chromosome 4q21, in members of the family. By direct sequencing, we P0734. Screening of six candidate genes involved in the TGF-b/ have identified mutations in the probands and both parents, who have BMP pathways in HHT patients without mutation in ENG or ALK1 a consanguinous marriage. Both sibling patients were homozygous for G. Lesca1, N. Burnichon1, H. Plauchu2, M. Marion3, S. Pinson1, G. Plessis4, S. a 25816 TT mutation in IVS17, and both parents were heterozygous Odent5, O. Boute6, S. Rivière7, R. Harle8, A. Calender1, S. Giraud1; (GT) for this variant. The elder brother had another new heterozygous 1Laboratoire de Genetique, HCL, Lyon, France, 2Service de Genetique, HCL, mutation, insG at 2497 in IVS7 while he was heterozygous (GT) for the Lyon, France, 3INSERM U271, Lyon, France, 4Service de Genetique, CHU IVS17 mutation of CMG2. These mutations have not been reported Clemenceau, Caen, France, 5Service de Genetique Medicale, Hopital Pon- previously. tchaillou, Rennes, France, 6Service de Genetique Clinique, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 7SErvice de Medecine Interne, Hopital saint-Eloi, P0732. Molecular Diagnosis of X-CGD in Iran Montpellier, France, 8Service de Medecine Interne, Hopital de la Conception, S. Teimourian, Z. Rezvani, Z. Pourpak, M. Moin, R. Safaralizadeh, F. Fattahi, Marseille, France. S. Mamishi, P. Tabatabaei, M. Fazlollahi, G. Khotaei, M. Gharagozlou, A. Far- Background: About 10% of HHT patients have no mutation in ENG or houdi, L. Atarod, M. Mansouri, M. Heidarzadeh; ALK1, even after extensive screening. Linkage analysis is hampered Immunology , Asthma and Allergy Research Institute Tehran university of medi- by the age-related penetrance of the disease, the wide variability of cal sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the phenotype and phenocopies. Candidate gene study may, indeed, Chronic Granulomatous Disease (CGD) is an inherited phagocytic represent a valuable alternative approach in HHT. disorder caused by mutations in NADPH oxidase subunits. Patients Methods: RNA extracted from lymphoblastoid cells was used for with CGD have life-threatening bacterial and fungal infections. It has cDNA sequencing of six genes, SMAD1, SMAD4, SMAD5, SMAD7, been reported that most common presentation of the disease is caused BMPR1A and BMPR2, in 19 HHT patients without mutation in ENG by mutation in CYBB gene located on the X chromosome (Xp21.1), and ALK1. RNA was extracted from cultured endothelial cells (EC) coding for gp91phox. Diagnosis of CGD is made by demonstrating from hepatic dilated vessels of one HHT2 transplanted patient to test absent or markedly reduced oxidase activity in stimulated nutrophils. gene expression. In order to facilitate final diagnosis of CGD and mutation analysis of Results: A novel single-base silent substitution was found in BMPR1A. CYBB gene, we have developed molecular diagnosis of the disease. A novel SMAD1 non conservative substitution was found in one patientMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 239 (c.738G>C), changing a poorly conserved methionine to an isoleucin. essential for early embryonic development. Uniparental disomy (UPD) Two novel conservative variants were found in SMAD7 as well as is the most studied form of loss of imprinting gene function in human a novel non conservative substitution in one patient (c.738G>C), reproduction. But literature data have shown only a minor contribution changing a glycin to an arginin. This letter variant was absent in of UPD to embryonic lethality. It is possible that chromatin remodeling controls and was not transmitted to the two affected daughters. All of changes connected with abnormal DNA methylation during early these genes were expressed in EC, except BMPR1A. embryogenesis, rather than abnormalities in chromosome segregation Conclusions: Our results are not in favor of a major role of these genes per se, may have deleterious effects on imprinted gene function. in HHT. Mutations of SMAD4 gene are not a common cause of HHT The aim of our work was to analyze the methylation patterns of the classical disease, i.e. in absence of JP. The lack of expression of promoter region of SNRPN gene (15q11) in extraembryonic tissues BMPR1A in EC cells is in accordance with the absence of reported (extraembryonic mesoderm and cytotrophoblast) of 40 first-trimester features of HHT in patients JP with a mutation in this gene. spontaneous abortions with normal karyotype and 6 induced abortions as a control group. DNA methylation of the SNRPN promoter on the P0735. Molecular study of WISP3 in 9 families originating maternal homolog only was found in all studied embryos. This result from the Middle-East and presenting with progressive shows a normal epigenetic status of SNRPN. No differences in the pseudorheumatoid pysplasia: identification of two novel methylation pattern of SNRPN between spontaneous and induced mutations, and description of a founder effect abortions were found. Probably, methylation changes of the SNRPN V. Delague1,2, E. Chouery2, S. Corbani2, I. Ghanem3, S. Aamar4, J. Fischer5, E. promoter make no significant contribution to the early lethality of Levy-Lahad6, A. Urtizberea7, A. Mégarbané8; embryos with normal karyotypes. However, further data with analysis 1INSERM U491, Marseille, France, 2Université Saint-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, of other imprinted genes is necessary to determine the effects of loss 3Hôtel-Dieu de France, Beirut, Lebanon, 4Hadassah Hospital, Mt. Scopus, of imprinted genomic loci functions during early stages of human Israel, 5Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France, 6Shaare Zedek Medi- embryonic development. cal Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 7Institut de Myologie, Paris, France, 8Université Saint-Jospeh, Beirut, Lebanon. P0738. RNA analysis in IPAH patients reveals mutations in We hereby report the molecular study of the WISP3 gene in 9 unrelated BMPR2 missed by routine DNA screening. consanguineous families originating from the Middle-East: 3 from V. James, M. A. Aldred, R. E. Harrison, R. C. Trembath; Lebanon, 5 from Syria, and 1 from Palestinian Bedouin descent, all University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. affected with Progressive Pseudorheumatoid Dysplasia (PPD). Five Heterozygous mutations in the gene bone morphogenetic protein different sequence variations were identified in the WISP3 gene, two receptor II (BMPR2) underlie idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension of them being new mutations: the c.589G◊C transversion at codon (IPAH). Direct sequencing of our familial cohorts has left approximately 197, responsible for a splicing defect (A197fsX201); and the c.536_ 30% without identified mutations. We hypothesise that a proportion 537delGT deletion (C179fsX), both in exon 3. In all other families, of our PAH cohorts have mutations which go undetected by current the affected patients were homozygous for a previously described screening methods. nonsense mutation, namely c.156C◊A (C52X). Interestingly, in the To investigate this hypothesis we performed mRNA analysis on latter families, the C52X mutation was always found associated with 4 patients with mutations in BMPR2 and 6 familial patients without a novel c.248G◊A (G83E) variation, suggesting the existence of a mutations, all of which genomic DNA has previously been screened. founder effect. Total RNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples and RT-PCR performed. We confirmed that mutation IVS7 +3del T leads to aberrant P0736. The NSD1 transcript defective in Sotos syndrome splicing of exon 7. In addition, we identified a deletion of exon 2 in escapes nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) in leukocytes and is FAM19, subsequently confirmed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe alternative spliced in subsets of patients and controls amplification (MLPA) using genomic DNA. M. Duno, F. Skovby, M. Schwartz; Allele specific analysis of common coding polymorphisms was Dept. of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Copenhagen, Copenhagen, carried out on 6 patients and 3 unaffected relatives using quantitative Denmark. primer extension assays. FAM03 was identified as having a marked Sotos syndrome (Sos), characterized by large head circumference, reduction of one allele. No mutation identified by RT-PCR suggesting dysmorphic facial features, advanced bone age, and mental the defect may reside in the unscreened promoter region. This case impairment, belongs to the family of overgrowth syndromes. The alone demonstrates the potential for allelic expression studies as a disorder is due to haploinsufficiency of the NSD1 gene. In the method of screening pathogenic defects. The assay also confirmed Japanese population ~50% of Sos patients are deleted for the entire a reduction of the mutant bearing allele in two cases with previously NSD1 locus, whereas only ~10% of Caucasian patients harbour a identified mutations. deletion. The remaining Sos patients have point mutations or indels These results indicate that a proportion of pathogenic defects are not in NSD1; more that 100 different aberrations have been identified so detected by current DNA screening methods. RNA analysis can form far. The 23 exons give rise to an open reading frame of 8088bp, which a valuable part of mutation screening strategies to identify BMPR2 makes mutation screening quite laborious and expensive.We have mutations in PAH, and also improve understanding of their functional sequenced NSD1 leukocyte cDNA isolated from genetically verified consequence. Sos patients and control individuals. Surprisingly, both point mutations and indels were confidently detected at the cDNA level. A subset of P0739. Spectrum of GJB2 mutations in autosomal recessive patients and controls exhibited a distinct splicing pattern, where the non-syndromic deaf patients of Kashan, Iran proportion of alternatively spliced transcripts varied quite extensively. E. Taherzadeh1, B. Azadeh2, T. Ehteshamzadeh2, K. Kahrizi1, Y. Shafeghati1, N. Thus, although Sos is caused by haploinsufficiency of NSD1, the Nikzat1, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Mohseni1, R. J. H. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1; mRNA apparently escapes nonsense-mediated decay in leukocytes. 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation This suggests the possibility of cDNA mutation screening. Moreover, Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Welfare Organization of Esfahan, the observed variation in splicing patterns could potentially explain the Esfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology Research Labo- clinical variability observed among patients with Sotos syndrome. ratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. P0737. Epigenetic status of the SNRPN gene in human Hearing loss is the most common sensory defect in humans, affecting spontaneous abortions 1 in 1000 neonates, with over half of these cases predicted to be E. A. Sazhenova, A. A. Kashevarova, I. N. Lebedev, S. A. Nazarenko; hereditary in nature. Most hereditary hearing loss is inherited in a Institute of medical genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. recessive fashion, accounting for approximately 80% of non-syndromic 15-20% clinically recognized pregnancies end in early embryonic hearing loss (NSHL). Mutations in GJB2, which encodes connexin death. For approximately 40% of abortions the genetic reasons for 26 subunit beta 2, are a major cause of inherited deafness in most developmental abnormalities are unknown. Probably, in some cases populations. We studied 35 probands with ARNSHL from 35 families the reproductive wastage may be due to defects of imprinted genes living in the historic city of Kashan (population 40,000), in EsfahanMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 240 province in central Iran. Mutation screening of GJB2 was performed P0742. SYT-SSX fusion genes and prognosis in synovial by amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS)-PCR for the sarcoma: a retrospecitve study of 51 patients from two detection of 35delG. We then analyzed all samples, excluding 35delG institutiones homozygote samples, by DHPLC and direct sequencing. In this study, I. Kokovic1, M. Bracko1, R. Golouh1, H. J. J. M. van Krieken2; we identified three patients homozygous for 35delG, one homozygous 1Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2UMC St Radboud, Nijmegen, The for the 312del14 mutation and two patients with the polymorphism Netherlands. V153I. Based on our data the 35delG was the most prevalent mutation Synovial sarcoma (SS) is characterized by the t(X;18)(p11;q11) in this population. chromosome translocation, which results in generating either SYT- SSX1, SYT-SSX2 or, infrequently, SYT-SSX4 fusion gene. The P0740. VLA-4 and Multiple Sclerosis in Italian population. association of SYT-SSX fusion types with morphology and prognosis V. Andreoli1, I. Manna1, P. Valentino2, A. La Russa1, M. Liguori1, A. Clodomiro2, in SS has been confirmed in several studies. In the present study we R. Cittadella1; characterized SYT-SSX fusion types and evaluated the impact of two 1Istituto di Scienze Neurologiche, Pianolago di Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Istituto di different fusions on clinical course of 51 patients with primary SS. Neurologia-Università "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy. The SYT-SSX fusion transcripts were detected in 47/50 (94%) of In Multiple Sclerosis (MS), an autoimmune disease of the central tumors with adequate RNA for RT-PCR analysis. Contrary to our nervous system caused by an interplay of environmental and expectations and some other studies, we could not confirm strong genetic factors, recurrent infiltration of lymphocytes and monocytes association of the fusion type and histology observed previously. producing inflammation in the brain and spinal cord, with consequent Furthermore, we could not confirm the impact of the fusion type or demyelination and axonal degeneration. Trafficking of this white any clinico-pathological variable on survival of patients with synovial cells into the CNS results from the binding of the cell adhesion sarcoma. Patients whose tumors had the SYT-SSX1 fusion showed a molecule alpha4beta1-integrin (very late antigen-4 VLA-4) with its trend toward better survival, although the difference between survival corresponding ligand, vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM- curves was not significant . 1), expressed on brain endothelial cells.Recently, several studies Slovenian group of patients is interesting with respect to several demonstrated that treatment of MS patients with an antibody against molecular findings. Thus, tumors with SYT-SSX2 fusion predominated alpha-4 subunit, which inhibits the interaction of VLA-4 with VCAM-1, in this group (73.5%), contrary to Dutch group, where tumors with SYT- prevents or limits the development of brain lesions. The effects of this SSX1 fusion predominated (61.5%). Furthermore, we found unusually antagonism of alpha-4 integrin on the formation of brain lesions are so high proportion of biphasic tumors with SYT-SSX2 fusion in Slovenian far unknown. We hypothesized that, to understand the autoimmune group (78%). inflammatory response in MS, the polymorphic VLA-4 gene could be In conclusion, neither the association between genotype and involved as candidate for genetic susceptibility or drug resistance to morphology of SS, nor prognostic value of SYT-SSX fusion type is the disease. We investigated the association of two single nucleotide absolute as it appeared in early studies. polymorphisms at position 269 in the promoter region of exon 1 and 3061 in the exon 24 of the VLA-4 gene, through a case-control study P0743. Molecular basis of holoprosencephaly: large deletions involving 280 Italian patients of the Calabria region with definite MS account for at least 10% in conceptuses and 1.5% in live births and 255 age-, gender- and ethnicity-matched healthy controls. Our C. Dubourg1,2, C. Bendavid1,2, I. Gicquel2, L. Pasquier3, M. R. Durou1, S. results showed no significant differences in the distribution of the two Odent3, V. David1,2; polymorphisms between MS patients and controls, suggesting that, 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Rennes, France, 2UMR 6061, Faculté despite a biological plausibility, this VLA-4 gene polymorphisms are de Médecine, Rennes, France, 3Unité de Génétique Médicale, Rennes, France. not a significant genetic risk factor for the susceptibility to MS in Italian Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a common development defect affecting patients. the forebrain and the face. The disease is genetically heterogeneous. We have collected 650 samples, 300 of them corresponding to typical P0741. Fas-dependent apoptosis at interaction of tumor cells HPE. We have systematically analysed the four main genes of HPE and lymphocytes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF), and identified 46 point mutations. L. B. Ginkul; Studying of two additional genes, GLI2 and TWSG, is in progress, Institute of Cytology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. and we have found 3 missense mutations (two in GLI2 and one in Prognosis of tumor growth depends on the capacity of tumor cells for TWSG) as yet. Point mutations, therefore, have been identified in only induction of apoptosis in immune system cells and on the capacity of 17% of the typical HPE cases (20.5% in living children and 12.5% in immune system cells to induce apoptosis in tumor cells. The aim of this fetus). These data suggest either other alterations in the known HPE study was to reveal expression of Fas and FasL in mouse hepatoma genes like large deletions, or the implication of other genes not yet MH-22a, histiocytic sarcoma J-774 and syngenic splenocytes on identified. combined cultivation in vitro by indirect immunofluorescence staining. In order to detect microdeletions in the four main HPE genes, we used The expression of Fas in cultures of MH-22a, J-774 and in clonal lines real time quantitative PCR. 10% of conceptuses and 1.5% of born alive after their combined cultivation in vitro with syngenic splenocytes children presented deletions. So this kind of alteration is significant fluctuated from 5 to 80 in hepatocytes and from 10 to 100 in histiocytes. and must be tested as a matter of routine for each sample analysed for In splenocytes the expression of Fas rose to 100 %. Expression of point mutations. That’s why we developed the QMPSF method which FasL in hepatocytes was not seen and it rose to 70 % in histiocytes. is a low cost method and allows the screening of several genes in the Expression of FasL in splenocytes was about 40-70 %. Expression same experiment. of Fas and FasL was not seen in control cells in experiments with Moreover we initiated a pangenomic approach by CGH array. Genes hepatocytes and splenocytes. Expression of Fas in experiments with residing in these potential deleted regions will be considered as clonal lines J-774 and splenocytes was seen in only half of cases, as in candidate genes for HPE. histiocytes and splenocytes. In controls, expression of Fas in histiocytes and splenocytes was revealed in half of cases and expression of FasL P0744. A novel missense mutation in a C2 domain of OTOF in histiocytes was from 60 to 100 % and in splenocytes from 0 to 50 results in autosomal recessive sensorineural hearing loss %. These experimental results on expression of Fas and FasL in M. Tekin1, D. Akcayoz1, A. Incesulu2; tumor cells of different histogenesis at their interaction with syngenic 1Division of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara University Shool of Medicine, Ankara, splenocytes has shown that Fas-dependent apoptosis could allow Turkey, 2Department of ENT, Ankara Social Security Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. tumor cells to escape from the immune system of the organism. Screening of 12 Turkish families with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss without GJB2 and mtDNA A1555G mutations for 11 previously known loci revealed a family in which the phenotype segregated with the DFNB9 (OTOF) locus. Three affected children were later found to carry the novel homozygous c.3033T>C (p.Leu1011Pro) mutation in exon 25 of OTOF. Both parentsMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 241 were heterozygote for the mutation. p.Leu1011Pro alters a conserved pristanic acid, pipecolic acid and plasmalogens were performed by leucine residue in the C2D domain of otoferlin and is negative in 100 Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS). In some cases chromosomes obtained from normal hearing Turkish persons. This digitonin permeabilisation of cultured fibroblast was realised. Molecular mutation expands the mutational spectrum in OTOF and points out the diagnostic involved sequencing of chosen exons of PEX1 and cDNA functional importance of C2 domains in otoferlin. sequencing was used to detect mutations in ABCD1 gene causing X- This study was supported by the Ankara University Scientific Research ALD. Primary hyperoxaluria and mevalonic aciduria were determined Projects (Grant# 20030809103) and Turkish Academy of Sciences by GC/MS analysis of urinary organic acids. (MT/TUBA-GEBIP/2001-2-19). We are grateful to Dr. Susan Kupka Results: Two patients with peroxisome biogenesis disorder and three from the University of Tubingen, Germany for providing us oligoprimers cases of nongeneralised peroxisomal disease with fatal course were which were partially used in this study. revealed. X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy with variable phenotypes - childhood cerebral, adrenoneuromyeloneuropathy, adult cerebral P0745. Cohen syndrome: Mutational and transcriptional analysis and until now asymptomatic form (after bone marrow transplantation) of COH1 have been found in 7 patients of male gender. One case of primary W. Seifert1,2, M. Holder3, S. Spranger4, M. Hoeltzenbein5, E. Rossier6, G. Mae- hyperoxaluria type I and mevalonic aciduria with hyper IgD were also gawa7, H. Dollfus8, K. H. Chrzanowska9, D. Horn10, H. C. Hennies1; diagnosed. 1University of Cologne, Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, Conclusions: During last 10 years inherited disorders of peroxisomal 2Free University, Faculty of Biology, Chemistry, and Pharmacy, Berlin, Ger- compartment have been definitively proved for 14 patients. Besides many, 3Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, Génétique médicale, Lille, France, mutations presented previously we present a novel mutation of ABCD1 4Praxis für Humangenetik, Bremen, Germany, 5Max Planck Institute for Molecu- gene - c.971G>C (R324P). lar Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 6University of Ulm, Dept. of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 7University of Toronto, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, P0747. Detection His1069Gln mutation by ARMS test and a Canada, 8Hôpital de Hautepierre, Service de Génétique Medicale, Strasbourg, seminested PCR in Slovak patients with Wilson disease France, 9Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Dept. of Medical Genetics, War- H. Poláková1, B. Katrincsáková2, G. Minárik2, V. Ferák2, E. Feráková2, A. saw, Poland, 10Charité, University Medicine of Berlin, Inst. of Medical Genetics, Ficek2, I. Zmetáková2, M. Baldovič2, V. Kupčová3, M. Žigrai4, &. Kádasi1; Berlin, Germany. 1Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia, Cohen syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, clinically 2Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular highly variable and mainly characterized by developmental retardation, Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Comenius University, Department of Internal craniofacial dysmorphism, retinal dystrophy, and neutropenia. In 2003, Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Comenius University, Neurological Clinic, a novel gene, COH1, on chromosome 8q22 was described, and we Bratislava, Slovakia. and others have identified mutations in patients with Cohen syndrome Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper therein. Here we describe new molecular findings in thirteen patients metabolism. More than 250 disease-causing mutations have been with Cohen syndrome, descending from eight families originating from identified in ATP7B gene. Some of these mutations are frequent in France, Germany, Poland, Turkey, and the U.K., with mutations in specific populations, which may help to introduce rapid diagnostic COH1. We identified fourteen different mutations, nine of these were procedures based on direct DNA analysis into routine clinical practice. novel, including four nonsense mutations, four frame shift mutations, The His1069Gln mutation in exon 14 is the most frequent one, and one potential splice site mutations. Our data contribute to further accounting for approximately 30-63% of all mutations in Caucasian confining the phenotypic spectrum of Cohen syndrome; a consistent patients. The aim of the present work was to introduce direct DNA- genotype/phenotype correlation, however, has not been established so based analysis into routine molecular screening for the above mutation far. All data released until now indicate that Cohen syndrome is mainly in Slovak WD patients and to clarify its frequency in patients as well caused by mutations in COH1 that result in a defective COH1 protein as in a control DNA samples. Two different DNA-based methods to through frame shift or nonsense sequence alterations. The lack of a detect His1069Gln mutation have been used: ACRS (amplification second pathogenic mutation in some patients points to the existence of created restriction site) for Alw21I in combination with nested PCR and further alternative exons and/or other transcripts of COH1. Therefore, amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS). The reliability and we have embarked on a detailed analysis of COH1 transcript variants discriminating power of these techniques was tested on samples of by RT-PCR and Northern hybridization. Furthermore, we are studying WD patients homozygous and heterozygous for His1069Gln mutation the expression of COH1 in humans and mice with respect to the and on random DNA samples, and confirmed by direct sequencing. different splice forms. Localization and specificity of the protein, which ARMS test seems to be more reproducible and precise. In summary, is similar to VPS13p from yeast and therefore supposed to be involved the mutation His1069Gln is the most frequent in either two copies or in intracellular protein sorting, are being characterized in order to shed one copy in Slovak WD patients. In the control DNA samples it was light on the molecular pathology of Cohen syndrome. present on 2 of 146 chromosomes. Our results represent a starting point of direct DNA diagnosis in the majority of WD patients in Slovakia. P0746. Biochemical and molecular diagnostics of peroxisomal We hope, that data presented in this work might contribute to the disorders in Slovakia from 1995 to 2004. geographical map of occurrence of His1069Gln mutation in Central R. Petrovič1, J. Chandoga1, J. Futas1, A. Hlavatá2, F. Cisárik3, N. Mišovicová4, Europe. M. Vasil5, M. Kolníková6, J. Štofko7, D. Ďurovčíková8; 1Centre of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 22nd P0748. Screening of ARX in 414 families with X-linked mental Dept. of Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Dept. retardation and report of the first maternal somatic mosaicism of Medical Genetics, Žilina, Slovakia, 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, University for the ARX gene Hospital, Martin, Slovakia, 5Dept. of Medical Genetics, Humenné, Slovakia, K. Poirier1, J. Abriol2, I. Souville2, D. Lacombe3, M. Raynaud4, B. Hamel5, J. P. 6Dept. of Neurology, University Children's Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 7First Fryns6, H. H. Ropers7, C. Beldjord1, B. Gilbert8, J. Chelly1, T. Bienvenu1; dept. of Neurology, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 8Dept. of Clinical 1Inserm U567, Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie et Gé- Genetics, Slovak Health University, Bratislava, Slovakia. nétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 3Génétique Médicale, CHU Introduction: The group of peroxisomal disorders now includes 17 Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 4Inserm U316, CHU Bretonneau, Tours, France, different mostly severe diseases. Although different classifications have 5Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Nijmegen, The Nether- been proposed through the years, there is growing consensus to use lands, 6Center for Human Genetics, Clinical Genetics Unit, Leuven, Belgium, a classification in which two groups of disorders are distinguished: (a) 7Max Planck Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 8Génétique Médi- the disorders of peroxisome biogenesis and (b) the single peroxisomal cale, CHU Poitiers, Poitiers, France. enzyme deficiencies. Except of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy Mutations in the human ARX gene have been seen to cause (X-ALD), all diseases are based on autosomal recessive type of nonsyndromic mental retardation (MRX) as well as syndromic forms inheritance. such as X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia (XLAG), Methods: In peroxisomal diseases with defect in β-oxidation pathway Partington syndrome (PRTS) and X-linked infantile spasms (ISSX). determination of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA), phytanic acid, The most common causative mutation, a duplication of 24 bp, wasMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 242 found in families with a variety of phenotypes, but not in the more unique sequence NS in Domain I of the protein; Arg169Gly in Domain severe phenotype. The aim of the study was to access the prevalence I; Glu323X in IS1 muscle specific unique sequence in Domain II; of the ARX mutations in 414 families with established or probable X- Gly333Asp in Domain II; 1811_1812delTC in IS2 muscle specific linked MR (XLMR) collected by the European XLMR Consortium. We unique sequence in Domain III; Asp753Asn in the third EF-hand of the screened for mutations all the coding region of ARX by dHPLC and we Ca2+-binding domain. Big deletions covering the whole exon 4 were identified 17 mutations (11 c.428_451dup, 2 insertions and 4 missense suspected in two families. In 4 families the second mutation was not mutations (including the novel p.Pro38Ser)) : 12 with MRX, 3 with PRTS found. and 2 with ISSX. All the missense mutations have been identified in Seven of the LDMD2A cases occurred missdiagnosed DMD/BMD MRX. This study confirms that the prevalence of ARX mutations is high and SMA type III patients. These genetically different disorders in XLMR, especially in established XLMR (9%) and that the screening have some common clinical findings, which sometimes confuse the of ARX in MRX should not be limited to the duplication. Moreover, we proper assessment of the clinical diagnose. Therefore, in genetically have identified for the first time somatic mosaicism for the duplication not confirmed DMD/BMD and SMA III cases, LGMD2A could be also found in an asymptomatic female, mother of two boys affected with considered as a possible diagnosis. MRX. Using a semiquantitative fluorescent PCR, we found that only Acknowledgements: Part of the fundind was provided by Grant No 1.3 % lymphocytes in the mother harboured the duplication. Our 31/2004, Sofia Medical University. finding is particularly important for genetic counseling and should lead to reconsider the molecular screening in sporadic cases of MR to look P0751. A novel VDR gene mutation identified in a patient of for mosaicism associated with the phenotypes. Libyan descend with hereditary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D- 3 resistant rickets P0749. Spectrum, frequencies and haplotype analysis of GJB2 P. Grammatico1, M. Barbato2, L. Barboni1, M. Roggini3, A. Crisi1, F. Viola2, S. gene mutations in Slovak NSHL patients of Caucasian and Majore1; Romany (Gypsy) origin 1Medical Genetics, University "La Sapienza" S. Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, G. Minarik1,2, V. Ferak1, E. Ferakova1, A. Ficek1, H. Polakova2, L. Kadasi2; Rome, Italy, 2Pediatry, University "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy, 3Radiology, Uni- 1Department of Molecular Biology, Comenius University Faculty of Natural Sci- versity "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy. ences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Hereditary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D-resistant rickets (HVDRR), also 3 SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia. known as vitamin D-dependent rickets type II (MIM: 277440) is a rare Non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) is one of the most common autosomal recessive disorder due to impaired responsiveness of target hereditary impairment. Mutations in GJB2 gene encoding connexin organs to the active form of vitamin D [1,25-(OH)D] The disease is 2 3. 26 - gap junction protein are causative in almost 60 % of patients. caused by heterogeneous mutations in the vitamin D receptor (VDR) The prevailing mutation can be identified for different population, e.g. gene, located on chromosome 12q12-q22 and encoding a member of 35delG for Caucasians, 167delT for Ashkenazi Jews, 235delC for the steroid-thyroid-retinoid gene superfamily of nuclear transcription Orientals. We studied two subpopulations which are present in Slovakia factors. It is characterized by early onset rickets, hypocalcemia - Slovak non - Romany (Caucasian origin) and Slovak Romany (Indian and secondary hyperparathyroidism. In addition, affected subjects origin) population. exhibit elevated serum level of 1,25(OH)D, and, in most cases, total 2 3 Biallelic GJB2 gene mutations were found in 50.7 % and 28.3 % for alopecia. non-Romany and Romany patients, respectively. In non-Romany Several alterations in the human VDR gene have been detected, subgroup, GJB2 gene mutations 35delG, 167delT, R75W, 310del14 including nonsense, missense, splicing mutations, a partial gene and 333delAA were identified. Polymorphisms V27I, M34T and E114G deletion and an insertion/substitution. They can cause premature were also present in this subgroup. The prevailing mutation 35delG termination of the VDR protein, affect its ability to interact with DNA accounts for 92.2% chromosomes with NSHL causative mutation in elements or impair the binding with vitamin D, resulting in partial or GJB2 gene. In Romany subgroup mutations W24X, 35delG, V37I total hormone unresponsiveness. and L90P, and polymorphisms R127H and V153I were detected. The Here we report on the clinical features and molecular basis of HVDRR prevailing mutation W24X accounts for 63.2 % of NSHL causative in a patient originating from Libya, born from consanguineous parents, mutations in GJB2 gene. in whom we identified a novel homozygous mutation in the helix H1 of As in other populations of European origin the mutation 35delG was the VDR ligand binding domain . the most prevalent in Slovak non-Romany patients, while in Slovak The mutation, occurring in VDR exon 4 changes a codon for Leucine Romany patients the most prevalent mutation was W24X, which is in at amino acid 135 to Proline (p.Leu135Pro), involves an amino acid consistency with high frequency of this mutation in India. In Slovak residue highly conserved in all vertebrates and is likely to cause HVDRR non-Romany patients testing for only 35delG mutation could reveal altering the correct folding of the VDR ligand binding structure. more than 90 % of GJB2 mutated alleles, while in Slovak Romany patients the testing for two mutations - W24X and 35delG (second P0752. Homozygous p.M172K mutation of the TFR2 gene in an most prevalent) reveal slightly lower proportion - 80 %, of GJB2 Italian family with hereditary hemochromatosis type 3 mutated alleles. S. Majore1, F. Milano2, F. Binni1, A. Cerrone1, A. Tafuri2, P. Grammatico1; 1Medical Genetics, University "La Sapienza" S. Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, P0750. Molecular genetic diagnosis of Limb-girdle muscular Rome, Italy, 2Hematology, University "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy. dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A, Calpainopathy) in Bulgaria Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH), previously regarded as a single B. Georgieva1, A. Todorova1, I. Tournev2, V. Mitev3, I. Kremensky1; gene disorder, has been recognised to be clinically and genetically 1Sofia Medical University, Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Laboratory of heterogeneous. Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Sofia Medical University, Alexandrovska Five distinct genes, encoding proteins with different functions in iron Hospital, Clinic of Neurology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Sofia Medical University, Deprt- metabolism, have been characterized. HFE is responsible for classical ment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia, Bulgaria. or type 1 HH (MIM# 235200); HJV and HAMP cause respectively type Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A; Calpainopathy) is 2A and 2B HH (MIM# 602390 and 606464); TFR2 is associated with caused by mutations in the muscle specific calcium-activated neutral type 3 HH (MIM# 604250). Eventually, mutations in the ferroportin1 protease 3 (CAPN3) gene, encoding the protein calpain 3. gene are at the base of an autosomal dominant atypical form of HH So far, we have registered 44 families (46 patients) with autosomal (Type 4 HH, MIM# 606069). recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (AR-LGMD). All patients TFR2 mutations seem to account to relatively few cases of primitive were screened for mutations in the CAPN3 gene. The diagnosis iron overload. Only six causative TFR2 mutations in a total of about LGMD2A was genetically confirmed in 17 families (19 patients), so 11 Italian, Japanese, Portuguese or French families have been in fact calpainopathy represents about 40% of all AR-LGMD cases. described. In 12 LGMD2A families (13 patients) (70%) the disease was caused by We report on two sibling of central Italy descent, in whom we identified the 550delA mutation in homozygous or heterozygous state. in homozygosis the TFR2 p.M172K mutation. The rest mutations in our patients are private and scattered along The patients exhibited a phenotype characterized by severe iron the whole gene sequence: Arg49His located in the muscle specific overload and onset of hepatic damage at an earlier age compared toMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 243 type 1 HH. P0755. Spectrum of GJB2 gene mutations in Korean deaf This is the second family in whom the TFR2 p.M172K has been patients and the functional study of syndromic GJB2 mutant detected and the patients’ clinical features confirm that HH type 3 is alleles associated to a more severe phenotype than in HFE related HH. H. S. Jin1, H. J. Park2, H. J. Oh1, S. C. Jung3, S. K. Koo1; Our findings may indicate that rarity of HH type 3 can be due to lack 1Div. of Genetic Disease, Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, NIH, Seoul, Republic of of systemic investigations of the whole TFR2 gene and that this Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2Soree, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 3College of gene could be responsible for the iron overload in a more significant Medicine, Ewha Womans University,, Seoul, Republic of Korea. percentage of patients, at least in some geographical areas. GJB2 is one of the most frequent causative genes in congenital deafness. It is inherited by autosomal recessive manner with some P0753. The value of genetic diagnosis in hemophilia families exceptions. It is known that the 35delG mutation is the most frequent from developing countries type of mutation in white populations, and 167delT among Ashkenazi C. A. M. Petrescu; Jews and R143W in Africans. In this study, we investigated the profile of University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. GJB2 mutation in 93 Korean deaf patients. GJB2 nucleotide sequence Introduction. The genetic diagnosis of hemophilia enables the early fetal analysis revealed 7 different mutations including 2 novel mutations diagnosis, with a possible decrease of the disease incidence. The primary (R75L and R143W). Fourteen percentile of total objectives has two or prophylaxis of hemophilia, an expensive disease, would be beneficial. one GJB2 mutation. The most frequent allele was 235delC, which was Objectives. Characterization of the genetic abnormalities in hemophilia found in four homozygous patients and two compound heterozygous families, ellaboration of a mutation database, starting point for the carriers patients. We also characterized two kinds of dominantly inherited GJB2 detectiond and the fetal diagnosis. alleles with skin abnormalities. To functional study of these two alleles, Material and methods. The study involved families from Hemophilia we transfected normal or the mutant type of GJB2 genes into the gap Center Timisoara (CHT); 33 patients with hemophilia A (HA), and 14 junctional intercellular communication (GJIC) deficient HeLa cells. of their mothers, and respectively, 6 patients with hemophilia B (HB) When we examined the GJIC with scrape-loading transfer of Lucifer and one of their mothers were investigated. The genetic analyses were yellow, the normal transfectant showed the active whereas mutant or performed at “Institut für Humangenetik” Greifswald (Germany): direct vector only control transfectant did not show any sign of GJIC. The genetic analysis (presence of inversions for HA, identification of the change of GJB2 subcellluar localization indicates that the failure of mutation type for HB); indirect analysis (study of the restriction fragment membrane targeting or plaque formation result in the impaired GJIC. length polymorphisms - RFLPs). Results and discussions. The presence of factor VIII gene inversion was P0756. Allele dosage dependent penetrance of RET analysed in 29 HA families; 18/26 (69.23%) of the patients with severe protooncogene in Israeli Arab inbred families segregating HA were positive (12/18 - type I, and 6/18 - type II inversions), as were Hirschsprung disease. all of their analysed mothers. A similar frequency of inversion was found, L. Basel-Vanagaite1, A. Pelet2, Z. Steiner3, Y. Rosenbach4, M. Shohat5, S. for the familial (57.89%) and sporadic (42.11%) forms of hemophilia. The Lyonnet2; RFLPs were analysed for 15 HA families, and one HB family; the limits 1Department of Medical Genetics, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel of this method are underlined. Two patients The mutation with severe HB and Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Departement de Genetique, have missense mutations: codon -4 CGG (Arg)→TGG(Trp); codon 386 Unite INSERM U-393, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Divi- GGT(Gly)→GAT(Asp). sion of Pediatric Surgery, Hillel-Yaffe Medical Center, Hadera, Israel, 4Pediatric Conclusions. The mutation was identified for half of the hemophilia Gastroenterology Institute, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel and families, making carrier detection and fetal diagnosis possible anytime Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 5Department of Medical Genetics, in the future. Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel. Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is characterized by intestinal obstruction P0754. Genetic predispose and mineral disorders in risk group resulting from the absence of ganglion cells in a portion of the intestinal of osteoporosis in North-West of Russia tract. The main mutations identified in the major gene, RET, associated E. B. Mishchenko1, S. M. Kotova1, T. P. Sankova2, I. I. Dorokhova2; with isolated HSCR, appear to be dominant loss-of-function mutations 1Mechnikov Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2State Poly- with incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. We have technical University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. ascertained two interrelated consanguineous Israeli Arab families. Osteoporosis is a multifactor disease with a strong genetic component. In one family there were 3 female siblings affected with total colonic The aim of this work was to investigate distribution of DNA polymorphisms aganglionosis; in the second family, there was one male affected with associated with osteoporosis, regarding to mineral metabolism and short-segment Hirschsprung disease (S-HSCR). Linkage to the RET hormone status of patients. Cohort1 (89 patients) includes patients locus was found using polymorphic genetic markers. Sequencing of the having severe osteoporosis with compression fractures. Cohort2 (49 RET gene showed the heterozygous splicing mutation (IVS6+5 G->A) patients) includes immediate relatives of the patients and patients in a patient with S-HSCR. This mutation impairs the consensus donor themselves. The TaqI, PctI, and ApaI polymorphisms of VDR gene and splice site. Accordingly, only 1/8 heterozygous individual harbours Msp20I polymorphism of the COLIA1 gene Sp1 site were studied by the S-HSCR phenotype. Interestingly the IVS6+5 G->A mutation was the PCR-RFLP method. The frequency of the osteoporosis associated found at the homozygous state in 2 females affected with total colonic PPAAtt genotype in cohort2 (28.6%) is noticeably higher than in cohort1 aganglionosis, suggesting a gene dosage effect on the penetrance (21.3%). Five cases of familiar VDR gene polymorphisms were found. and expressivity of the HSCR phenotype. Homozygous RET gene The frequency of the mutant homozygous genotype (ss) of COLIA1 mutations causing HSCR are extremely rare. While the heterozygous is twice higher in cohort2 (12.5% and 6.8%, respectively). 61% of IVS6+5 G->A is of low penetrance (12.5%) for S-HSCR disease, there VDR and COLIA1 alleles have markers of osteoporosis. A correlation is a full penetrance for the homozygous state for total aganglionosis. between the osteoporosis severity and polymorphisms in both genes As suggested in other inbred populations segregating weakly was observed. DNAs of 69 patients were examined to determine length penetrant RET predisposing allele (Mennonites), our data support of AT-rich minisatellite repeats in 3’-UTR of the IL-6 gene. Individuals that the penetrance of RET gene mutations for the HSCR phenotype with prevailing homozygous genotype FF (51%) have a higher bone depend on : i) the nature of the mutation,ii) the allele dosage, and iii) mass density compared to those having the CF (26%) genotype. the gender of affected individual. 75% of the tested relatives have disorders of mineral homeostasis and 68.4% of them have a low serum Mg level. We have established P0757. C282Y, H63D and S65C mutations of the familiar cases of reduced vitamin D content in the blood serum and hemochromatosis gene (HFE) in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis enhanced concentration of parathyroid hormone. The data indicate that N. Starcevic Cizmarevic1, S. Stepec2, S. Ristic1, S. Milic1, B. Brajenovic-Milic1, mineral disorders (especially Mg-related) and genetic predispose must D. Stimac1, M. Kapovic1, B. Peterlin2; be considered together for early recognition of osteoporosis. 1School of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia, 2UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia. In the present study we have investigated the HFE gene mutations and its role in the predisposition of developing alcoholic cirrhosis in SlovenianMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 244 and Croatian patients. The groups of patients have been genotyped - P0760. Inherited disorders of bilirubin glucuronidation in Slovak 147 patients with alcoholic cirrhosis, 66 alcoholics without cirrhosis and population 350 healthy controls for C282Y, H63D and S65C. The analysis of these I. Zmetáková1, G. Minárik1, V. Ferák1, &. Kádasi2; mutations were performed using polymerase chain reaction/restriction 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. According to our Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, results C282Y, H63D and S65C allele frequencies were 3.4%, 18.0% Bratislava, Slovakia. and 1.4% in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis, 3.0%, 12.9% and 1.5% Three forms of bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (B-UGT) in alcoholics without cirrhosis and 3.4%, 13.6% and 1.1% in healthy deficiency are known in humans. Absent B-UGT activity results in controls, respectively. Our results indicated no significant difference severe, and very rare unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, Crigler- in the HFE allele and genotype frequencies between investigated Najjar syndrome type I (CN-I), characterized by potentially lethal groups, except the higher frequency of H63D heterozygotes observed hyperbilirubinemia. Strongly reduced B-UGT activity resulting in in patients with cirrhosis (32.0%) than in healthy controls (19.1%) Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II, characterized by intermediate levels (p<0.05). These results suggested that C282Y and S65C mutations of hyperbilirubinemia. Moderately reduced B-UGT activity causing the were not associated to the risk of developing alcoholic cirrhosis in mildest form of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia Gilbert syndrome our populations, but the role of H63D mutation has to be elucidate in (GS), one of the most common inherited disorders, with prevalence of further study in a larger series of patients. approximately 10-13% in Caucasians. All three diseases are caused by mutations in UDP-glucuronosyltransferase gene (UGT1A1) encoding P0758. Deletion of hypotonin, a novel serine oligopeptidase, in B-UGT, which is involved in detoxification of bilirubin by conjugation with patients with the hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome glucuronic acid. Here we report the results of molecular-genetic study K. Martens1, S. Meulemans1, I. Pauli1, A. Vervoort1, J. Jaeken2, J. J. W. Creem- of inherited unconjugated hyperbilirubinemias in Slovak population. ers1, G. Matthijs3; Forty-seven families with suspected GS, a family with 4 children 1Department for Human Genetics, KU Leuven/VIB, Leuven, Belgium, 2Depart- affected with CN-I, and a patient with CN-I were studied. Sequencing ment of Paediatrics, University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department for of promoter area and of all five exons of the UGT1A1 gene in CN-I Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. patients was performed with PCR primers designed by us. In families Hypotonia-Cystinuria Syndrome is a novel recessive disorder identified with suspected GS, the A(TA)TAA motif in the promoter area of the n in 12 patients. They present with generalised hypotonia and failure-to- UGT1A1 gene was analyzed by PCR followed by separation of the thrive, which gradually diminishes after infancy. Growth is retarded due amplified products on 15% nondenaturating polyacrylamide gel. Out to a growth hormone hyposecretion. All patients present with cystinuria of 52 suspected GS patients, 49 had the most frequent GS mutation type I within their first decade. observed in Caucasians A(TA)TAA, 2 were heterozygous and 1 7 Isolated cystinuria type I is caused by mutations in SLC3A1. Screening was homozygous for normal allele A(TA)TAA. The frequency of the 6 this locus with quantitative PCR techniques resulted in the detection of A(TA)TAA allele was 0,96% in suspected GS patients to compare with 7 deletions in all patients. In total, five different deletions ranging from 24 0,35% in 120 healthy control subjects. to 75 kb were identified. Interestingly, these deletions disrupt the coding region of only two genes, SLC3A1 and KIAA0436. As SLC3A1 causes P0761. Development of direct and indirect DNA-diagnostics of isolated cystinuria type I, KIAA0436 is responsible for the extended neurofibromatosis type 1 in Russian Federation. phenotype.The KIAA0436 gene product, hypotonin, shows homology O. Drozd1, O. Babenko1, N. Serova2, L. Lazareva2, L. Satanin2, M. Nemtsova1, with two serine oligopeptidases (POP and OpdB) and secondary D. Zaletayev1; structure predictions reveal striking similarities. Moreover, amino 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Bur- acids forming the catalytic triad are conserved. Reactivity against FP- denko Institute of Neurosurgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. biotin, a biotinylated form of the serine hydrolase inhibitor DFP, was Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant observed, indicating an active conformation. Site-directed mutation of disorder affecting ~ 1 in 3500 individuals. The disease is caused by the catalytic triad amino acids and generation of an inhibitor profile mutations in the tumor suppressor gene NF1, whose mutation rate suggest that hypotonin is a novel serine (oligo)peptidase with unique estimated to be 10-fold higher than in most other genes. We have catalytic properties. developed the protocol for direct and indirect NF1 DNA-diagnostics. DNA samples from 35 unrelated patients (16 familial and 19 sporadic P0759. Genetic analysis in Spanish cases of dominant cerebellar cases) were screened for the presence of mutations by SSCP, HD ataxia and microsatellite analysis; all mobility shifts were sequenced. Twelve V. Volpini1, J. Corral1, I. Banchs1, H. S. Nicolás1, J. Armstrong2, J. Infante3, O. mutations have been found and ten of them were described for the Combarros3, J. Berciano3, D. Genís4; first time. Eight mutations were detected for the sporadic patients 1Cancer Research Institute - IRO, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Unitat Neu- and four in familial cases. The complete spectrum of mutations has ropatologia, Universitat de Barcelona. Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3Servicio been found: small deletions and small insertions (192-195dupTGTT, de Neurología, Htal. Marqués de Valdecilla. Santander, Spain, 4Servei de Neu- 4973-4978delTCTATA, 5459delA, 998-999insA, 2415-2416dupTG, rologia, Htal. Josep Trueta. Girona, Spain. 1075delA and 2345delC), missense mutations (5498 T > A), nonsense Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias (ADCA) are a clinically mutations (1094C>G), splice site mutations (IVS2+1delGTGA and heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders caused by IVS10c+1G > A) and large deletions (deletion on markers TAGA/ unstable trinucleotide repeat expansions. Sevent spinocerebellar TAGGint27a and GTint38). For indirect DNA-diagnostics we have ataxia genes: SCAs1-3, SCAs6-7, SCA12 and SCA17 have been developed a panel of 4 intragenic microsatellite markers - TCCAint1, cloned with the finding of an expansion of a CAG repeat which encodes D17S1849, TAGA/TAGGint27a and GTint38, which were very helpful a polyglutamine tract. The exception is SCA8, which consists of an for prenatal diagnostics and for searching of long rearrangements of exonic but untranslated CTG repeat. We present here the molecular the NF1 gene in families. analysis of 222 unrelated familial and 522 sporadic and idiopathic Spanish cases of spinocerebellar ataxia. For ADCA familial cases P0762. Improvement in identification of haemophilia carriers' by 40.21% were SCA3, 28.87% SCA2, 11.34% SCA8, 7.22% SCA1, screening for gene rearrangements 5.15% SCA6 and 1.03% SCA17. None of ADCA mutated cases also F. Niel1, J. Martin2, A. Delahaye1, A. Frances3, E. Girodon1, M. Goossens1, C. have the SCA8 expansions in their reported pathogenetic range, thus Costa1; we have not found coexistence of SCA8 expansions with other SCA 1Service de Biochimie et Genetique Moleculaire, AP-HP et INSERM U654, CHU expansions in our SCA series. About 56% of familial ADCA cases Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 2Service de Biochimie et Genetique Moleculaire, remained genetically unclassified. No SCA mutations were detected in AP-HP, CHU Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 3Service de Genetique Medicale, the 522 isolated and idiopathic cases of spinocerebellar ataxia. Hôpital Font-Pre, Toulon, France. Haemophilia is a frequent X-linked bleeding disorder caused by factor 8 (F8) or factor 9 (F9) gene defects. Identification of disease-causing mutations usually relies on extensive analysis of the coding sequenceMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 245 in index-cases and subsequently allows carrier status determination in known SCA genes. The screening while confirming the high frequency at-risk women. However, in case of large deletions, which account for of SCA1 and 2 and the low frequency of SCA3 in Italy as compared 5% of disease alleles, direct molecular diagnosis of carriers becomes to other countries, showed: a) a low frequency of SCA 6,7,8,17; b) difficult by conventional PCR. Quantitative real-time PCR can be presence of SCA14 and EA2 point mutations; c) presence of atypical efficiently applied once a particular deletion has been identified in an Friedreich Ataxia cases with pseudodominant inheritance; d) absence index case. Screening for gene rearrangements by semi-quantitative of SCA10-12 and Fragile X permutation. Molecular diagnosis could be fluorescent multiplex PCR, recently developed to identify such assigned to 70% of familial and only in 5% of sporadic cases. The data heterozygous rearrangements in various diseases, represents an are relevant both in a genetic epidemiology context and in devising attractive option. We developed an assay encompassing the eight priorities for molecular tests in Italian ataxic patients. exons, the promoter region and the polyadenylation signal sequence MIUR-FIRB2001 RBNE01XMP4-008, MIUR-FISR2000, MIN.Salute of the F9 gene, involved in haemophilia B. It was successfully applied Final.2002 to MF to establish the carrier status of women in 5 families where various large deletions were previously found in patients. Furthermore, it P0765. Positional cloning of four candidate genes for autism: a identified a deletion of exons 7-8 in a woman having a low FIXc activity possible role for neuron vesicle trafficking in the pathogenesis of 30% but no family history of haemophilia, and whose extensive of autism. screening for mutations was negative. Compared to gene dosage by D. Castermans1, J. R. Vermeersch2, C. T. Schrander-Stumpel3, J. Fryns2, W. J. real-time PCR, the method simultaneously analyses multiple gene loci M. Van de Ven4, J. Steyaert2, J. W. Creemers1, K. Devriendt2; and is cost effective. In addition, it is sensitive enough to detect micro- 1Department of Human Genetics, Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, Leu- deletions/insertions, thus being a powerful diagnostic tool. Such an ven, Belgium, 2Centre for Human Genetics, Division of Clinical Genetics, Leu- assay would also be advantageous as a first step screening in the ven, Belgium, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Research Institute Growth and diagnosis of haemophilia A, with regards to sequential analysis of the Development, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4Department of Human Genetics, 26 F8 gene exons. Laboratory for Molecular Oncology, Leuven, Belgium. Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder of unknown cause and P0763. Evaluation of CFTR gene mutation testing methods pathogenesis. The identification of genes involved in autism is in laboratories participating in the Italian External Quality expected to increase our understanding of the pathogenesis of this Assessment disorder. We initiated a positional cloning strategy, starting from four M. Salvatore, N. Bruzzese, F. Censi, V. Falbo, G. Floridia, F. Tosto, D. Taruscio; unrelated persons with idiopathic, non-familial autism carrying a de Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. novo chromosomal aberration. The Italian External Quality Assessment (IEQA) in molecular genetic Last year, we reported on the identification of three different genes testing is coordinated by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità (ISS) and affected by the characterized translocations: Neurobeachin (NBEA), supported by the Italian Ministry of Health. CLIC4 (chloride intracellular channel protein) and amisyn. Recently, the IEQA organization is described in Taruscio et al. (1). Gene test for cystic C10orf74 gene was found to be affected by the paracentric inversion fibrosis (CF) is the most frequently performed in Italian laboratories present in the fourth patient. This gene encodes for a predicted protein (more than 30000 tests requested in 2002) (2). with high homology to proteins in human and several other species, We present an overview of results and impact of the IEQA in CF; most of which have not been characterized yet. The best characterized moreover, Italian data are discussed in the European context. homolog is yeast Yop1p, which interacts with the yeast Rab GTPase In particular the evaluation of CFTR gene mutation testing methods Ypt1p required for vesicular ER-to-Golgi transport. will be discussed. The involvement of these genes in the regulated secretory pathway At National level: of LDCVs is currently under study by means of RNAi-mediated gene 1. Oligonucleotide Ligation Assay PCR (OLA-PCR) and Reverse Dot knockdown in the βTC3 neuroendocrine cell line. For neurobeachin Blot (RDB) analysis were the most frequently used testing method and amisyn, we showed that disruption of gene expression results 2. The majority of Italian participating laboratories made use of in a significant increase of regulated secretion, suggesting a role for commercial kit (i.e.: INNO LiPa CFTR12 and 17 + Tn Innogenetics; both proteins as negative regulators of vesicle trafficking and/or fusion. OLA CF assay - PE, etc.). Similarly, overexpression of Yop1p (C10orf74 yeast ortholog) has been We’ll focus on methods used by laboratories and frequent errors. reported to block ER-to-Golgi membrane trafficking. This work is funded by the Project “Test genetici: dalla ricerca alla In conclusion, these data suggest a role for NBEA, amisyn and C10orf74 clinica”, Italian Ministry of Health (2003-2005). as negative regulators of neuron vesicle trafficking. Moreover, it implies 1.Taruscio D. et al., Clin Chem Lab Med 2004; 42: 915-21 that vesicle trafficking in neurons may be involved in the pathogenesis 2.Dallapiccola et al., Analysis 2/3. 2004 of autism. P0764. Autosomal Dominant Cerebellar Ataxia mutations in 104 P0766. Polyalanine expansions, missense and frameshift Italian ataxic patients. mutations of the PHOX2B gene result in loss of function via L. Veneziano1, M. Spadaro2, E. Mantuano1, R. Penci1, S. Guida1, C. Jodice3, M. different mechanisms Frontali1; D. Trochet1, S. Jong Hong2, J. F. Brunet3, A. Munnich1, K. Kim2, S. Lyonnet1, C. 1Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, National Council of Re- Goridis3, J. Amiel1; search, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of Neurological Science 1° Medical School, La Sa- 1Hopital Necker and INSERM U-393, Paris, France, 2McLean Hospital, Harvard pienza University, Rome, Italy, 3Dept of Biology Tor Vergata University, Rome, medical school, Belmont, MA, United States, 3CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole normale Italy. superieure, Paris, France. Autosomal Dominant Cerebellar Ataxias (ADCAs) are a heterogeneous Heterozygous mutations of the PHOX2B gene account for disorders group of neurodegenerative disorders for which at least 25 SCA of the autonomic nervous system either isolated or combined, (Spino-cerebellar Ataxia) loci are known. In eleven of these loci the including: congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS), gene was identified and the mutation found to be an expansion of a tumours of the sympathetic nervous system (TSNS) and Hirschsprung microsatellite sequence in coding or non-coding regions. Two ADCAs disease. In CCHS, the prevalent mutation is an expansion of the 20 are caused by point mutations in FGF14 (Fibroblast Growth Factor alanines stretch ranging from +5 to +13 alanines, while frameshift and 14) and in PRKCG (Protein Kinase Cg) genes. CACNA1A gene missense mutations are found occasionally. Importantly, as opposed to mutations, responsible for Episodic Ataxia type 2, have sometimes polyalanine expansions, frameshift mutations predispose to TSNS. been associated with an AD permanent progressive ataxia phenotype. To further investigate phenotype/genotype correlation, we performed SCA was also associated with premutation of FragileX CGG repeat. both transactivation and DNA binding assays on wild type and mutant The relative frequency of the various genetic types of ADCAs appears PHOX2B proteins. Furthermore, as already reported in polyalanine to be remarkably different between ethnic groups. In order to contribute expansion diseases, nuclear and/or cytoplasmic PHOX2B aggregations to the assessment of SCAs relative frequency in Italian population, 104 were investigated by immunofluorescence and gel filtration in protein Italian ataxic patients were collected and screened for mutations of with expansions ranging from +5 to +13. Except for the +5 alaninesMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 246 expansion, all mutations resulted in reduced PHOX2B transactivation. P0769. Genetic analysis of the two major ADHSP genes in genes However, the disease causing mechanism seems to vary according in Bulgarian patients with hereditary spastic paraplegia to the nature of the mutation. On the one hand, in vitro DNA binding N. Ivanova1, I. Tournev2, I. O. Litvinenko3, R. Rousev4, A. Lofgren5, A. Jordano- was altered for both homeodomain missense mutations (R100L va1, P. DeJonghe5, V. Mitev6, I. Kremensky1; and R141G) and expansions. On the other hand, while cytoplasmic 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Neurology, aggregation was observed only for expansions of +9 and above, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3University Hospital of Pediatrics, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Medical Uni- in vitro spontaneous formation of oligomers occurred starting at +5 versity, Pleven, Bulgaria, 5Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, UA, Antwerpen, alanines expansion. Finally, considering frameshift mutations, mRNA Belgium, 6Department of Biochemistry, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. decline could be excluded in tumoral tissues. INTRODUCTION: Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a Altogether, our data favor a loss of function mechanism irrespective neurodegenerative disorder affecting the most distant parts of the of the nature of the mutation. However, as both transactivation and corticospinal tracts in CNS with a main clinical characteristic, spasticity cellular localization were normal with the +5 alanines expansion, of the lower limbs. The most common genetic form of the disease the disease-causing mechanism remains unclear for short alanine among European population is the autosomal dominant (ADHSP). expansions. Mutations in two major genes - spastin and atlastin, contribute to about 50% of ADHSP cases. P0767. Association of GABRG2 gene and polymorphic DNA-loci MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a mutation screening of D5S422, D5S402 with idiopathic generalized epilepsy in Volga- spastin and atlastin genes, using direct sequencing, on a cohort of 40 Ural region of Russia. Bulgarian patients with different ethnic background (Bulgarian, Turkish A. Fattakhova, A. Karunas, E. Khusnutdinova; and clinical diagnosis of HSP. Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: We detected 4 spastin and 2 atlastin Idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) is a common form of epilepsy mutations. Five of them are new and one spastin mutation is already accounting for 20-40% of all epilepsies. Last genetic discoveries showed reported. All mutations in both genes are different single nucleotide that IGEs are associated with mutations in genes encoding voltage- substitutions. The 2 atlastin mutations and 2 of those found in the and ligand-gated ion channels (Na+, K+, Cl-) and some neurotransmitter spastin gene result in amino acid changes. The other two spastin receptors (GABA, dopamine). mutations affect different splice sites. The family history of the disease We aimed to study association of some polymorphic DNA-loci linked to suggests AD or a dominant (D) inheritance for 11 out of 40 examined epilepsy genes with an increased risk of developing epilepsy. 125 patients families. We found the genetic defects in 6 out of those 11 AD/D HSP from Volga-Ural Region of Russia with different forms of IGE and 150 families with clear family history for HSP in at least 2 generations. In one healthy donors were enrolled in our investigation. We study polymorphic family with an atlastin mutation we observed incomplete penetrance of DNA-loci D5S422 and D5S402, linked to GABRG2 (gamma2 subunit of the disease. We did not find any mutation in autosomal recessive or gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor) gene (5q34). sporadic cases. In conclusion, the analysis of the two major ADHSP- The analysis of D5S422 polymorphisms revealed some differences in related genes identified the genetic defects in about 55% of Bulgarian distribution of allele and genotype frequencies between IGEs patients ADHSP families. and healthy donors. The research of D5S402 polymorphisms showed that allele 2 (169 bp) is significantly frequent in patients (49, 5%) in P0770. Promoter region of CACNA1A gene and Episodic Ataxia comparison with controls (39, 7%) (OR=1, 49; p<0, 05). To further analyze Type 2 the possible role of GABRG2 gene in epileptogenesis we determined the E. Mantuano1, S. Guida1, L. Veneziano1, R. Penci1, C. Jodice2, M. Frontali1; genotype and allele frequencies C588T polymorphism of the exon5. The 1Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, National Council of Re- allele frequencies in patient group were 0, 85 for C and 0, 14 for T. search, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of Biology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy. Our results suggest that GABRG2 may be involved in epileptogenesis Episodic Ataxia type 2 (EA2) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder of common forms of IGE in Volga-Ural region. characterised by attacks of vertigo, visual disturbance, dysarthria, ataxia and interictally by cerebellar deficit of variable severity. The P0768. Canavan disease in two Slovak patients disorder is due to protein truncating or missense mutations leading to J. Futas1, R. Petrovič1, D. Kantarská2, M. Kolníková3, J. Chandoga1; a loss of function of the Cav2.1 subunit, the pore-forming subunit of 1Centre of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Dept. of voltage-gated P/Q type calcium channels, coded by CACNA1A gene. Clinical Genetics, F.D.Roosevelt University Hospital, Banská Bystrica, Slovakia, Cav2.1 has a neuron specific expression and a very high number of 3Dept. of Neurology, University Children's Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia. isoforms with different biophysical properties. Its expression regulating Canavan disease (OMIM 271900) is an autosomal recessive spongy mechanisms should therefore be remarkably complex. So far, only degeneration of the central nervous system and usually has fatal the coding regions of human CACNA1A gene are known, while prognosis in 1 to 3 years. The disease is caused by deficiency of the expression regulating machinery remains unexplored. As a first step enzyme aspartoacylase (ASPA) (EC 3.5.1.15) and characterised by towards the understanding of the human gene regulation we have increased levels of N-acetylaspartic acid (NAA), a possibly neurotoxic identified a new region at 5’ of CACNA1A gene, that has a neuron- compound, in body fluids. The human aspartoacylase gene is located specific transcriptional activity. Within this region a mutation has been on chromosome 17p13ter and contains 6 exons, which encodes a identified in a patients affected with EA2 for whom mutations of the protein of 313 amino acids. CACNA1A coding region could be excluded. The mutation, not present Two unrelated patients have been diagnosed in Slovakia last year. in 230 random chromosomes, deletes 5 nucleotides and is predicted to Patient 1 a third child in family presented psychomotor retardation, disrupt a putative binding site for Interferon Regulating Factor 1 or 2. In hypertonic syndrome and leukodystrophy at 4 months of age. Patient 2 a preliminary functional analysis the mutation completely abolished the a first child of non-consanguineous parents presented macrocephaly, transcriptional activity of the wildtype fragment. The region under study spastic quadruparesis, amaurosis, seizures and leukodystrophy at 1 opens the way to a) increased probabilities to detecting mutations and year of age. The gas chromatography/mass spectrometry analyses of exploring pathogenesis of CACNA1A-related disorders; b) detecting organic acids in urine revealed high excretion of NAA in both cases. expression modulating polymorphisms; c) identifying signalling To elucidate the cause of disease at molecular level we analysed pathways involved in the expression of P/Q calcium channels as the ASPA gene by direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction possible targets for drug development. products of all 6 exons from genomic DNA of patient 1. We have found MIUR-FIRB2001 RBNE01XMP4-008, MIUR-FISR2000 to MF homozygous missense point mutation 914 C>A in exon 6 changing alanine 305 to glutamic acid (A305E), which is the most common P0771. Should we screen for the Fragile-X premutation in the mutation among European patients of non-Jewish origin and leads older population presenting with ataxia ? to complete loss of ASPA enzyme activity. Both parents were found H. Van Esch, G. Matthijs, J. Fryns; heterozygous for A305E. The molecular genetic analysis of patient 2 Centre of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. has revealed heterozygous state for A305E mutation. The search for In 2001, Hagerman described the occurrence of a late-onset the second pathologic mutation is still in progress. neurological disorder in male carriers of the fragile-X premutation.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 247 This disorder, designated the Fragile-X Tremor Ataxia Syndrome P0774. Complex molecular-genetic analysis of patients with (FXTAS), consists of progressive intention tremor, cerebellar ataxia spinal muscular atrophy and cognitive decline. Since the first description additional symptoms E. Zapletalová1,2, J. Jedličková1, R. Gaillyová3, L. Fajkusová1; were documented and diagnostic criteria proposed. More recently, 1Center of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, University Hospital, Brno, the occurrence of FXTAS was also reported in female carriers of the Czech Republic, 2Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Re- FMR1-premutation, presenting with tremor and ataxia. public, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Since cerebellar ataxia is one of the cardinal features, we performed Republic. FMR-1 premutation screening in 122 male and 131 female patients, Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive older than 50y, who were referred for testing of the spinocerebellar neuromuscular disease, characterized by the loss of motor neurons ataxia (1, 2, 3, 6, 7) genes and who were negative. In the group of in the spinal cord, leading to proximal, symmetrical limb, and trunk male patients we found 5 with an FMR-1 premutation. In four of them, muscle weakness. The gene implicated in SMA is the survival motor a definite diagnosis of FXTAS was made, based on the clinical and neuron gene (SMN) located on chromosome 5q13. In humans, the radiological diagnostic criteria. In the group of 131 females, we did SMN gene is duplicated with telomeric copy (SMN1) and centromeric not detect a patient with an FMR-1 premutation, with all repeat alleles copy (SMN2). The differences between these highly homologous genes within the range of 10-49. result in alterations in their RNA expression patterns. Homozygous Combining our results and the results of similar studies, we propose SMN1 deletions were found in ca 95% of SMA cases. Point mutations, to include FMR-1 analysis in the molecular diagnostic work-up of older micro-deletions or insertions and small duplications are scattered ataxia patients, even though the FMR-1 premutation seems not to be a through all SMN1 exons in ca 5% of SMA cases. SMN2 may occur major cause of late onset ataxia in females. FMR-1 premutation should in more than two copies per diploid genome. Studies of correlation especially be excluded when additional FXTAS symptoms are present. between disease severity and the number of SMN2 copies have shown Moreover, the important counseling aspects and the identification of an inverse relationship. several new fragile X patients in the families of the 5 identified FXTAS In our study we present results of SMA diagnostics using 1) PCR- males, further justifies this screening. restriction analysis for detection of SMN1 homozygous deletion; 2) real- time PCR for detection of SMN1 copy-number - identification of SMA P0772. Prenatal and Postnatal Molecular Study in Serbian SMA carriers and SMA patients with SMN1 deletion on one chromosome Families - two years experience and point mutation on the second one; 3) denaturing high performance M. Miskovic, T. Lalic, M. Djurisic, D. Radivojevic, M. Guc-Scekic, D. Zamur- liquid chromatography and sequencing for detection of point mutation ovic; in patients with one SMN1 copy; 4) real-time PCR for detection of Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Monte- SMN2 copy-number - determination of correlation between SMN2 negro. copy-number and clinical findings (SMA of type I, II or III). Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), with a prevalence of 1 in 10000 and a This work was supported by the Ministry of education, youth and sports carrier frequency of about 1/40, is the second most frequent autosomal (FRVS 2422/2005). recessive disease. According to the age of onset and severity of the clinical manifestations, SMA is classified into three types (SMAI,II,III). P0775. Mutation screening of genes associated with long QT Two candidate genes, SMN and NAIP, were isolated from chromosome syndrome using PCR and SSCP methods region 5q11.2-q13.3. SMN gene exists in two nearly identical copies, I. Papoušek, M. Raudenská, K. Kozubíková, K. Chroust; telomeric and centromeric, but only deletion/mutation in SMNt is seen Masarykova univerzita v Brně, Brno, Czech Republic. to cause SMA (>98%). Deletion of NAIP gene is observed more often The congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a hereditary cardiac in severe SMA (65%), but there is no evidence that these gene play a disorder with known risks for ventricular fibrillations, syncopes, seizures role in the pathology of the disease. and arrythmic events potentially leading to sudden death. At least In this report we present the molecular analysis of the SMN and NAIP seven genes linked to LQTS were identified so far, mostly encoding gene in 26 SMA cases, over a two-year period. DNA extracted from various structural and regulative subunits of cardiac membrane ion blood samples, CVS and amniotic fluid was amplified by PCR. We channels. amplified exons 7 and 8 of SMN gene and exons 5 and 13 of NAIP The aim of our study was to implementate mutation screening based gene. Restriction enzymes digestion was used to separate SMNt and on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and single strand conformation SMNc. Results revealed the homozygous deletions of exons 7 and 8 polymorphism (SSCP) in three genes associated with LQTS: SCN5A of the SMN gene in 84% (16/19) and deletion of exon 5 of the NAIP (27 coding exons divided into 34 parts, KCNE2 (1 exon) and KCNJ2 gene in 4 SMAI cases. Seven prenatal samples, from pregnant women (1 exon divided into 6 parts). Using primers which cover whole coding with affected child, have been tested (one case was with deletions of regions of these genes, we optimized PCR conditions for all studied exons 7 and 8). fragments and used this methodics for amplification of DNA samples of These findings have important implications for genetic counseling and 66 patients with suspected LQTS. PCR fragments were subsequently pre- and postnatal diagnosis of SMA. analyzed by SSCP. Samples which have shown irregularity in pattern of bands on SSCP analysis were purified and sequenced. Total amount P0773. DHPLC analysis of the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in patients of 1961 samples was analyzed so far. with multiple osteochondromas. In exon 28 of the SCN5A gene we found a single-nucleotide W. Wuyts, R. Radersma, K. Storm, L. Vits; polymorphism C5607T. In total of 65 analyzed samples, 40 samples Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium. exposed T/T genotype, 22 samples were of C/T genotype and three Hereditary multiple osteochondromas (MO) is an autosomal dominant samples represented C/C genotype. This would indicate allele bone disorder characterized by the presence of bony outhgrowths frequency of 0,785 (T allele). This observation significantly differs from (osteochondromas or exostoses) on the long bones. Standard mutation results in other populations in which this SNP was previously observed analysis performed by sequencing analysis of all coding exons of the (American - 0,123; Japanese - 0,46; Chinese - 0,413). EXT1 and EXT2 genes reveals a mutation in approximately 80% of No mutation directly causing LQTS was found so far. the MO patients. This work was supported by FRVŠ 554/2004 and NA/8063-3. We have now optimized and validated a DHPLC based protocol for screening of all EXT1 and EXT2 coding exons in a set of 49 MO P0776. Genomic deletions in STK11 in Peutz-Jeughers patients with an EXT1 or EXT2 mutation. Under the optimized DHPLC Syndrome detected by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe conditions, mutations were detected in all patients. These include 20 Amplification (MLPA) previously described mutations and 29 new mutations, including 20 H. M. B. Duarte1, F. H. Menko2, K. R. Heimdal3, J. P. Schouten4, J. J. P. Gille2; new EXT1 and 9 new EXT2 mutations. 1MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Dept. of Clinical Genetics and The protocol described here therefore provides a sensitive and cost Human Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, sparing alternative for direct sequencing analysis of the MO causing 3Dept Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, The Netherlands, 4MRC-Holland, genes. Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 248 Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an inherited cancer syndrome, about 4400 files were reviewed and hearing loss was noted. From which results in a greatly increased risk of developing gastrointestinal this number 50 members of different families were contacted whose polyps. Defects of the STK11 (LKB1) gene are the predominant pedigree suggested autosomal recessive hearing loss. 45 persons cause of PJS. The STK11 gene has 10 exons and spans 21 Kb of were tested.. In 30 cases connexin 26 was negative; 12 cases were chromosomal sequence on chromosome 19p13.3. Point mutations positive and 3 cases are still under review. For those whose connexin and small deletions / insertions in the STK11 gene can be detected by 26 result was negative first class of family members were considered sequencing, DHPLC and other methods. Deletions and duplications individually and are under more consideration. Mutations detected of complete exons are usually not detected by these methods but can were 35DelG 6 (13.3%); 312del14 1 (2.2%); v271/wt 1 (2.2%); Not be detected by MLPA. A new MLPA probemix specific for STK11 was DFNB1 2 (4.4%); Wt 1 (2.2%); 35DelG/Wt 1 (2.2%). developed and covers almost all exons as well as the promoter and can be used to determine the copy number of most STK11 exons. P0779. Quality assurance for genetic testing We analysed 36 PJS families using conventional methods for mutation C. A. Rundell, M. J. Connors, J. T. Gordon, S. M. Nesbitt; detection (DHPLC or DNA sequencing) and MLPA. There were 14 Maine Molecular Quality Controls, Inc., Scarborough, ME, United States. families (39%) with point mutations in STK11 and 7 with genomic Objective: Development and testing of multi-mutation molecular deletion. The nature of the deletions was quite heterogenous. quality controls. Based on evaluation of quality assurance needs for Four cases had the entire STK11 gene deleted, one had the promoter molecular testing, controls were constructed through creation of DNA region and exon 1 deleted, one had exons 2-9 deleted and the last constructs, assembly of material, and performance testing. Evaluation one had exons 3-9 deleted. These data show that 33% of pathogenic showed high quality DNA recovery by common extraction methods, mutations in STK11 are genomic deletions which demonstrates that expected test results by clinical test methods, sensitivity to analytical the deletion in STK11 recently described by Le Meur et al. is not a test failure conditions, and stability. rare phenomenon. We conclude that MLPA is a sensitive, robust and Need: Quality controls that provide multiple mutations in one sample easy to perform technique and an important tool for deletion detection are needed for cystic fibrosis (CF) and other genetic tests in order to in STK11. monitor the entire assay, including extraction. Construction and Assembly: DNA constructs containing 24 CFTR P0777. Integrated homogeneous genotyping assay using dried exons including intronic borders and carrying multiple mutations were blood spots. synthesized and suspended in artificial blood matrix. A. Ylikoski, P. Ollikka, H. Raussi, V. Laitala, A. Godenhjelm, I. Hemmilä; Extraction and testing: The CF Control and whole blood were PerkinElmer Life and Analytical Sciences, Wallac, Turku, Finland. extracted by common methods and amplified using CF Roche Gold Laboratories performing genetic tests need simplified methods 1.0. PAGE band intensities of control and genomic sample amplicons allowing automation. Our aim was to investigate the direct use of blood were similar. Test results were concordant with expected sequence disks in homogeneous PCR for genotyping of celiac disease related except for known “neighboring mutation” method interferences. risk haplotypes (DQ2: HLA-DQA1*05 and HLA-DQB1*02 alleles, and Sensitivity: Sensitivity to analytical factors was demonstrated by DQ8: HLA-DQB1*0302 allele). extraction and CF Gold 1.0 testing of control in parallel with genomic Blood samples from 134 volunteers were spotted onto 903 collection samples in a simulated polymerase failure. papers. A disk sample was punched and added to the reaction tube Stability: A CF Control was incubated at 4°C and 60°C and serially together with the PCR mix including detection probes. The reactions tested yielding a predicted stability of >679 days at 4°C. were sealed and moved to a thermal cycler. After cycling, the reactions Conclusions: Synthetic Controls are useful quality assurance tools. were detected through the seal using time-resolved fluorometry. Characteristics: DELFIA Celiac Disease Hybridization Assay Kit (PerkinElmer) was A. Mimic genomic samples in multiplex amplification, used as a confirmatory test. B. Contain rare mutations, The homogeneous PCR assay gave detectable signals (blank+3SD) C. Allow for multiple mutation detection in one sample, with 1 ng of input DNA. The within-run variation was below 20%. The D. Can monitor several extraction methods, low detection limit of the assay allowed the use of blood disk samples. E. Aid in setting up assays and genotype assignment. When the disk sample gave detectable signal with DQA1 and DQB1 controls, the amplification was considered successful. All the blood P0780. Mutation screening in MSX1 gene in non-syndromic cleft disk samples were successfully genotyped. However, 4/134 disk lip and palate patients samples were reanalyzed due to an unsuccessful amplification in the J. Kasnauskiene, V. Mikštienė, V. Kučinskas; first analysis. Of the 134 samples, 29 (22%) and 26 (19%) had DQ2 Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithu- and DQ8 haplotypes, respectively, which were in consistence with the ania. DELFIA analysis. MSX1 is emerging as an especially strong gene candidate in non- The integrated homogeneous assay presents an automation-friendly syndromic clefting. Support for this comes from human linkage and and simple way for genotyping without the need for pre-processing linkage disequilibrium studies, chromosomal deletions resulting in of disk samples. The analysis of 134 dried disk samples using the haploinsufficiency, a large family with a stop codon mutation that integrated homogeneous PCR assay showed successful genotyping includes clefting as a phenotype, the Msx1 phenotype in a knockout results for the celiac disease related risk alleles. mouse. MSX1 mutations are found in 2% of cases of clefting and should be considered for genetic counselling implications. P0778. Study of the prevalence of 35delG mutation in the Gjb2 Aim of the study was to identify potentially etiological mutations in gene among patients with ARNSHL referred to the genetic MSX1 gene in CL/P and CPO patients. In this study a total of 116 counseling center of Isfahan Welfare organization, Iran independent MSX1 chromosomes (58 unrelated patients with CL/P B. Azadeh; and CPO residing in Lithuania) were investigated. Welfare Organization, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. 5’UTR and exon one and intro of MSX1 gene of all probands were Hearing loss is one of the defects which has high prevalence. About screened for DNA sequence alterations by direct sequencing. 1/1000 children are born deaf and 1.5 to 2/1000 will be affected by In the 5’UTR one SNP was found in 5 chromosomes (-36G>A); in the age six. exon one one change in sequence was found - A34G (c.101C>G) in The cause and nature of inherited deafness would become clear from 9 chromosomes. Six different polymorphisms were found in the intron identification of a known syndrome, but mostly definite diagnosis is not sequence. simple. In such cases the pattern of inheritance can only be identified No potentially etiological mutations in MSX1 gene were identified. through family review or drawing the pedigree. Hearing loss relates to ten genes that could be observed among the affected people who were referred to the genetic counseling center of Isfahan. We reviewed the connexin 26 gene and our results were as follows: Among those referred to the genetic counseling center in IsfahanMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 249 P0781. Analysis of biotransformation system genes using mutation detection. We performed a blind study on a panel of 76 'Detoxichip' patients to test the performance of the complete neurofibromatosis A. S. Glotov1, T. E. Ivaschenko1, V. S. Baranov1, A. S. Zasedatelev2, T. V. Nasedkina2; type 2 (NF2) gene VariantSEQrTM primer set (34 fragments) and 1Ott's Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, analysed the data using the SeqScape® v2.1 automated sequence 2Engelgardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation. analysis/mutation detection software. Most xenobiotics (carcinogens, drugs, food etc) are metabolized in the The NF2 VariantSEQrTM kit PCR gave robust amplification for most human organism by numerous enzymes of biotransformation system. of the fragments (28/34). Sequence data was produced for nearly Genes encoding these enzymes are characterized by significant all the fragments for each patient DNA. After only a single round of genetic polymorphism which is thought to be connected for genetic repeat amplifications and sequencing only 6 fragments from the whole predisposition to different types of cancer. We present a diagnostic data set of 76 patients (6/4560) failed to produce any sequence data. biochip ("DetoxiChip") for genotyping of biotransformation system However a very large amount of sequence data is generated (18.3kb gene polymorphism. We used multiplex PCR followed by allele-specific in one direction) to cover the regions of interest (complete coding and hybridization on biochip for the detection of SNP. Mutations were non-coding sequences of the NF2 gene = 7.6kb). discriminated by analyzing fluorescence intensities from individual The sensitivity of mutation detection of the VariantSEQrTM/SeqScape® probes on biochip. The following loci have been chosen: CYP1A1 protocol observed with our panel (containing 20 mutation positive (C4887, A4889G and T6235C), CYP2D6 (G1934A and DelA2637), controls) was seen to be 17/20 mutations (85%) under default analysis GSTM1 (deletion), GSTT1 (deletion), NAT 2 (S1, S2, S3 alleles) and conditions. Two of the mutations missed were heterozygous frameshift MTHFR (C677T). deletions, and the third a mutation lying within a portion of an exon We tested "DetoxiChip" on 30 control and more than 100 diagnostic that repeatedly failed to sequence. Although the NF2 VariantSEQrTM/ samples. Among 715 SNPs that yielded fluorescent signals, 2 SeqScape® system was able to detect the majority of mutations the showed less than 99% of concordance, whereas 713 were performed inability to automatically detect frameshift mutations is a concern that accurately. Thus, the accuracy of the method was 99.7%. The biochip needs addressing. is suggested to be used for the analysis of genetic predisposition to multifactorial diseases like cancer, as well as for screening of P0784. Evaluation of a service for Sorsby Fundus Dystrophy polymorphic loci associated with individual drug sensitivity. J. M. Rice1, N. Hart-Holden1, Z. Saihan2, S. Ramsden1, S. A. Jenkins2, A. Web- ster2, G. C. M. Black3, R. G. Elles1; P0782. Rapid TPMT-genotyping for clinical applications using 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2In- DNA-biochips stitute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 3Central Manchester and T. V. Nasedkina1, O. E. Fedorova1, A. S. Glotov1, E. V. Samochatova2, N. V. Manchester Children's University Hospitals, Manchester, United Kingdom. Chupova2, A. E. Roudneva2, V. V. Zemlyakova3, Z. M. Kozhekbaeva1, E. Y. Sorsby Fundus Dystrophy (SFD) is an autosomal dominant macular Krynetskiy4,5, N. F. Krynetskaia5, R. C. Ribeiro4, W. E. Evans4,5, A. G. Roumyant- dystrophy. Loss of vision in SFD results from the growth of new choroidal sev2, A. S. Zasedatelev1; vessels or atrophy of the outer retina typically in the fourth or fifth decades 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, in those affected. 2Research Institute of Pediatric Hematology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Re- SFD results from gain-of-function mutations in the tissue inhibitor of search Center for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4St. metalloproteinase-3 (TIMP-3) protein which is encoded by five exons. All Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, United States, 5University of six pathogenic mutations reported are located in exon 5 and the intron 4 Tennessee, Memphis, TN, United States. boundary. There is a very strong founder effect in the UK with the p.S204C Thiopurine drugs are metabolized, in part, by S-methylation catalyzed missense mutation accounting for the overwhelming majority of positive by thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT). Patients with very low cases. or undetectable TPMT activity are at high risk of severe, potentially We report the results of 18 months of a diagnostic evaluation using bi- fatal hematopoietic toxicity when they are treated with standard directional sequencing of exon 5 of TIMP-3. During this period we have doses of thiopurines. Because human TPMT activity is controlled by performed diagnostic testing on 24 individuals and predictive testing on 3 a common genetic polymorphism, it is an excellent candidate for the individuals with a confirmed family history. Of the 24 diagnostic tests carried clinical application of pharmacogenetics. A new molecular approach out 11 cases carried p.S204C* and in 12/23 no mutation was found. was developed to detect point mutations in the TPMT gene that cause Additionally we have identified the unclassified variant p.E162K, the loss of TPMT activity. A fluorescently labeled amplified DNA is previously unreported. It segregated with disease and was not present hybridized with oligonucleotide DNA probes immobilized on a biochip. in 600 ethnically matched control chromosomes. The TPMT biochip can recognize six point mutations in the TPMT gene We have demonstrated a demand for diagnostic and predictive testing and seven corresponding alleles associated with TPMT deficiency. The for SFD from both ophthalmic and genetic specialist centres across genotyping procedure is rapid, reliable, and cost-effective and can be the UK. Due to the potential outcomes for the patient, we request that used for rapid screening of inactivating mutations in the TPMT gene. samples are appropriately referred, with informed consent and have a Here we present the results of biochip analysis of the 625 DNA samples requirement for duplicate samples where predictive testing is requested. in the Russian population. TPMT gene mutations were identified in All results are delivered within a genetic counselling environment. 36 subjects. Thirty-one individual (4.96%) had genotype *1/*3A, five *p.S204C (previously Ser181Cys) has been reclassified according to (0.8%) had *1/*3C, and two (0.32%) had *1/*2. The remaining 587 HGVS guidelines. individuals (93.9%) had the wild-type genotype, *1/*1. The results show the feasibility of new chip-technology for pharmacogenetic testing in P0785. Mitochondrial variants in Non Syndromic Hearing Loss order to identify patients carrying the TPMT-deficiency alleles. S. Marlin1, D. Feldmann2, E. Chapiro3, C. Francannet4, H. Dollfus5, D. Bouc- This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic cara6, A. David7, V. Drouin-Garraud8, J. Vigneron9, C. Goizet10, B. Delobel11, R. Research (grant 03-04-49355), St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital Couderc2, E. N. Garabédian12, C. Petit13, F. Denoyelle12; International Outreach Program and by the American Lebanese Syrian 1Unit Genet Med, INSERM U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, Associated Charities (ALSAC). 2Lab Biochem, INSERM U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Lab Biochem, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Genet Med, CHU, Clermont P0783. An Evaluation of the VariantSEQrTM re-sequencing system Ferrand, France, 5Unit Genet Med, Hôp Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 6Serv and automated SeqScape® V2.1 mutation detection software for ORL, Hôp Beaujon, AP-HP, Paris, France, 7Unit Genet Clin, CHU, Nantes, use in diagnostic laboratories. France, 8Serv Genet, Hôp Charles-Nicolle, Rouen, France, 9Mater Reg A Y. G. Patel, A. J. Wallace, R. G. Elles; Pinard, Nancy, France, 10Unit Genet Med, Hôp Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom. 11Centre Génétique, Hôpital St Antoine, Lille, France, 12Serv ORL et Chirurgie VariantSEQrTM primer sets are available for a wide range of genes Cervico-Faciale, INSERM U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 13IN- involved with genetic disease. Clinical laboratories are interested in SERM U587, Inst Pasteur, Paris, France. the performance of the VariantSEQrTM system in a diagnostic setting, Mitochondrial mutations have been previously reported in maternally particularly since it can be coupled with SeqScape® v2.1 automated inherited hearing impairment (HI). The most common mutation isMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 250 1555A>G usually associated with history of aminoglycosides exposure. The NHS gene was identified in 2003 by an Australian group. NHS In addition, three other mutations causing non syndromic hearing is a large gene that encodes a 8.7 kb major isoform and a 7.7 kb loss NSHL have been reported: 1494C>T in mtRNA12s, 7510T>C minor isoform, resulting in predicted proteins, which differ by their and 7511T>C in tRNA-Ser(UCN). To ascertain the contribution of N-terminus. The predicted amino acid sequence shows significant mitochondrial variations to NSHL, we studied 200 unrelated patients homology between several animal species, but no homology with any included 50 sporadic cases with aminoglycosides exposure and 150 known protein family. NHS expression is developmentally regulated familial cases with maternally inherited HI. in a range of embryonic tissues, including the lens, brain, craniofacial We analysed mtRNA12s, tRNA-Leu(UUR) and tRNA-Ser(UCN) and mesenchyme, and dental primordia. The function of NHS is unknown the flanking regions by DGGE and sequencing. but the expression pattern together with the identification of predicted The mutation 1555A>G was observed in 4 large families and was nuclear localization signals support a key role in the regulation of always homoplasmic. The phenotype was variable ranging from severe brain, lens, tooth and craniofacial development. By positional cloning prelingual HI to mild progressive postlingual HI. No aminoglycosides and database searching, we simultaneously identified the NHS gene. administration has been noted in all the families. The families’ origin We found 2 additional mRNA isoforms which differ by their 5’ end, was varied: France, Arab-Palestinian, Madagascar and Pakistan. both lacking exon 1, and which display tissue-dependent alternative In addition, we observed 2 French large families with 7511T>C splicing of an additional exon. homoplasmic or heteroplasmic. The age of onset and the severity of We present the detailed results of mutation screening in a series of the HI were variable even in the same family. In tRNA-Leu(UUR) the 19 independent NHS families. All the mutations identified until now mutation 3243A>G was founded in 4 families with HI and other clinical are truncating mutations, mostly nonsense or frameshift. They are symptoms. No known mutation was found in the sporadic cases. In spread over the gene and there is no consistent genotype / phenotype addition, 25 different variations were founded, 20 have been previously correlation. There is no significant difference in the clinical picture reported as polymorphisms and 5 are new variations. between the mutated families and those where no mutation was In conclusion, we have identified a known mitochondrial mutation in identified. 6.6 % of familial NSHL. So, it seems justified to screen only large maternally inherited HI families for mitochondrial mutations. P0788. Study of MEFV mutations in the Iranian population by means of reverse-hybridization teststrips P0786. Mutation search in the DNAI1 and DNAH5 genes in 50 S. H. Amini1, C. Oberkanins2, B. Moghimi3, A. Ghamari4, N. Almadani1, K. Kah- Italian families with Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia rizi4, G. Kriegshäuser2, H. Najmabadi1,4; L. Bartoloni1, C. Cazzadore1, A. Beghin1, M. Collura2, M. DeSanti3, F. Ganz1, A. 1Kariminejad/Najmabadi Genetic and Pathology Center, Tehran, Islamic Re- Ferlin1, C. Foresta1; public of Iran, 2ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 3Medical 1University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Ospedale dei Bambini, Palermo, Italy, School, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 3University of Siena, Siena, Italy. Iran, 4Genetics Research Center, Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare heterogeneous hereditary University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. disorder characterised by immotility of cilia, leading to recurrent Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is a hereditary inflammatory pulmonary and upper respiratory tract infections. The infections often disorder caused by mutations in the MEFV gene. Carrier rates are result in bronchiectasis, and they can seriously damage the lungs, known to be high among Turks, Armenians and Arab populations, which may need to be transplanted. Dextrocardia, with or without whereas no data on the frequency and the spectrum of MEFV heterotaxia (situs inversus totalis), is present in about 50% of the mutations were so far available from neighbouring Iran. patients. If respiratory infections, ciliary dyskinesia and situs inversus We have applied reverse-hybridisation teststrips (FMF StripAssay) are present, the pathology is named Kartagener Syndrome (KS). to simultaneously analyse twelve common MEFV mutations in 208 We collected 50 unrelated KS/PCD families from all around Italy. asymptomatic Iranians from different regions and ethnic groups. The Diagnosis was established on the basis of respiratory tract infections, overall frequency of mutant alleles in our study population (15.6%) was bronchiectasis, electron microscopy of cilia or flagella. Over half of moderate compared to Armenia, but exceeded the values known from the patients has a dynein arm deficiency.We searched the patients’ Turkey and Iraq. The most common variant E148Q was identified in DNA for mutations in the genes in which mutations have already been 9.6% of MEFV genes. Five other mutations (P369S, M694V, V726A, described: DNAI1, an intermediate dynein chain and DNAH5 an heavy A744S, R761H) were observed with lower prevalence. chain axonemal dynein. The analysis of the entire DNAI1 gene did not In addition, we studied the case of an 8 year old boy with short recurrent show pathogenetic alterations. In Italy, PCD/KS is almost never due fever attacks and abdominal pain from a small village in the northwest to mutations in the DNAI1. The mutation search on the DNAH5 gene of Iran. He turned out to be homozygous for MEFV mutation M694V. His was focused on the exons carrying already published mutations. This parents were M694V/N and M694V/R761H. Several other members of strategy was necessary because of the size of this gene. Only one this large family were found to be affected by typical symptoms of FMF couple of brothers shows mutations in the DNAH5 gene: one is the A and to carry MEFV mutations. Among 30 asymptomatic inhabitants insertion in exon 32 at nt 5130, the second one is novel it is in exon 34, of this village, who consented to participate in our study, we identified and changes a Glu in a stop codon. It is possible that the other Italian six different variants (E148Q, P369S, M680I(G/C), M694V, V726A, patients share the same mutated gene/s which is to be individuate. R761H) in a total of 13 mutant MEFV genes. Given the high frequency of MEFV mutations in Iran, the awareness for FMF and the availability P0787. Nance-Horan syndrome: results of mutation screening in of testing needs to increase significantly. (oberkanins@viennalab. 19 independent families co.at) A. Toutain1, B. Dessay1, N. Ronce1, J. Kaplan2, J. K. Hartsfield3, C. Wallgren- Pettersson4, I. Walpole5, S. Russo6, A. Nemeth7, N. Oyen8, A. Rossi9, P. Bi- P0789. Screening of GATA4 gene in patients with isolated toun10, D. Heron11, J. Burn12; atrioventricular canal defect 1CHU Bretonneau, Tours, France, 2Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, A. Sarkozy1,2, G. Esposito1,2, C. Neri1,2, E. Conti1, M. C. Digilio3, B. Marino4, A. France, 3Indiana University School of Dentistry, Indianapolis, IN, United States, Pizzuti1,2, B. Dallapiccola1,2; 4University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Princess Margaret Hospital for Chil- 1IRCCS, CSS Hospital, CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Department of dren, Subiaco, Australia, 6Instituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 7Oxford Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy, Radcliffe Hospital NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 8Haukeland University 3Division of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 9EFS, Bois Guillaume, France, 10SIDVA, Savigny sur 4Section of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University La Sapi- Orge, France, 11Pitie-Salpetriere Hospital, Paris, France, 12Institute of Human enza, Rome, Italy. Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. Atrioventricular canal defect (AVCD) is frequently associated with Nance-Horan syndrome (NHS) is a rare X-linked condition characterized extracardiac anomalies, and peculiar anatomic patterns are found with by bilateral congenital cataracts with microcornea, distinctive dental distinct genetic syndromes. In particular, the complete form of AVCD, anomalies, typical facial features and mental impairment in 30% of which accounts for 70% of the cases, is associated with trisomy 21 male cases. (20%), and deletion 8p23 (40%), while the partial form occurs is someMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 251 mendelian disorders. Mutations in CRELD1 gene has been detected P0792. Study of genetic risk factors for cardiovascular disease in 6% of isolated AVCD patients, while a missense mutation in GATA4 in the Iranian population by means of reverse-hybridization gene, mapped to 8p23, was found in a family segregating either atrial teststrips or ventricular or AV septal defects. We screened GATA4 gene in a C. Oberkanins1, S. H. Amini2, A. Ghamari3, K. Kahrizi3, H. Pühringer1, H. cohort of sporadic and familiar cases of non-syndromic AVCD. Twenty- Najmabadi2,3; two sporadic individuals and nine families, with at least one individual 1ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Kariminejad/Najmabadi affected by AVCD have been enrolled in this study. Six sporadic Genetic and Pathology Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Re- and one familial patients had additional heart defects, in particular search Center, Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, Tehran, 5 patients were affected by AVCD-Tetralogy of Fallot. Recurrence of Islamic Republic of Iran. CHDs was concordant in 3 families and discordant in 5. Chromosome A number of genetic and environmental risk factors have been found and CRELD1 gene analyses were negative in all individuals. GATA4 or suspected to predispose to cardiovascular disease (CVD), the term gene analysis was performed by PCR, SSCP and direct sequencing. collectively used for disorders of the heart and blood vessels. We have No mutation was identified in the GATA4 gene coding region. Our study developed a reverse-hybridization assay (CVD StripAssay) for the does not support a pathogenetic role of GATA4 mutations in AVCD. rapid and simultaneous detection of twelve candidate CVD risk factors Although GATA4 gene haploinsufficiency is considered responsible for (Factor V Leiden, Factor V R2, Prothrombin G20210A, Factor XIII cardiac septal defects, either in del8p syndrome and in some non- V34L, beta-Fibrinogen -455 G-A, PAI-1 4G/5G, GPIIIa L33P, MTHFR syndromic patients, present results suggest that GATA4 mutations C677T, MTHFR A1298C, ACE Ins/Del, Apo B R3500Q, Apo E2/E3/ are not a common cause of isolated AVCD, arguing genes, other than E4). The test is based on multiplex PCR and hybridization to a teststrip CRELD1 and GATA4, should be causally related to this defect. presenting a parallel array of allele-specific oligonucleotide probes for each mutation. We have applied these teststrips to investigate the P0790. Molecular studies of USHER 1 patients in France prevalence of CVD risk mutations among 208 asymptomatic Iranians evidence a high genetic heterogeneity from different regions and ethnic groups. A. F. Roux, V. Faugère, N. Pallares-Ruiz, A. Vielle, M. Claustres; The allele frequencies of mutant Factor V Leiden (1.2%) and Prothrombin Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France. G20210A (0.5%) in our cohort were below previously published figures Usher syndrome is a recessive disorder associating hearing loss (HL) on the population of Tehran (2.7% and 1.5%, respectively; Zeinali et al. and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Current classification divides Usher 2000). Mutant MTHFR C677T (24.8%) and Factor XIII V34L (14.2%) syndrome in three distinct clinical types. Usher syndrome type 1 occurred less frequently than among Europeans, but exceeded the (USH1) is the most severe form characterized by profound congenital much lower frequencies known from India and most of Asia. The hearing loss, vestibular dysfunction and prepubertal onset of retinitis prevalence of mutant MTHFR A1298C in our study population (41.8%), pigmentosa. To date 5 genes causing USH1 have been cloned: however, was remarkably high. Apo E2 (4.6%) and E4 (5.8%) alleles MYO7A, CDH23, PCDH15, USH1C and SANS. were observed in relatively low frequencies compared to population Because no specific phenotype can yet be related to either gene, it is studies in Europe and the USA. still necessary to plan the screening of several genes before identifying Our comprehensive population data should represent a valuable basis the deleterious one(s). We therefore developed a two-step strategy for further investigation on the contributions of genetic CVD risk factors to perform an extensive study of USH1 genes. In first intention and in Iran. (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at) when possible, we perform linkage studies with microsatellite markers neighboring the different USH1 genes to point the gene(s) to be P0793. Prototype Genomic DNA-based Reference Materials screened. We then perform mutation analysis by using the Single for Fragile X and Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer Condition Amplification/Internal primer method (SCAIP). The latter Testing. On behalf of the Certified Reference Materials for approach allows entire sequencing of a single gene with a single PCR Genetics (CRMGEN) project condition in a reduced time. We screened several dozens of patients E. E. Gillaspy1, J. Rice1, E. Byrne2, R. Hawkins2, G. Stacey2, D. Barton3, R. for MYO7A and CDH23. The study reveals known mutations for both Elles1; genes as well as 17 new pathogenic mutations. Since no mutation 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Na- could be identified in a number of patients, the analysis of the other tional Institute for Biological Standards and Control, London, United Kingdom, USH1 genes is underway. Finally, the SCAIP method also identifies a 3Our Lady's Hospital for Sick Children, Dublin, Ireland. high number of SNPs distributed throughout the genes, thus permitting The use of appropriate Reference Materials (RMs) to validate test the building of complex haplotypes for several USH1 genes for each equipment or methods is an important part of diagnostic systems patient. These data will be integrated for further phenotype/genotype however, currently no Certified Reference Materials (CRMs) are correlations. available for molecular genetic testing. The CRMGEN project (EC Contract: G6RD-CT-2001-00581) aims to develop CRMs for a range P0791. Functional characterization of a novel sporadic mutation of diseases and by doing so, develop the methodology to produce in Von Hippel Lindau (VHL) gene. CRMs for any molecular genetic test. Four formats of RMs are being G. Merla, L. A. Muscarella, V. Formica, R. Barbano, B. Augello, L. Zelante, L. investigated by the project’s producing partners: Cultured cell lines D'Agruma; (Leuven), Recombinant DNA fragments (Leiden), PCR products Servizio di Genetica Medica - IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San (Dublin) and Genomic DNA (Manchester). Initially, Manchester has Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy. concentrated on developing RMs relevant to testing for Fragile X von Hippel Lindau disease (OMIM # 193300) is a heritable autosomal syndrome and Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC). dominant cancer multisystem cancer syndrome that results from a Samples have been collected from 13 Fragile X and 6 HNPCC patients germline mutation in the VHL gene. Germline mutations in the VHL under informed consent. Stable cell lines have been established gene lead to the development of several benign or malignant tumours from these samples and stored at the National Institute for Biological and cysts in many organ systems. Principal lesions are retinal and Standards and Control (NIBSC). Six HNPCC and 5 of the Fragile X CNS haemangioblastomas. cell lines were selected for the development of prototype RMs. Four In a screening for germline mutations of VHL patients we have methods for large scale DNA extraction were developed and tested identified a case of germline mosaicism in an affected individual by in field trials. From the results, it was decided that a batched phenol- VHL syndrome without a family history of the disease. The nucleotide chloroform methodology would be used in future genomic DNA-based alteration consists of an 11bp tandem repeat, located in the VHL RM production. The 11 prototype RMs were fully characterised and promoter region. Analysis of this altered region of the VHL promoter distributed for field trialling, in conjunction with the European Molecular using a computer algorithm revealed the presence of an additional Sp1 Genetics Quality Network, to 54 Fragile X and 43 HNPCC testing and AP2-alfa binding sites. laboratories. The results indicate that genomic DNA-based RMs In order to characterize the potential Sp1 and AP2 binding sites and to perform well in a diagnostic laboratory setting. investigate the functional consequences of the repeat we performed EMSA and transactivation assay. Moreover the levels of VHL mRNA have been assessed. The result of this analysis will be presented.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 252 P0794. Clinical and biochemical characteristics in patients with de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg,, Strasbourg, mitochondrial T8993C/G mutations France. E. Morava, R. Rodenburg, B. van den Heuvel, F. Hol, M. de Vries, L. Nijtmans, Mutations in the PQBP1 gene, coding for the polyglutamine-binding J. Smeitink; protein 1, a putative transcription factor, have recently been identified UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. in 8 families with syndromic or non syndromic X-linked mental Deficient complex V activity has been reported in patients carrying the retardation (XLMR). Clinical features frequently associated with the T8993G point mutation in the mitochondrial ATPase 6 gene. However, mental retardation are microcephaly and/or short stature and in a the effect of the T8993C mutation on complex V function in muscle has smaller proportion spasticity, small testes, anal atresia or stenosis, not yet been described. We retrospectively analyzed the biochemical, cardiac defects, ocular coloboma, cleft palate and other craniofacial clinical and histological data of eleven patients, five of which carried the abnormalities. The predominant mutations detected (5/8) affect a maternally inherited T8993C and six carrying the T8993G mutations. stretch of six AG dinucleotides in the polar-amino-acid-rich domain The percentage of heteroplasmy was higher than 95% in muscle and (PRD), causing frameshifts in the fourth coding exon. Further studies in blood. We compared the ATP production from pyruvate oxidation identified another deletion in exon 4, an insertion in exon 5, and a and the activity of complexes I-V measured in fresh muscle biopsy missense mutation in exon 3. samples in the two patient groups. We also evaluated the assembly- We searched for PQBP1 exon 4 frameshifts in a cohort of mentally process of complex V in muscle tissue. In nine patients a decreased retarded males initially referred with a clinical description of at least ATP production was detected, and complex V was deficient in all one of the following criteria : microcephaly, short stature, spastic children. The activity of the respiratory enzyme complexes I-IV was paraplegia or a family history compatible with XLMR; and also in a normal in nine patients, whereas complex I and III were deficient in two. large cohort of mentally retarded males not selected for specific clinical All patients had an early clinical presentation with muscle hypotonia, features or familial history. severe extrapyramidal dysfunction and Leigh disease demonstrated We identified a novel frameshift mutation (a 23bp deletion) in two half- by the cranial MRI. A slower clinical progression and more frequent brothers presenting specific clinical features. We also performed a senso-neural involvement were noted in the patient group carrying the molecular prenatal diagnosis in this family. T8993C mutation. No obvious difference was found in the biochemical We additionally detected in three independent probands two different parameters. We couldn’t find any correlation between the degree of in frame deletions of 21bp, deleting one of 5 copies of an imperfect 7 complex V deficiency and the severity of the phenotype. We confirmed aminoacid repeat. The nature of the mutations, the lack of consistent an assembly defect in our patients. This is the first report of decreased associated clinical features, and the borderline cognitive impairment activity and delayed assembly of complex V in patients with T8993C phenotype showed by some patients, lead us to discuss their mutations measured in muscle tissue. pathogenic significance. P0795. PABPN1 gene point mutations associated with P0797. Complex I deficiency in Iranian multiple Sclerosis oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) and a novel patients mechanism for triplet repeat expansion. F. Nabipoor, H. Hasani Komleh, M. Houshmand; D. O. Robinson1, S. P. Read1, A. Wills2, M. A. Farrell3; National Institute for Genetic engineering and Bio, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 1Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, Wilts., United Kingdom, Iran. 2Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 3Beaumont Hospital, Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an demyelinating disease of the central Dublin, Ireland. nervous system characterized by the morphological hallmarks of Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is an autosomal inflammation, demyelination and axonal loss. Until now, little attention dominant late onset neuromuscular degenerative disease characterised has been paid to the contribution of mitochondrial respiratory chain by proximal muscle weakness, ptosis and swallowing difficulty. The enzyme activities to MS. In this study, kinetic analysis of mitochondrial underlying cause is a triplet repeat expansion of 2 - 7 additional base respiratory chain complex I enzyme (measured as NADH-ferricyanide triplets in a repeat sequence in exon 1 of the polyadenine binding reductase) on intact mitochondria isolated from fresh skeletal muscle protein nuclear 1 gene (PABPN1). This results in an increase in length in MS patients(n=10)and control subjects(n=11) was performed of from 10 to 12 - 17 residues of a polyalanine tract in the PABPN1 . Common deletion and deletion also was tested in mtDNA of protein and is associated with deposition of characteristic nuclear MS patients. Our findings showed that complex I activity were filament inclusions in skeletal muscle fibres. PABPN1 is ubiquitously significantly reduced (P=0.007) in patients compared with control. expressed and binds to the polyadenine tail of pre-mRNAs, being Howere, we could not find deletion in mtDNA of patients with MS. The involved in regulation of their formation and length. presupposition of relationship between MS and mitochondrial disorder The triplet repeat expansion mutation has been the only OPMD is due to predominant maternal transmission of MS in affected parent- mutation documented to date, however we have identified two point child pairs, pathoaetiological role of respiratory chain dysfunction in mutations in PABPN1 associated with OPMD and an OPMD like multisystem disorder and important role of it in neurodegenerative phenotype. Both are miss-sense mutations close to the 3’ end of disorders, a number of patients such as LHON or other mtDNA the PABPN1 polyalanine repeat sequence. In case A, who has the abnormality with developed neurological symptoms indistinguishable typical OPMD phenotype, a c.35G>C/ p.Gly12Ala mutation generates from MS and Similarity of clinical symptoms in mitochondrial disorders a polyalanine tract of 13 contiguous residues by the change of only a to those of MS . This study suggested that a biochemical defect in single base. This represents a previously undescribed mechanism of complex I activity may be involved in patogenesis of MS. triplet repeat expansion. Cases B1 and B2 have the mutation c.50G>C / p.Arg17Pro mutation and an early onset OPMD like phenotype but P0798. Molecular Diagnosis of the Classical Type of Ehlers- with no evidence of intranuclear inclusion bodies. Danlos Syndrome (EDS Type I/II) K. Mayer1, I. Hausser2, H. Klein1; P0796. In frame 21 bp exonic deletions in the PQBP1 X-linked 1Laboratory for Medical Genetics, Martinsried, Germany, 2Electron Microscopic mental retardation (XLMR) gene : pathogenic mutations or rare Laboratory, Department of Dermatology, University Heidelberg, Germany. variants of uncertain effect ? Major diagnostic features of the classical EDS type are hyperextensible M. Cossee1, B. Demeer1, M. Antin1, B. Echenne2, S. Finck3, H. Dollfus4, P. Blan- skin, tissue fragility with widened atrophic scars, and joint hypermobility. chet5, L. Vallee6, J. Mandel7; Approximately 50% of classic EDS cases result from abnormalities 1Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, in type V collagen, a molecule that predominantly occurs as a Strasbourg, France, 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU de Montpellier, Montpel- heterotrimer of two a1 (V) and one a2 (V) chains encoded by the lier, France, 3Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpital de Haguenau, Haguenau, France, COL5A1 and COL5A2 genes. The clinical diagnosis of classic EDS 4Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, can be strengthened by abnormal ultrastructural dermal architecture Strasbourg, France, 5Service de Pédiatrie II, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, recognized by characteristic findings in electron microscopy. France, 6Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU de Lille, Lille, France, 7Laboratoire We report on the molecular analysis of 35 patients with the clinical diagnosis of classic EDS. Electron microscopy of a skin biopsyMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 253 preceeded molecular genetic analysis in 17 cases. Mutation screening markers D16S3043 and D16S3018. Regional and functional candidate of all coding exons of the COL5A1 and the COL5A2 gene by direct genes were tested by sequencing but no causal mutation was sequencing of leukocyte DNA has been finished in 22 patients, 11 of detected. whom had additional ultrastructural findings. Most likely pathogenic In vivo kinetics of apolipoprotein B100-containing lipoproteins, mutations were identified in 10/22 patients (45%); in five patients conducted in 2 affected members, mainly showed substantial decrease transmission electron microscopy revealed typical composite collagen in LDL catabolism compared to normocholesterolemic individuals. fibrils with enlarged “flower-like” cross sections and rope-like longitudinal A Q-PCR analysis of SREBP2 (Sterol Responsive Element Binding sections. All mutations affect the COL5A1gene and none has been Protein) and 2 of its target genes (HMGCR, LDLR) in EBV-transformed previously reported. Seven are translation terminating composed of four lymphoblasts of one affected member showed a huge decrease of frameshift, two splice site and one nonsense mutation. Two missense expression versus normocholesterolemic an FH patients in standard changes affect a glycin residue and a conserved arginin residue in the culture conditions. triple-helical domain of the proa1 (V) chain, respectively. One patient In conclusion, we identified a French family with a fourth form of ADH carries a one amino acid in-frame deletion. Our detection rate of 45% linked to 16q22.1 whose LDL elevation is due to a substantial default in is in accordance with previously reported molecular genetic studies LDL catabolism and characterized by extremely low basal expression and supports further genetic heterogeneity in classic EDS. of SREBP2, HMGCR and LDLR genes in lymphoblasts. P0799. Novel and recurrent mutations in the ATM gene in P0801. Rapid heteroduplex scanning of the GALT gene using patients with classical ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) dried blood spot DNA. A. De Luca1, M. Piane2, M. Magliozzi1, L. Sinibaldi1, I. Torrente1, G. Rizzo2, B. J. A. Harbour1, C. R. Ellington1, E. W. Naylor2, C. Saunders3, K. Muralidharan4, Dallapiccola1,2, L. Chessa2; J. T. McKinney1, S. F. Dobrowolski1; 1IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 1Idaho Technology, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Pediatrix Screening, 2Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University of Rome “La Bridgeville, PA, United States, 3Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, Sapienza”, Rome, Italy. United States, 4Emory Univeristy, Atlanta, GA, United States. The gene for ataxia-telangiectasia (MIM 208900), ATM, spans about Classical galactosemia results from defects in galactose-1-phosphate 150 kb of genomic DNA. ATM mutations are found along the entire uridyl transferase gene (GALT) and is identified by newborn screening. gene, with no evidence of a mutational hot spots. We screened the Screening utilizes the dried blood spot (DBS) to assay total galactose ATM gene using an optimized denaturing high performance liquid and/or GALT enzyme activity. Screening identifies some carriers and chromatography (DHPLC) technique that detected all previously some specimens with partial deficiencies (so-called D/G compound known mutations in PCR segments being analyzed. The screening heterozygotes). Screening labs use DNA from DBS to assay common was performed in 22 unrelated AT patients, and allowed us to identify mutations but DBS is considered an inadequate source of DNA for 38 of the 44 expected mutations. Therefore, the efficiency of mutation comprehensive gene analysis. Two normal specimens and thirty- detection by optimized DHPLC was approximately 86%. Sixteen eight specimens testing beyond cut-offs in newborn screening were (73%) of the investigated patients were compound heterozygous, assayed over the GALT gene using dye-binding/high-resolution and six (27%) were homozygous for an ATM mutation. Among the 38 thermal denaturation with DNA from the newborn DBS. Exons were mutations identified, we observed 6 nonsense alleles (16%) and 26 assayed as single amplification products included coding and intron (68%) frameshift alleles, including 16 deletions, one insertion, 7 out-of- sequence critical to splicing. PCR included the dye LCGreenTM. Post- frame exon skipping events and one homozygous duplication. Thus, PCR dye-saturated product was melted in the HR-1TM instrument. as many as 32 (84%) alleles caused, directly or indirectly, a premature Samples with aberrant melt-profiles were recovered for DNA termination codon (PTC). Two alleles (5%) caused in-frame exon sequencing. Nine classical galactosemia, 16 carriers, and 11 D/G skipping. In addition, 4 (11%) missense mutations were also observed. compound heterozygotes were identified. No mutations were found Mutations were scattered across the whole coding sequence of the in 2 specimens with elevated galactose and normal enzyme activity ATM gene, and 13 of the mutations were found to be novel according suggesting galactose epimerase deficiency. In one likely carrier no to the ATM Mutation Database. For the three mutations [c.3576G>A mutation was observed. The following mutations were observed: (K1192K), c.3802delG and c.7517_7520delGAGA] recurrently detected fs D39X (c17-18 del CC), ΔD97 (c289-291 del AAC), R67H, S135L, we defined the associated haplotypes in order to investigate whether T138M, M142K, F171S, Q188R, S192N, L195P, R231C, Y251S, they are ancestrally related or hot spots. The identification of ATM gene R263G, T284N, M298V, Y323C R333W, Q344K. Comprehensive mutations appears important for understanding the molecular basis of analysis of GALT used 11ul of the 60ul of DNA obtained from a 3.2mm the disease, and is essential for diagnosis and genetic counseling. punch showing the DBS is useful for comprehensive gene analysis. The protocol including preparing DNA, PCR, melting, and preparing P0800. Characterization of a fourth form of Autosomal Dominant specimens with aberrant melting profiles for sequencing is completed Hypercholesterolemia in a French family in 4 hours. D. Allard1, M. Trillard1, M. Abifadel1,2, K. Ouguerram3, Y. Zair3, M. Devillers1, D. Erlich1, M. Krempf3, C. Junien1,4, J. P. Rabès1,4, C. Boileau1,4, M. Varret1, A. D. P0802. Screening for Wilson Disease: 2nd tier molecular H. French Research Network5; analysis of ATP7B 1INSERM UR383, Paris, France, 2Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Saint-Jo- S. F. Dobrowolski1, J. T. McKinney1, C. R. Ellington1, J. A. Harbour1, J. Win- seph, Beirut, Lebanon, 3INSERM UR539, Hôtel-Dieu, Nantes, France, 4Labora- ters2, S. Hahn2; toire de Biochimie, d'Hormonologie et de Génétique Moléculaire, AP-HP, Am- 1Idaho Technology, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Mayo Clinic, Roch- broise Paré, Boulogne, France, 5GIS-Institut des maladies rares, Paris, France. ester, MN, United States. Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is characterized by Wilson Disease (WD, OMIM#277900) is an autosomal recessive isolated elevation of LDL cholesterol and associated with high risk of disorder of copper metabolism secondary to mutations in the premature cardiovascular complications. Over 1000 mutations in the ATP7B gene. Presentation is characterized by hepatitis, cirrhosis, or LDLR gene (Familial Hypercholesterolemia, FH) and 5 mutations in neuropsychiatric symptoms. Early detection of WD averts irreversible the APOB gene (Familial Defective Apolipoprotein B100) have been tissue damage thus prospective screening is proposed using reduced implicated. We recently reported further genetic heterogeneity related ceruloplasmin as the biochemical genetic marker. Among candidate to missense mutations in the PCSK9 gene. We now report a large patients with low CP, there are no secondary biochemical or clinical French ADH family in which involvement of the LDLR, APOB and markers, thus 2nd tier evaluation of ATP7B is being investigated. PCSK9 genes was excluded. We named the pathology “HCHOLA4”. Analysis of ATP7B applies dye-binding/high-resolution thermal Our aim was to identify the disease-causing gene and to define the denaturation to identify regions of sequence aberration to target DNA associated pathophysiology. sequencing. Coding and critical splice site regions are amplified in A whole-genome scan, using 232 polymorphic microsatellite markers, the presence of the saturating dye LCGreenTM Plus. High-resolution located the HCHOLA4 gene at 16q22.1. Regional haplotype thermal denaturation of dye saturated amplification product used construction allowed identification of a 5.9 cM critical interval between the LightScannerTM instrument. Normal profiles were established forMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 254 each fragment and those deviating from normal were recovered for ment, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of sequence analysis. Among 16 patients, mutations were observed in Otolaryngology, Rasoul Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, exons 8-20, the most frequently observed were R778L and H1069Q. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Other mutations identified include: M769I; A874V, c2697-2723 del In this study, we analyzed the genotype-phenotype correlations in the IVKLVEEAQ; G988R, G1035V; L1083F, 3400 delC, I1148T, N1270S, Iranian GJB2-related deaf population. Included in this study were 147 Q1351X. Polymorphisms were observed in 11/16 specimens and patients who met the defining criteria for autosomal recessive non- include, R725R, L770L, K832R, R952K, T991T, V1140A, IVS12 - syndromic hearing impairment. Of these, 95 patients (65%) were 13 G>T, IVS18 +6 C>T. Amplification of all regions uses a common homozygous for the 35delG mutation and 25 patients (17%) carried PCR protocol and melting is performed in the PCR plate. Melting is the 35delG mutation in trans with another GJB2 mutation. The next two not destructive and LCGreen Plus does not interfere with subsequent most prevalent mutations were W24X, present on 17 chromosomes sequencing thus samples are recovered from the reaction plate for (5.8%) and -3170G>A, present on 14 chromosomes (4.8%). In the sequencing. Dye-binding/high-resolution thermal denaturation is a entire group, severe-to-profound deafness was seen in 83.8% of the cost effective means to assay ATP7B in candidate patients identified cases, including 92% of those homozygous for the 35delG mutation. by prospective screening using reduced ceruloplasmin. Interestingly, mild hearing loss was found in a subject homozygous for 35delG, which is unusual. All persons segregating missense P0803. Origin of de novo KCNJ11 gene mutations causing mutations, whether homo- or heterozygous, had severe-to-profound neonatal diabetes hearing loss. S. Ellard1,2, E. L. Edghill1, S. Flanagan1, A. L. Gloyn1, J. Rankin2, A. T. Hatter- sley1; P0806. Screening for CFTR mutations in Southern European 1Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Royal Devon & Exeter Countries Hospital, Exeter, United Kingdom. M. Tzetis, E. Kanavakis; The KCNJ11 gene encodes the Kir6.2 subunit of the beta-cell ATP- Athens University, Athens, Greece. sensitive potassium channel. We have recently identified KCNJ11 The gene for cystic fibrosis was identified in 1989 and this together with mutations in 23 families with neonatal diabetes. Nineteen (83%) of the emerging technology for mutation detection heralded a new dawn the probands are apparently sporadic cases. In two families a second for the diagnosis of the disease. Genotypically, the frequencies and generation was affected and microsatellite markers were used to types of mutations vary according to the geographic and ethnic origin determine the parental origin of the mutation. A third family includes of the population studied. A total of more than 1200 mutations have two affected half-brothers whose unaffected father is presumed to be a been identified worldwide with F508del, showing a North-to-South germline mosaic. For 13 families DNA was available from parents and Europe decreasing frequency gradient (90-30%) while the percentage informative polymorphisms were present in 8. Allele specific PCR for of non-F508del chromosomes associated with CF increases. Mutation a heterozygous polymorphism (E23K, A190A, I337V) or the mutation screening is especially difficult with commercially available kits in the was used to amplify across the mutation or polymorphism and phase Mediterranean region (≤75% of CF allele detection). For the Greek determined by sequencing. population 80 different mutations (20 specific to our population) account Seven mutations had arisen on the paternal allele and one was for 91% of CF genes generating 103 different genotypes. For the maternal in origin. There was no evidence of an association with Spanish population more than 75 different mutations represent 90.2% advanced paternal age. Real-time PCR analysis of lymphocyte DNA of the CF alleles. The south of France shows allelic heterogeneity found no evidence of somatic mosaicism in the father presumed to be ranging from 75 mutations to about 30 accounting for 97.6% of CF a germline mosaic. The maternally derived KCNJ11 mutation showed alleles. In southern Italy 43 mutations detect 91.5% of CF mutated a low level (2.8%) of somatic mosaicism, suggesting the likelihood chromosomes. Identification of the alleles that are common in the of germline mosaicism. It is important to consider the possibility Mediterranean region will help in the design of specific assays. Whole of germline mosaicism when counselling parents of an apparently gene scanning methodologies such as DGGE or DHPLC combined sporadic case for recurrence risks. with sequencing are currently the methods of choice, but moving towards a more high-throughput array technology is desirable. The P0804. Cyp21 gene analysis in 50 patients with 21-hydroxylase advantage of the micro-arrays is flexibility in adding additional ethnic- deficiency in Iran specific mutations and the Nanogen NanoChip™ platform for which H. A. Ramazani1, K. Kahrizi1, M. Razzaghiazar2, F. Saffari2, P. Koppens3, H. we have developed assays to cover >85% of CF alleles in the Greek Najmabadi1; population, offers such a possibility. 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran University of Medical Sciences, P0807. Contribution of GJB6 large deletion to the hereditary Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Pediatrics, Erasmus MC/So- deafness genetic load in the Iranian population phia, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. P. Imanirad1,2, Y. Riazalhosseini1,2, M. Mohseni1, N. Bazazzadegan1, K. Kah- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase rizi1, R. J. H. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1; deficiency is one of the most common (1 in 10,000 to 1 in 15,000) 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation autosomal recessive disorders. The aim of this study was to assess the Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecualr-Cellular Biology Depart- frequencies of the eight most common mutations in the CYP21 gene in ment, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolar- individuals with 21-hydroxylase deficiency. We applied allele specific yngology Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of polymerase chain reaction previously, as described by RC Wilson et Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. al., to detect the eight most common mutations in the CYP21 gene. Mutations in the gene that encodes the gap-junction protein connexin Fifty unrelated patients with symptoms of classical CAH (salt wasting 26 (GJB2) at the DFNB1 locus on chromosome 13q12 are the major or simple virilization) were studied. We could detect overall 66% of the cause of autosomal recessive non-syndromic sensorineural deafness mutations. The most frequent mutations were found to be I2G (29%) (ARNSD) in many different populations. A second gap-junction gene, and an 8 bp deletion in exon 3 (10%). The frequency of other alleles GJB6, also localizes to the DFNB1 interval. Interestingly, the encoded was: I172N (8%), V281L (3%), exon 6 cluster (I236N, V237E, and protein connexin 30 is expressed in the same inner-ear structures M239K) (4%), Q318X (7%), R356W (5%), and we did not detect the as connexin 26 and both connexins are functionally related. The P30L mutation in any of our patients. The frequency of mutations did importance of GJB6 to normal hearing has been confirmed by the not differ substantially from frequencies of other countries. identification of a large deletion (Δ(GJB6-D13S1830)) involving the first two exons and a part of third exon of GJB6 and a large region of P0805. Genotype-Phenotype correlations of GJB2 mutations the upstream sequence in persons with ARNSD. Homozygotes for this K. Kahrizi1, M. Malekpour1, Y. Riazalhosseini1,2, A. Daneshi3, P. Majidpour3, H. deletion and compound heterozygotes carrying Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) Najmabadi1; and a deafness-causing allele variant of GJB2 have severe-to- 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation profound congenital deafness. The aim of this study was to evaluate Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular-Cellular Biology Depart- the contribution made by this deletion to the ARNSD genetic load in theMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 255 Iranian population. One hundred and fifty four probands with ARNSD reduced Hb levels, normal HbA . 2 from various regions of the country were screened for this mutation Mutations were identified in 284 of cases; 166 were α3.7/αα (39.43%), using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers that amplified the 33 were α3.7/α3.7 (7.83%), 14 were Med/αα(3.32%), 4 were α3.7/ breakpoint junctions of the deletion. Among them, one hundred and α4.2(0.95%), one was α3.7/Med(0.23%), 22 were α4.2/αα (5.22%), sixteen patients were deaf probands with normal GJB2 alleles and the one was α4.2/α4.2(0.23%), one was α4.2/Med(0.23%), 4 were α20.5/ remaining 38 were heterozygote for only one GJB2 mutation. None αα(0.95%),13 with point mutation αcsα/αα (3.09%), and also 14 cases of patients screened for Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) was shown to carry this had polyA mutations αPAα/αα (3.32%). deletion, suggesting that this mutation is not a common cause of We also found other mutations α(-5nt) α/αα, α-22α/αα(0.23%), α(+14) deafness in Iran. α/αPA and α(+14)α/αα in 7 cases. Two other cases had α14α/αα polymorphism that is the most common P0808. Analysis of association of candidate gene polymorphism and we also detected a novel mutation α(+14;Cd20)/αα polymorphisms with decreased bone mineral density in 2 cases(0.47%). In 137 individuals none of these mutations were L. Selezneva, R. Khusainova, E. Khusnutdinova; found. Our study shows that α globin mutations were found in 66.75% Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. of individuals that we have tested and the most common mutations of Osteoporosis is a complex disease characterized by decrease of bone α-thalassemia are single or double α-globin gene deletions α3.7. mineral density (BMD) and a microarchitectural deterioration of bone structure, leading to a higher susceptibility to fractures. In recent years P0811. FLJ23451, A novel gene note expressed in the 2P16 different studies have suggested a major genetic contribution to bone deletion syndrome mass determination and to the development of osteoporosis. Several S. Buriakovsky, M. Rubinstein, R. Parvari; candidate genes were identified but the role of each in the development Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. of osteoporosis is not clearly determined. We started to examine the We identified Bedouin patients presenting a unique recessively inherited association of candidate gene polymorphisms with decreased bone syndrome, with broad clinical manifestations: cystinuria, mental & mineral density and osteoporotic fractures in patients from different growth retardation, hypotonia, facial dysmorphism and mitochondrial ethnic groups from Bashkortostan. We examined the SpI polymorphism respiratory chain dysfunction presenting as reduced activity of all in the collagen type 1A1 (COL1A1) gene, the FokI polymorphism in the mitochondrial encoded respiratory chain enzymatic complexes. Our vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene, and the XbaI and PvuI polymorphisms previous study identified the molecular basis of this syndrome as in the estrogen receptor (ER) gene in patients with osteoporosis and a homozygous deletion of 179,311 bp on chromosome 2p16, and in a control group. Analysis of the SpI polymorphism in COL1A1 thus was subsequently named the 2p16 deletion syndrome. Further revealed an increased frequency of the ss genotype (0.033) in patients studies to define the transcription content of this interval showed that with osteoporosis compared with controls (0.066); this difference it includes 4 protein coding genes: type I cystinuria SLC3A1, protein was not statistically significant (p>0.05). We have found association phosphatase 2Cβ, two unidentified genes KIAA0436 and FLJ23451 of ss genotype with osteoporosis (OR=1.2). We also have revealed and three transcripts without, or with very short, open reading frames. significant differences between Bashkirs and Russians (p=0.02714), The FLJ23451 gene has its first exon in the deletion and thus is not and between Tatars and Bashkirs (0.00268). For the XbaI and PvuI expressed in patient's cells. Bioinformatics investigation suggests polymorphisms in the ER gene we saw no significant differences in that FLJ23451 belongs to a family of methyltranferases. It is highly the allele and genotypes frequencies in patients with osteoporosis in conserved during evolution, ubiquitously expressed- including the compared with healthy individuals (p>0.05). Thus, we can suggest tissues affected by the syndrome and our preliminary results suggest that it is necessary to take into account the ethnicity of individuals in nuclear localization. We hypothesize that the absence of this gene in association studies. the patients may have a major contribution to the clinical presentation of the patients. P0809. An international network for genetic diagnostics GENDIA P. J. Willems; P0812. Growth retardation associated with iron-sulfur enzymes GENDIA, Antwerp, Belgium. deficiency in frataxin deficient stable murine fibroblasts cell lines Molecular diagnostics for genetic diseases remains a challenging problem. For many diseases local tests are not available, or incomplete, N. Carelle1, H. Seznec1, A. Derré2, L. Reutenauer1, P. Rustin2, M. Koenig1, H. expensive and slow. The most important bottlenecks for cost-effective Puccio1; molecular diagnostics are the rareness of genetic diseases in general 1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2Unité de Recherche sur les Handicaps Génétiques and the private nature of most mutations. This precludes cost-effective de l'Enfant, INSERM U393, Necker, Paris, France. set up of molecular diagnostics on a regional or even national level. Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the most common recessive ataxia, results To facilitate genetic diagnostics a worldwide network of diagnostic from a generalized deficiency of mitochondrial and cytosolic iron-sulfur labs was organised, existing of many referral labs, 40 expert test (Fe-S) protein activity due to a partial loss of function of frataxin, a labs, and 1 central lab that accepts all samples and issues all results. mitochondrial protein involved in Fe-S cluster (ISC) biosynthesis. This network is called GENDIA (for GENetic DIAgnostics). GENDIA Oxidative stress has been proposed to be involved in the pathogenesis now offers more than 600 genetic tests (www.GENDIA.net), including of FRDA, leading to the use of antioxidants for therapy. However, to molecular analysis of more than 400 genes. this date, FRDA remains a devastating disease for which there is no cure. P0810. Determination of Alpha Thalassemia mutations Our key objective is to find an effective treatment for FRDA using spectrumin Iranian population cellular and mouse models that will then be transferred to the clinical A. R. Ghamari1, A. H. Taromchi1, M. Hasanzad1, H. Yang Law2, M. Neishabury3, research field. Conditional knockout mice already exist but may be M. H. Kariminejad1, H. Najmabadi1; very expensive models for drug assay. Therefore, an initial screening 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, should be undertaken first in cellular models. Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Service KK Woman's and Children's Hospi- The absence of spontaneous phenotype and the genetic heterogeneity tal, Singapore, Singapore, 3Genetics Research Center the Social Welfare and in FRDA patient cell lines make them unsuitable for drug screening. Rehabilitation University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. We have recently developed a murine fibroblast cell model based Alpha-thalassemia is the most common inherited hemoglobin disorder on antisense strategy using a ribozyme which shows highly reduced worldwide, it is caused by a variety of deletional and non-deletional α- levels of frataxin reproducing the quantitative defect found in patients. globin mutations, leading to a reduction or complete absence of gene These cell lines exhibit a proliferation defect associated with an ISC expression. enzyme deficit. This model is the first stable cellular model for FRDA It is observed in high frequencies throughout southeast Asia, India, the that shows spontaneous phenotype without exogenous oxidative Middle East, parts of Africa and the Mediterranean area. insult, and is therefore a key model for drug screening. In this study we have tested 421 Iranian individuals, randomly chosen We therefore propose to screen a library of chemical compounds on from a pool of patients with low MCV, low MCH, normal or slightly this novel cellular model (using high-throughput screening technology)Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 256 in order to identify novel pharmacological compounds that may P0815. Forteen year experience of prenatal diagnosis of potentially work in combating the disease. Thalassemia in Iran M. Parvin1, H. Imanian1, A. Ghamari1, F. Sahebjam1, R. Kariminejad1, A. Sama- P0813. Hereditary ataxias - differential diagnosis and vat2, B. Modell3, M. H. Kariminejad1, H. Najmabadi1; comorbidity 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Z. Musova1, A. Zumrova1, M. Havlovicova1, A. Krepelova1, A. Bodayi1, J. Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Center for Disease Control, Deputy for Non-com- Kraus1, R. Mazanec1, S. Krilova1, L. Appeltova1, T. Marikova1, M. Vyhnalek2, E. municable Disease, Genetics Department, Iranshahr jonoobi St., Tehran, Havrdova3; Islamic Republic of Iran, 3RF & UCMS Dept. of Primary Care & Population Sci- 1Neurogenetic centre of 2nd MF and Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, ences, and UCL Centre for Health Informatics and Multiprofessional Education 2Department of neurology, 2nd MF and Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Repub- (CHIME), Holborn Union Building, Whittington Campus, Highate Hill, London, lic, 3Department of neurology, 1st MF of Charles University, Prague, Czech N19 5LW, UK, United Kingdom. Republic. For fourteen years Iranian scientists have worked to develop a national The hereditary ataxias are a group of genetic disorders characterized thalassemia prevention program Historically abortion was considered by slowly progressive incoordination of gait and often associated unacceptable in Iran; however, intensive consultations led to the with poor coordination of hands, speech, and eye movements. The clerical approval of therapeutic abortion of cases with major type of differential diagnosis of disorders that include ataxia now includes β-thalassemia in 1997, and a nation-wide prevention program with a new neurodegenerative disorder - the fragile X tremor/ataxia screening, counseling and prenatal diagnosis networks has been syndrome (FXTAS). The symptoms are very similar: intention tremor developed. This paper reports the experience from one of the two and gait ataxia and/or mild parkinsonism, peripheral neuropathy, lower national prenatal diagnosis reference laboratories. From 1990 to 2003 limb proximal muscle weakness, short-term memory loss, executive we performed a total of 906 prenatal diagnoses from 718 families at function deficits, cognitive decline, and autonomic dysfunction. risk for thalassemia. Direct and indirect mutation detection methods Potentially FXTAS could be a relatively frequent cause of adult were applied for all cases. In total, 22 mutations were tested routinely onset progressive ataxia or tremor. According to the literature, the and an additional 30 rare mutations were identified. 208 fetuses premutation, an expansion of 50 to 200 CGG repeats in the FMR1 were found to be normal, 215 fetuses were major, and 435 fetuses gene, has a prevalence in the general population of approximately 1 were trait. In 40 cases we only defined one allele. We were unable to per 700 men and 1 per 250 women. provide 8 cases with any diagnosis, corresponding to 0.9%. Our data In the last five years we have created a patient register and DNA supports the functionality of Iranian β-thalassemia prevention program. bank of more than 400 samples from probands with spinocerebellar The success of this system in Iran as a multiethnic and Islamic-based symptomatology. We demonstrate our experience with diagnosis country would mean that it might be applied as an adaptive system for of spinocerebellar ataxias at the DNA level and note a possibility of neighboring and other Islamic countries. comorbidity in a case of a patient with DNA-verified diagnosis of late- onset Friedreich´s ataxia plus a premutation in the FMR1 gene. P0816. Deletion of DMD exon 16 is not associated with disease. Supported by the grant IGA MZ CR No NM/7405-3 and NR/8124-3 M. Schwartz, M. Dunø, J. Vissing; Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. P0814. Study of genetic, epigenetic and expression events Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD)is one of the most common associated with MECP2 in patients with Rett syndrome: an inherited neuromuscular diseases, affecting 1 in 3,500 males. It is an attempt to validate MECP2 as a single underlying cause of Rett X-linked disorder caused by mutations in the DMD gene. Covering 2.4 E. Gak1,2, Y. Petel-Galil1,2, M. Vecsler1,2, I. Greenbaum1, B. Ben Zeev3; Mb, DMD is one of the largest human genes. The gene has 79 exons 1Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Tel encoding a 14kb mRNA. Mutations leading to a truncated protein Hashomer, Israel, 2Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, cause the severe phenotype of DMD, whereas mutations retaining Israel, 3Child Neurology Department, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, the mRNA reading frame cause the more benign phenotype of Becker Israel. muscular dystrophy (BMD). Knowing the exact mutation in a patient Rett syndrome is a progressive neurodevelopmental X-linked disorder is therefore prognostic and an important part of the diagnostic tool of associated with mutations in MECP2 gene. In the course of our these diseases. experience at the Central Rett Clinic at the Sheba Medical Center, By the traditional multiplex PCR one of our healthy male control DNA offering clinical and molecular diagnoses of Rett and clinical follow- samples was found to harbour a deletion of exons 16 and 17 predicted up, we have identified 70 classical and atypical patients. This entire to give rise to an out-of-frame mRNA. MLPA analysis indicated, cohort has been diagnosed under standardized phenotypic criteria and however, only a deletion of exon 16. Closer analysis showed that the using molecular indicators of MECP2 deficiency including sequence deletion covered part of intron 15, exon 16 and almost the entire intron analysis of MECP2 coding region and intron-exon junctions, MLPA 16. The person is completely healthy, has normal muscle morphology deletion detection assay and evaluation of X chromosome inactivation. and creatine kinase level. The deletion was also present in DNA Following, we identified 62 patients with known and novel mutations from a muscle biopsy, excluding mosaicism as an explanation for the involving MECP2 coding region. In attempt to address the need of phenotype. We conclude that a deletion of exon 16 of DMD does not diagnosis of patients with clinical yet not molecular indication of Rett, interfere with the normal function of dystrophin. we developed an alternative approach based on direct estimates of expression levels of the two MECP2 isoforms in peripheral blood. P0817. Interleukin-1b gene and receptor antagonist gene Thereby, we identified additional 5 patients with lower blood MECP2 polymorphisms in patients with multiple sclerosis expression that may indicate presence of mutations in the regulatory A. M. Mikhailova1, O. E. Mustafina1, K. Z. Bahtyarova2, A. N. Aglyamova1, R. V. elements of MECP2 gene. Two of these patients were further detected Magjanov2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; with a novel splice site mutation involving the 2nd alternatively spliced 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa scientific center, Russian Academy exon of MECP2 that potentially leads to an imbalance between the two of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkirian State Medical University, MECP2 isoforms. Bioinformatic analysis of the non-coding MECP2 Ufa, Russian Federation. introns, 5'- and 3'-UTRs, revealed several highly conserved elements This study was done to elucidate the effects of interleukin (IL-1) gene associated with RNA splicing or transcription mechanisms in other polymorphisms on multiple sclerosis (MS). genes. We also detected MECP2 overexpression in several patients We evaluated IL-1b (a C/T transition at -511in promotor) and (+3953 C/ with missense mutations, which overlaps with recent findings of a T in exon 5) and IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) (a variable-number neurodevelomental delay phenotype on the background of MECP2 repeat in intron 2) gene polymorphisms in unrelated 114 patients of MS overexpression in a mouse animal model. and 166 healthy controls. No significant differences were observed in the allelic frequencies of the IL-1b promoter, IL-1b exon 5 and IL-1RA genes between patients with MS and healthy control subjects. But the frequencies IL-1b (-511) T/T genotype was higher in patient MS with optical breach then controls (38.46% vs. 21.08%; P=0.036; OR=2.33,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 257 CI=1.11-4.92). and affected macula) and very early abolished ERG. T155I was Knows, IL-1b (-511 C/T) gene polymorphisms may influence protein found homozygously in 2 families. Affected patients showed early production. Were found the IL-1b gene polymorphisms to play a role onset and severe RD with blindness before 40yrs. Four families were in the development of clinical particularity MS. Further studies are heterozygous for 4 mutations. necessary to determine the biological significance of these findings in CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that there are 3 founder Spanish relation to susceptibility or severity of the disease. mutations (L99I, T155I, c.102ins4) and RDH12 mutations are always associated with a severe RD phenotype, being responsible for 3-4% of P0818. Molecular screening of SRD5A2 gene on ambiguous early-onset RD in Spain. genitalia patients in Taiwan L. P. Tsai1, K. W. Chang2, Y. J. Lee3, D. M. Niu4, M. C. Chao5; P0820. Prevalence of two common mutations and Arylsulfatase- 1Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Hsintien, Taipei county, Taiwan Republic of A pseudodeficiency alleles in patients with metachromatic China, 2Women's and Children's Hospital, Taipei City, Taipei, Taiwan Republic leukodystrophy in Egypt. of China, 3Makay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 4Taipei I. M. R. Hussein1, S. Youssef1, S. Hamid1, N. A.Meguid1, M. Barakat2; Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 5Kaohsiung Medi- 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo Univer- cal University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan Republic of China. sity, Cairo, Egypt. Background: Steroid 5α-reductase(SRD) reduces testosterone Metachromatic Leukodystrophy (MLD) is a neurodegenerative to dihydrotestosterone. The genital phenotype of SRD deficiency is lysosomal storage disease resulting from deficiency of activity of the heterogenous, ranging from complete female to sexual ambiguity, enzyme arylsulfatase A (ASA). Objective: To investigate the efficiency hypospadias with scrotal bifida, and isolated micropenis. Several of some biochemical parameters in the diagnosis and to identify the different mutations leading to SRD deficiency have been identified in molecular basis of MLD in Egyptian patients. A total of 52 patients the 5α-reductase type 2 gene(SRD5A2). In order to understand the presenting with clinical manifestations of MLD were studied using extent of SRD5A2 mutation in Taiwan, we analyzed SRD5A2 gene on quantitative determination of leucocytic ASA, inorganic sulfates and XY patients with ambiguous genitalia. sialic acid, their ages ranged between 1.5- 4 yrs. Mutations in the ASA Methods: Fifty-five XY patients with either complete female, sexual gene were identified by PCR amplification and restriction enzyme ambiguity, hypospadias with scrotal bifida, or isolated micropenis were analysis using BstN1 for detection of splicing mutation at +1 in intron 2 enrolled in this study. The patients distributed from neonate to puberty (I) allele, Aci for missence mutation in exon 8, and Bsr1 (glycosylation) teenager. Except twelve prepubertal patients refusing the HCG test, the site and Rsa1 (poly A allele) for detection of pseudoalleles (P) . Results: others showed normal basal testosterone. Thirty-one had completed A total of 16/52 (30.7%) were diagnosed as having ASA deficiency. the HCG test. The coding region of SRD5A2 gene was amplified by Estimation of sulfates had no significant value while sialic acid was PCR and followed by automatic sequencing. PCR-RFLP was used for significantly higher in leucocytes of affected cases than controls. It was mutation confirmation. observed that (7/16) 43.8% of patients were homozygote for the (I) Results: The analysis revealed three disease-causing mutations from allele,6/16(37.5%) were double heterozygote for (I/P) alleles, none of six unrelated patients, including five homozygous (one G66R,one D95H the patients had the mutation at exon 8. Pseudodeficiency alleles were and three R227E) and one heterozygous (R227E/?) males. The three found in 9 (56%) of patients. The frequency of the poly A allele was cases of homozygous R227E and one homozygous D95H presented 15.6%, and the glycosylation allele 12.5% among the patients’ studied as micropenis. The rest two showed hypospadias with scrotal bifida. alleles. Conclusion: A great variability was observed in ASA enzyme All parents denied consanguinity. We also noticed that the hot spot activity in patients with MLD and their parents. The combination of R227E accounted for the 7 out of 12 mutation loci. pseudodeficiency alleles with MLD can complicate interpretation of the Conclusion: We found that SRD5A2 mutation might cause micropenis results in families at risk. and hypospadias in Taiwan. Most patients showed homozygous mutation though no consanguinity was noted. One hot spot(R227E) P0821. Molecular Screening of β-Thalassaemia Mutations in Iran was discovered. Further polymorphism study is needed to clarify the M. Karimipour1, A. Moradmand1, M. T. Akbari1,2; founder effect for R227E mutation in Taiwan. 1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Depart- ment of Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Tarbiat Modarres, P0819. Phenotype-genotype correlations in 11 Spanish RDH12 Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. mutated families We have characterized the ß-globin gene mutations in 1800 carriers M. Baiget1, G. Utermann2, B. García-Sandoval3, G. Antinolo4, A. Queipo5, S. of ß-thalassaemia and analyzed their regional distribution in Iran. The Bernal1, S. Borrego4, A. Gal6, A. Janecke7, C. Ayuso3, EsRetNet; subjects were either the parents of affected thalassaemia patients or 1Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Innsbruck Medical carrier couples identified following the national premarital preventive University, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 4Hos- screening program. The majority of the carriers were from Mazandaran pital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain, 5Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, and Gilan in the Caspian Littoral in the North, Fars and Khuzistan in 6Hamburg University, Hamburg, Germany, 7Medical University, Innsbruck, Inns- the South. Using the PCR-based allele-specific technique of ARMS the bruck, Austria. subjects were screened and the following alleles with 1% or greater INTRODUCTION: Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a group of hereditary frequency were detected in the following order: IVSII-1(G◊A), IVSI- disorders, which causes retinal dystrophy (RD) and leads to blindness. 5(G◊C), CD 36/37(-T),IVSI-1(G◊A), CD 8/9(+G), CD 44(-C), IVSI- Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is a congenital and severe form of 110(G◊A), IVSI-25del, CD30(G◊C), CD 8(-AA), CD 39(C◊T), IVSII- RD. The RDH12 gene encodes a retinol-dehydrogenase, a protein of 745(C◊G), IVSI-6(T◊C). The frequency range was between 35.9% and the visual cycle. Mutations in this gene are a cause of severe early- 1% for the most frequent and least common mutations with almost onset RD. 80% detection rate. The IVSII-1mutation was found in all population PATIENTS AND METHODS: 22 LCA and 311 unrelated Spanish RP groups with varying frequencies. The other mutations also showed (210 autosomal recessive and 101 sporadic) families were studied. clustering with particular regions. To characterize the remaining 20%, They were ophthalmologically studied and classified into 3 categories: the subjects were further investigated by DGGE and DNA sequencing. 149 severe, 95 moderate and 66 mild. The RDH12 gene mutation This approach has revealed 13 mutations so far .These are: screening was performed by dHPLC followed by sequencing. CD 37/38/39(-GACCCAG), CD22/24(-AAGTTGG), CD 22(G◊T), CD RESULTS: Eleven mutated families were found. All of them were 5(-CT), severe and early onset RD patients (1 LCA and 10 severe RP). CD 25/26(+T), CD15(G◊), CD 82/83(-G), IVSI-130, IVSII-850(G◊T), Three mutations were only found among Spanish cases and 2 of -101(C◊T), IVSI-128(T◊G), -88(C◊T) and the novel mutation of - them were recurrently seen. L99I (previously reported in a French 26(A◊C). This study shows that the underlying genetic determinants of LCA-family) was present in 5 families (3 homozygotes and 2 double ß-thalassaemia in Iran is very heterogeneous. The generation of this heterozygotes) It was associated to 0-3yr onset RD with nistagmus, data was crucial in setting up of the prenatal diagnosis in Iran. nictalopia, visual field impairment and photophobia, followed by early blindness, characteristic fundus (granular black and white pigmentsMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 258 P0822. A novel COX III deletion and D-Loop tandem duplications P0824. MtDNA deletions in patient with hypertrophic of the mitochondrial genome associated with rhabdomyolysis cardiomyopathy-is there a causal relation? R. Marotta1, J. Chin1, D. Kirby2, P. Kennedy3, S. Tombs4, M. Chiotis1, R. Kapsa4, M. Tesarova, D. Fornuskova, L. Cerna, H. Hansikova, L. Stiburek, J. Zeman; M. Cook1, S. Collins1; Dept. of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech 1St. Vincent's Melbourne Neuromuscular Diagnostic Laboratory, Centre for Republic. Clinical Neurosciences and Neurological Research, 5th Floor Daly Wing, St. Within years 1995 - 2004, we have identified isolated or combined Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy Victoria 3065, Australia, 2Mitochondrial Laboratory, cytochrome c oxidase deficiency in 69 children (3 weeks till 16 years). Victorian Clinical Genetics Services and Murdoch Children's Institute 10th Floor Echocardiography revealed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in 25 of Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville Victoria 3052, Australia, 3State Neuropa- them. This group of patients is intensively studied on the molecular thology Laboratories, Level 3 Medical Building, Melbourne University, Parkville level. Victoria 3052, Australia, 4National Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Cen- In proband with exercise intolerance, the hypertrophic cardiomyopathy tre for Clinical Neurosciences and Neurological Research, 5th Floor Daly Wing, was recognized at the age of 15 years. The results of histochemistry St. Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy Victoria 3065, Australia. in endomyocardial biopsy (irregular decrease in COX activity) The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is replicated without proofreading suggested the mitochondrial disorder caused by disturbance in and efficient DNA repair mechanisms. With increased exposure mtDNA. Biochemical analysis in muscle biopsy of the patient to oxidative damage by reactive oxygen species and free radicals revealed decreased activity and protein amount of complex IV and generated due to electron leakage of the respiratory chain, the DNA I. No mtDNA rearrangement was found in DNA isolated from muscle is subject to mutations. A vast number of point mutations and large- sample therefore mtDNA was sequenced and 2 mutations were found: scale mtDNA rearrangements have been associated with a diversity 8348A>G and 12174C>T. Despite the 8348A>G mutation has been of neuromuscular disorders and phenotypes. Rhabdomyolysis, the already associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Terasaki et al., breakdown of myocytes resulting in the leakage of contents such as 2001); we were not able to confirm the pathogenicity of both mutations. myoglobin into the blood and urine, has been associated with a number The mutations were homoplasmic in all analysed tissues of the patient of mitochondrial DNA mutations including: tRNALeu(UUR) A3243G, and in blood of his 7 maternal relatives. Analysis of the heart muscle G15059A , a 24 bp deletion in the cytochrome b gene, cytochrome obtained at autopsy revealed the presence of mtDNA rearrangements. c oxidase, COX I G5920A, COX II, a 15 bp deletion of COX III gene; MtDNA deletions were found also in autoptic muscle sample. These and multiple mtDNA deletions resulting from nuclear defects. Short observations suggest worsening of the mtDNA quality during the tandem duplications of the D-Loop region, the non-coding portion of course of the disease. To find the cause of the mtDNA deletions mtDNA, have been associated with mutations in tRNAs or cytochrome observed in our patient, the analysis of genes involved in a process b and along with large scale deletions are recognized as markers of of mtDNA replication is necessary. Supported by GAUK41/2004/c, early molecular events of the human aging process but have not been GAUK153/2004/c and IGA MZ NR 8065/3. described in patient’s yonger than 30 years of age. Histochemical, , immunohistochemical, genetic analysis of mtDNA and western blot P0825. Genetic studies of the Iranian deaf population analysis was carried out on in a 27 year old patient with a single H. Najmabadi1, C. Nishimura2, K. Kahrizi1, Y. Riazalhosseini1, M. Malekpour1, unprovoked episode of rhabdomyolysis. The muscle biopsy displayed A. Daneshi3, M. Farhadi3, M. Mohseni1, N. Bazazzadegan1, A. Naghavi1, M. prominent focal COX-negative muscle fibres and a novel one base pair Avenarius2, S. Arzhangi1, M. K. Javan1, R. J. H. Smith2; COX III deletion causing a premature stop codon and was associated 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation with multiple D-Loop duplications suggesting a combined deleterious Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Re- effect. search Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 3Rasoul Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, P0823. Frequency of GJB2 deafness in Lur population of Iran Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and one novel GJB2 deafness-causing variant During last six years, probands from 1254 families with hearing loss L. Abbasi Moheb1, M. Sepahvand2, K. Kahrizi1, C. Nishimura3, R. J. H. Smith3, have been referred to our center for genetic testing. In 13 persons, H. Najmabadi1; the following syndromic phenotypes were recognized: Usher, Familial 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Expansile Osteolysis (FEO), Meniere, Bilateral Enlarged Vestibular Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Welfare Organization of Lorestan, Aqueduct (EVA), Waardenburg, Oto-Palato-Digital, Gorlin, Pendred, Lorestan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology Research Labo- Stickler syndrome and Kallmann.. In the remaining 1241 probands, ratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United the diagnosis of non-syndromic deafness was made. Pedigrees were States. consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance in 1163 probands Mutations in the gene that encodes the gap-junction protein connexin who had consanguineous parents and other affected siblings, and 26 ,GJB2 gene, on chromosome 13q12 account for most autosomal autosomal dominant inheritance in ten persons. Three families recessive non-syndromic deafness (ARNSD) in many world population. segregated X-linked deafness. In 65 probands, no other affected Over 90 different ARNSD-causing mutations in GJB2 have been relative could be identified - we classified these as simplex cases. GJB2 reported, but 35delG mutation is the most frequent one in different mutation screening was complete in 1094 patients with presumed populations. In this study, we assessed the contributions made by autosomal recessive deafness, initially by completing an allele specific GJB2 mutations to the ARNSD genetic load in Lur population of Iran. polymerase chain reaction (ASPCR) to detect the 35delG mutation. This population mainly lives in west of Iran. The study group consists Persons either negative or heterozygous for this mutation were of fifty three Lur probands suffering from ARNSD. The first step was analyzed by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography and an allele-specific polymerase chain reaction (ASPCR) assay to screen direct sequencing. We found GJB2-related deafness in 167 of 1094 all study participants for the 35delG mutation. All samples excluding familial cases (15.3%) and in 4 of 65 simplex cases (6.1%). Identified 35delG homozygotes were analyzed by DHPLC and sequencing. deafness-causing allele variants included: delE120, 167delT, R184P, Seven GJB2 deafness-causing variants were found including: 35delG, 310del14, R32H, 314del14, 35delG, IVS1+1G>A, -3170G>A, R127H, W24X, 314del14, V95M, -3170G>A, 512insAACG and 510insCGAA. W24X, R143W, E129K, 312del14, M93I, W77R, 8insT, 512insAACG, Among them 35delG mutation was the most frequent one and the 510insCGAA, 507insAACG, 329delA, 363delC, Q80L. The last four are 510insCGAA is a novel deafness-causing mutation which has not been novel mutations, which have not been reported in other populations. detected in other world populations. In addition to the abovementioned Selected probands and families negative for deafness at the DFNB1 mutations, the V153I polymorphism was detected in three patients. locus are beginning used to complete a genome-wide linkage analysis. Taken together, nine patients (16.9%) had two GJB2 deafness-causing In four of these families, the deafness-causing gene has been localized alleles. Based on our results, we suggest that other genes are the to specific chromosomal regions. major responsible for ARNSD in this population.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 259 P0826. Detection of Cystic Fibrosis mutations in echogenic P0828. Good news for potential DMD/BMD carriers - MLPA gives bowel the answer M. Tzetis, A. Tsiamouri, A. Papatheodorou, K. Pouliou, E. Kanavakis; P. Hedvicakova1, K. Pavlikova1, T. Marikova1, E. Seemanova1, H. Stepankova2, Athens University, Athens, Greece. A. Krepelova1; The presence of echogenic bowel detected on ultrasound investigation 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics,Second Medical School and Univer- during the second trimester of pregnancy can be a normal variant sity Hospital,Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Medi- and also associated with cystic fibrosis, as well as a number of other cal Genetics, Hospital Ceske Budejovice, Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic. disorders such as chromosome aneuploidy. We have investigated Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD) are common 91 cases of echogenic bowel and have detected cystic fibrosis X-linked disorders with an incidence of 1 in 3500 live male births. Up homozygosity in four of these (4.3%) with the following genotypes: to 1/3 of the cases are caused by de novo mutation, without any family F508del/L732X, F508del/574delA, F508del/F508del, F508del/G542X. history. About 60% of DMD patients have a deletion of at least one out In addition heterozygosity was observed in 15 cases (13.4%): 9 with of 79 exons of the large dystrophin gene. The identification of female F508del 2 with 621+1G>T and 1 case each for I148T, 2789+5G>A, carriers has been difficult, time consuming and not fully reliable till now. R297Q and E822X. An additional finding was the presence of particular Using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) we polymorphisms: 3 instances of 1716G/A (E528E), 2 of 2752-15G/C, 2 reinvestigated 14 women from 6 families with an isolated case of DMD. of R1162L and 1 of 4029A/G. Our data indicated that the prior risk of In two families the carrier status of three women at risk was confirmed. CF in a fetus with echogenic bowel for our population is 4.3% and the Previously performed haplotype analysis was neither able to confirm remaining risk of an heterozygous fetus having CF is between 10.3 nor to exclude the risk of these women being carriers of the deletion. and 20%. Besides, using MLPA we examined 5 suspected patients without a Table 1: Summary of families tested and CF results deletion, however we didn´t reveal any. We confirmed a deletion in one exon with three patients (exon 43, 44 and 51, respectively). With Both parents and/or fetus negative 21 one patient the deletion of exon 19 was found to cover exons 18 to 30, in fact. One parent carrier- 2 I148T, F508del We show an interesting case of a female proband with DMD fetus negative manifestation, who has a deletion of exons 46-51. This deletion was One parent carrier- 5 621+3A>G, R75Q and 3 with F508del, inherited from her mother and was not passed on her children. fetus not tested We find MLPA to be a helpful and sensitive method of uncovering the One parent carrier- 7 621+1G>T, I148T and 5 with F508del carrier status in families with a deletion in DMD gene. fetus carrier Both parents carri- F508del/L732X, F508del/574delA, Supported by Institutional Research Project 2005-2009 4 ers- fetus affected F508del/F508del, F508del/G542X P0829. Molecular detection of nondeletional mutations in alpha Fetus only tested- thalassemic patiens by a DHPLC based assay 18 negative V. Guida1, A. Colosimo1,2, M. Fiorito1,3, F. Rafanelli1, M. Fichera4, E. Foglietta5, I. Fetus only tested- E822X; 2789+5G>A; 621+1G>T; Bianco5, P. Grisanti5, M. I. Parodi6, G. Ivaldi6, B. Dallapiccola1,3; 8 carrier R297Q; and 4 F508del 1IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, Couple only tested- 2Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, University of Teramo, 26 both negative Teramo, Italy, 3Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University TOTAL 91 4 homozygotes and 15 heterozygotes of Rome “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 4Associazione Oasi Maria SS. ONLUS, Troina, Italy, 5Centro microcitemia ANMI-ONLUS, Rome, Italy, 6Human Genetic P0827. Two novel CFTR gene mutations identified in cystic Laboratory, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy. fibrosis patients from Lithuania: can the 4171insCCTA mutation Alpha-Thalassemias (α-Thal) are inherited disorders of hemoglobin be associated with low sweat chloride level? synthesis that arise from more than 80 different genetic alterations K. Končiūtė, A. Utkus, V. Kučinskas; within the α-globin gene cluster in 16p13.3. The great majority of Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius Uni- pathogenic mutations consist in large genomic deletions that involve versity, Vilnius, Lithuania. either one or both α-globin genes (α1 and α2), while nondeletional The spectrum and frequencies of CFTR gene mutations in cystic mutations (including point mutations and deletions or insertions of fibrosis (CF) patients from Lithuania were investigated in the present few nucleotides) are responsible for only a minority of α-thalassemia study. CF patients were initially tested for F508del using PCR with phenotypes. oligonucleotide primers bridging the deletion. Subsequently they were We have developed a rapid and reliable method for the molecular screened for the presence of other mutations in all CFTR gene exons detection of α-globin nondeletional defects using a denaturing using DGGE and sequencing. Duplex PCR was applied to identify high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC)-based assay. CFTRdele2,3 (21 kb). 47 patients with CF residing in Lithuania (94 CF Subsequently, we have analyzed 70 Italian subjects, who resulted chromosomes) were investigated. negative after a previous screening for the most common α-globin Twelve different CFTR gene mutations were identified: F508del large genomic rearrangements, using our DHPLC method. The full (70.21%), R553X (4.26%), N1303K (4.26%), CFTRdele2,3 (3.19%), genomic region of both α-globin genes were carefully amplified in four and single cases (1.06%) of W1282X, G314R, R1066H, 3667insTCAA, overlapping fragments and then subjected to DHPLC analysis. Overall, 574delA, 4006-4A>G, 794delC, and 4171insCCTA. Mutations on 9 CF using the DHPLC-based method we have unambiguously identified chromosomes (9.6%) were not identified. both common and rare mutations, as well as neutral variants. The Frameshift mutations 794delC and 4171insCCTA have not been rapidity and reliability of this approach seem appropriate for a second- described previously. Both patients having CFTR genotypes level molecular diagnosis of α-thalassemia carriers and/or patients that [F508del]+[794delC] and [F508del]+[4171insCCTA] had a moderate are negative for the most common deletional mutations. CF clinic with pancreatic insufficiency and pulmonary diseases. Sweat chloride concentration was estimated for these patients. Chloride P0830. Three novel mutations in CX32 gene detected by DHPLC concentration for a boy having [F508del]+[794delC] genotype was 107 mutation analysis mmol/L. Sweat chloride test was repeated fivefold for 1 year old boy A. Patitucci1, A. Magariello1, A. L. Gabriele1, G. Peluso1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. with [F508del]+[4171insCCTA] genotype, the estimated concentration Conforti1, T. Sprovieri1, C. Ungaro1, P. Valentino2, C. Rodolico3, A. Mazzeo3, A. was unusually low 4-9 mmol/L. Toscano3, M. Muglia1; In conclusion the applied PCR-based approach resulted in 12 different 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of CFTR gene mutations in CF patients from Lithuania with the overall Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Department of Neurol- identification rate of 90.4%. 4171insCCTA and 794delC mutations ogy, University of Messina, Messina, Italy. were novel. The patient having genotype [F508del]+[4171insCCTA] X-linked dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX) is an inherited had unusually low sweat chloride level. neuropathy caused by mutations affecting the gap junction protein betaMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 260 1 (GJB1) gene coding for the gap junction protein beta 1 (connexin32) 3 years old, profound deafness was diagnosed and cochlear implant located in the X-q13 region. In males symptoms begin in late childhood surgery was performed. Molecular studies in the CDH23 identified two or adolescence and progress to moderate disability by the third decade novel deleterious mutations. Segregation analysis showed that the of life. Female carriers are usually less severely affected than males two mutations were on different chromosomes and thus the proband at the same age. Over 250 different mutations in the GJB1 gene have presents the [c.6146_6153delTCAACAGC]+[IVS7-2A>C] genotype. been identified involving all portions of the Cx32 protein. Moreover, for epidemiologic purpose, systematic screening for the We propose a mutational approach for the Cx32 gene based on 2299delG mutation in the USH2A was performed. The child carries denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC), a vary in addition to the CDH23 genotype the 2299delG mutation that was fast and sensitive method that minimizes diagnosis time and cost. We inherited from her mother. This mutation is common in Usher type studied seven unrelated Italian cases diagnosed as probable CMT 2 (moderate-to-severe deafness) but has also been described in based on typical clinical features of distal wasting, hyporeflexia with autosomal recessive non-syndromic RP. distal sensory disturbance. In six patients a positive family history was Recently, digenic inheritance of USH1 phenotype in families with present. We detected by DHPLC three novel (Ser49Phe, Ser128Leu, mutations in CDH23 and PCDH15 genes has been shown. This and Phe153Leu) and four known mutations (Tyr7Cys, Arg164Gln, case study supports further that USH1 and USH2 arise from distinct Arg183Hys, Arg183Cys). All mutations segregated with the disease in pathogenic processes since no digenic effect is being observed in the the family, except the Ser49Phe mutation that is a de novo mutation. mother who is double heterozygote for a CDH23 and USH2A mutation. The three novel substitutions were yet unknown, but there were other However, the association of these three deleterious mutations localized amino acid changes reported at those amino acid positions. Both S49 in two Usher genes is likely to explain the severe RP phenotype and Phe153 occur in the extracellular domain of the Cx32, instead described in this proband. the Ser128Leu occurs in the intracellular domain; however all three mutations are also highly conserved in the GJB1 proteins among all P0833. Characterization of Ozzy, a mouse model for Alagille mammalian species suggesting a functional role for the aminoacid at syndrome these positions. K. Vrijens1, S. Thys1, M. de Jeu2, A. Postnov3, L. Cox4, M. Pfister5, A. Zwijsen4, V. Van Hoof6, M. Müller5, N. De Clerck3, C. De Zeeuw2, G. Van Camp1, L. Van P0831. Molecular analysis of candidate genes of LQT syndrome Laer1; J. Kadlecová1, T. Novotný2, R. Gaillyová1, Z. Schmidtová3, M. Šišáková2, O. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium, Toman2, B. Semrád2; 2Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 1University Hospital Brno, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Physics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Laboratory 2University Hospital Brno, Dept. of Cardiology, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk of Molecular Biology (CELGEN), University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5HNO University Brno, Faculty of science, Brno, Czech Republic. Universitatsklinik, Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 6Department of Understanding the molecular basis of cardiac channel activity has Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium. been of major interest in recent years. The Long QT syndrome (LQTS) Ozzy originated from an ENU-mutagenesis program and was selected is an inherited cardiac disorder in which ventricular tachyarrhytmias because of its headbobbing fenotype. We examined the vestibulo- predispose affected individuals to syncope, seizures, and sudden ocular reflex (VOR) and the optokinetic reflex. Ozzy mice showed no death. Ventricular repolarization involves several distinct currents VOR, indicating severe functional defects in the semicircular canals controlled by a number of different ion channels. The defect in any and ampullae. CT-scanning of the inner ears confirmed these results of these channel genes can result in altered repolarization leading to showing narrowing and truncations of at least one of the semicircular LQTS. Presently six different genetic loci are associated with LQTS: canals and loss of the ampullae. Hearing abilities were tested using KCNQ1(11p15.5), KCNH2(7q35-36), SCN5A(3p21-24), Ankyrin- frequency-specific Auditory-evoked Brainstem Response, revealing B(4q25-27), KCNE1(21q22.1-22.2) and KCNE2(21q22.1). Mutations a slight threshold increase for the middle frequencies. Linkage in some other genes appear to be associated with LQTsyndrom. The analysis localised the gene in an 8.7 cM region on chromosome 2, candidate genes are SCN1B (β-subunit of I ), KCND3 (α-subunits of and a 499 T->A missence mutation was identified in Jag1, leading to Na Kv4.3 of I ), CACNA1C (α-subunit of I ) and KCNJ2 gene (α-subunit a substitution of an evolutionary conserved tryptophane (Try167Arg). to1 caL of I ). Mutations in the human homologue of Jag1 cause Alagille syndrome K1 We used single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis (AGS), an autosomal dominant disorder associated with liver, heart, to screen all exons of KCNQ1, KCNH2, KCNE1 genes and recently of eye and skeletal abnormalities, accompanied by a characteristic SCN1B gene in group of unrelated Czech LQT patients. SSCP analyses facies. Occasionally it affects other organ systems like the kidney or were followed by sequency analyses of abberant conformers. the hearing apparatus. Liver disease is the main diagnostic factor for DNA sequence analysis determined one frameshift mutation and AGS. Ozzy mice showed significantly less interhepatic bile ducts than seven missense mutations of KCNQ1 gene, four missense mutations wild-type littermates (p=0.011). 20% of Ozzy mice showed dilation of of KCNH2. Some of them were novel. We also identified nine different the right ventricle in combination with an opening in the tricuspidal single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in KCNQ1 and KCNH2 and valve and aortic dextraposition, symptoms of the tetralogy of Fallot, the three variants of introns in KCNH2 gene. The screening for mutations in most common heart defect in AGS. No eye or vertebral abnormalities the KCNE1 gene revealed rare amino acid variants G38S and D85N. could be detected. Since Ozzy displays two of the major and one minor However, functional studies of these determined sequence variants characteristic of AGS, we conclude that this mouse can be considered would be required to absolutely confirm the pathogenic nature of these to be an animal model for Alagille syndrome. changes This work is supported by grants IGA MZNA 7424-3 and NR/8063-3. P0834. Abnormal inheritance and phenotypic consequences of the A1555G mutation in a heteroplasmic family affected of P0832. One Usher case, two genes, three mutations. nonsyndromic hearing loss N. Pallares-Ruiz1, A. Vielle1, V. Faugère1, M. A. Delrue2, L. Larrieu1, A. Ard-El- E. Ballana1, N. Govea2, R. de Cid1, J. Rosell3, X. Estivill1; Moneim2, D. Lacombe2, M. Claustres1, A. F. Roux1; 1Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital son Dureta, 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 3Hospital Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. 2Génétique Médicale, CHU Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France. Most mitochondrial pathogenic mutations appear in heteroplasmy, Usher syndrome type I (USH1) is manifested by profound congenital being lethal the homoplasmic state. However, the A1555G mutation deafness, vestibular dysfunction and retinal degeneration beginning in the mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene, which has been associated with in childhood. Five USH1 genes have been identified (MYO7A, aminoglycoside-induced and nonsyndromic hearing loss, appears CDH23, USH1C, PCDH15, SANS). The proband is a twelve years mostly in homoplasmy. Moreover, different clinical phenotypes old female, single child with non affected parents. At three months have been associated with this mutation even in the absence of old, nystagmus was noticed and ophthalmic examination confirmed aminoglycoside exposure. We report here the identification of a the diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa (RP). The age of walking was Spanish family with an abnormal inheritance pattern of the A1555G delayed until 18 months due to vestibular dysfunction. When she was mutation in heteroplasmy. Mutation load of all available members haveMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 261 been quantified using the pyrosequencing technology. As a result, we in 9 families and AR in 6. Clinical diagnosis and patient ascertainment have observed a great variability in the mutation load of heteroplasmic was established by the accepted criteria. Genotyping was performed A1555G carriers. The mutation load in the offspring of heteroplasmic on genomic DNA using PCR amplified polymorphic markers for mothers showed a tendency to reverse to homoplasmy after three the 3 most common AD (SPG4, SPG3A) and AR (SPG11) loci and generations. The study of genotype-phenotype suggests that there is fluorescein-labeled primers. a threshold in mutation load for manifestation of clinical symptoms. It Results. As expected, AD-HSP mainly presented the pure clinical is well known that in the case of heteroplasmy, different proportions phenotype whereas AR-HSP patients manifested additional neurologic of wild-type and mutant mtDNA accumulate in different tissues. Thus, manifestations, such as mental retardation, peripheral neuropathy and we should consider that the estimation of mutation load obtained from thin corpus callosum observed in 3 families. Of the 10 informative peripheral blood might not reflect the real situation of heteroplasmy families, 2 showed linkage to the SPG4 locus, 2 to the SPG3A, and in the inner ear, and speculate that unaffected subjects that have the 2 to the SPG11. Mutational screening and studies with additional mutation have a high proportion of the normal 12S rRNA gene. In markers are in progress. summary, this family provides evidence of the presence of a certain Conclusions. Despite the apparent referral bias, the observed amount of wild-type mtDNA in subjects with the A1555G mutation, proportion of AR-HSP forms seems important and may be related which could act as an additional modifying factor of the hearing to the common preference of parental consanguinity. Molecular phenotype in subjects carrying the mutation which show little hearing characterization of HSP is expected to enable better dissection of the abnormalities. various clinical syndromes allowing genotype-phenotype correlation and accurate genetic counseling to family members. P0835. Molecular analysis of the porphobilinogen deaminase gene in newly (2004) diagnozed Czech and Slovak acute P0837. Increased Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) intermittent porphyria patients: Report of three novel mutations plasma levels in eating disorders: a discordant sib-pair analysis M. Hrdinka1, D. Ulbrichova1, E. Flachsova1, I. Mikula1, M. Bodnarova1, J. J. M. Mercader Bigas1, M. Ribases1, M. Gratacos1, A. Badia2, L. Jiménez2, R. Prochazkova1, J. Saligova2, E. Silhanova3, H. Halamkova4, J. Zeman1, P. Mar- Solano2, F. Fernandez-Aranda2, X. Estivill3; tasek1; 1Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 2Psychiatric Service, Ciutat 1Ist School of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 2University Hospital, Kosice, Sanitaria Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain, 3Genes & Disease Program, Center for Slovakia, 3University Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 4Regional Hospital, Genomic Regulation (CRG) and Pompeu Fabra University (UPF), Barcelona Vyskov, Czech Republic. Biomedical Research Park (PRBB), Barcelona, Spain. Background: Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is autosomal dominant Murine model approaches and association studies have indicated that disorder caused by the partial deficiency of porphobilinogen deaminase the Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene participates in the (PBGD; or hydroxymethylbilane synthase, HMBS; EC 4.3.1.8), the susceptibility to eating disorders (ED). The association of the BDNF third enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway. It is manifested by life- gene with anorexia nervosa (AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN) and the threatening acute neurological attacks that can be provoked by various generation Bdnf knock-out mice support that increased levels of BDNF exogenic factors. Clinical expression is highly variable, and ~90% of in the central nervous system (CNS) could be involved in restricting AIP heterozygotes remain asymptomatic throughout life. To date, over food intake and in low body weight. Thus, we propose that ED are 250 PBGD mutations have been identified. characterized by alterations in blood BDNF levels as a reflection of Objective: To identify the molecular lesions in newly diagnozed (2004) increased BDNF concentration in several regions of the CNS. To test Czech and Slovak AIP patients. this hypothesis we assessed the BDNF plasma levels in 50 discordant Design and methods: Genomic DNA was isolated from members sib pairs with ED by using an Enzyme Linked Immunoassay System of seven unrelated AIP families from Czech and Slovak Republics, (BDNF Emax Immunassay System, Promega) and found that BDNF and mutation screening was performed by PCR and denaturing levels were significantly higher in ED patients than in their unaffected gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). Subsequently, automated DNA sibs (mean 57.7 ng/ml vs mean 40.9 ng/ml; P = 0.004). No significant sequencing was used to verify the mutated lesions. For each identified differences were found between the different ED categories (AN and mutations, a restriction fragment lenght polymorphism (RFLP) assay BN) or considering the purging and non-purging ED phenotypes. was established, and a total of 36 individuals from seven families were We also observed a negative correlation between Body Mass Index analyzed to detect asymptomatic carriers. (BMI) and BDNF plasma levels (P = 0.015). These results give further Results: Eight mutations were identified, including three novel physiological evidence for a role of this neurotrophic factor in AN and mutations (610 C>A, 675 delA, 966 insA), and five previously reported BN, and strongly argue for its involvement in eating behavior and body mutations (76 C>T, 77 G>A, 518 G>A, 771+1 G>T, 973 insG). This weight regulation. is the first report of the 518 G>A mutation in the Czech and Slovak population. P0838. The MEFV L110P-E148Q complex allele associated with Conclusions: Three novel mutations were identified in seven an unusual presentation of familial Mediterranean fever unrelated AIP families. These studies further emphasize the molecular I. Bouchardy1, G. Laifer2, U. Eriksson3, M. A. Morris1; heterogenity of AIP, and provide accurate detection of asymptomatic 1Service of Medical Genetics, Dept. of Gynecology-Obstetrics, Geneva Uni- carriers. versity Hospitals, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland, 2Div of Infective Diseases (Supported by grant GAUK 10/2004/C) and Medicine A, Dep. of Internal Medicine, University Hospital,, 4031 Basle, Switzerland, 3Medicine A, Dep. of Internal Medicine, University Hospital, 4031 P0836. Molecular characterization of hereditary spastic Basle, Switzerland. paraplegia (HSP) in Israel Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is caused by mutations in the A. Lossos1, S. Silverstein1, I. Lerer1, D. Abeliovich1, G. Stevanin2, A. Durr2, A. MEFV gene. FMF presents typically as recurrent episodes of fever Brice2, O. Abramsky1, Z. Argov1, V. Meiner1; and polyserositis; amyloidosis is an important long-term complication. 1Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Genetic analysis is valuable in confirming the diagnosis and assisting Paris, France. therapeutic decisions. Background. Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a clinically We have tested 273 individuals by sequencing exons 2 and 10, and genetically heterogenous group of pure and complex forms with followed by complete gene sequencing when appropriate, identifying various genetic loci corresponding to autosomal dominant (AD) and one or two mutations in 93 (34%). Eleven distinct mutations have been autosomal recessive (AR) forms. The spectrum and frequency of HSP found, most commonly M694V (51%), M680I (19%) and V726A (8%). forms in Israel are currently unknown, although instances of unique 12% of patients were hetero- or homozygous for E148Q, which was and important syndromes have been reported. initially considered as a low-penetrance mutation but which is now Objective. To set up a clinical database and perform molecular being “re-evaluated” as a non-pathogenic polymorphism. characterization of HSP in Israel We describe a 23-year old Turkish woman with a short history of Methods. 15 unrelated multiplex Israeli families with HSP formed the “sore throat”, fever, and abdominal pain that resulted in explorative basis of the present study. The mode of inheritance was apparently AD laparoscopy. Following the intervention severe SIRS with rash,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 262 arthralgia, and polyserositis with pleural effusions and ascites P0841. Results of molecular-genetic analyses in the group of developed. After exclusion of infections and other rheumatic/ probands with the Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes autoimmune diseases, genetic diagnosis of FMF was requested and G. Calounova1, A. Boday1, M. Havlovicova1, L. Apltova1, A. Zumrova2, A. Baxo- the patient identified as homozygous for both L110P and E148Q. va3, E. Silhanova4, K. Svetnicova5, P. Goetz1; Colchicine treatment was initiated, and the patient recovered. 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd School of Medical, Charles Uni- L110P has been previously reported in just 3 patients; in at least two, versity and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Pediatric Neu- it was present in a complex allele with E148Q. The overall frequency rology Clinic, 2nd School of Medical, Charles University and University Hospital of L110P cannot be reliably assessed at present, as many laboratories Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st do not include it in their testing.We predict that L110P will be commonly School of Medical, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of found in cis with E148Q, and that attention is required to avoid falsely Medical Genetics, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 5De- identifying heterozygotes as having “two mutant alleles”. partment of Medical Genetics, University Thomayer Hospital Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. P0839. Functional analysis of a new human RUNX2 mutation The Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes are two distinct found in a family with cleidocranial dysplasia multisystem disorders in the chromosomal region 15q11-q13, the C. Puppin1, L. Pellizzari2, D. Fabbro2, G. Tell1, F. M. Santorelli3, G. Damante1,2; genetic background of these disorders is complex and they are caused 1Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Udine, Italy, 2Istituto di Ge- by absence of expression of the paternal (PWS) and maternal (AS) netica - Azienda Policlinico Universitario a Gestione Diretta, Udine, Italy, 3Dipar- active genes. timento di Genetica e Medicina Molecolare - IRCCS Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy. We analyzed 99 PWS and 86 AS suspected probands in our study. Mutations of RUNX2 gene results in cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD), We applied following methods for investigation: microsatellite analysis which is a dominantly inherited skeletal dysplasia characterized (loci: LS6-CA (D15S113), GABRB3 and IR4-3R (D15S11)) with all hypoplastic clavicles, large fontanelles, dental anomalies and delayed patients, methylation analysis with 80 PWS or AS patients and FISH skeletal development. RUNX2 encodes for an osteoblast-specific analysis with UPD suspected cases. transcription factor, which recognizes specific DNA sequences by the We identified 29 of 99 (29 %) positive PWS probands with the runt domain. Most of missense mutations described in CCD patients following distribution: 20 deletions (69 %), 6 uniparental maternal affect conserved residues of the runt domain, abolishing both the heterodisomies (21 %), 2 uniparental maternal isodisomies (7 %). In 1 DNA-binding and transactivation functions and produce a classic case, the absence of paternal 15q11-q13 region was excluded by STR CCD phenotype. We have recently found a novel c.574G>A RUNX2 analysis, but methylation analysis showed inadequate methylation missense mutation present in affected members of a family with pattern, identifying the imprinting mutation (3 %). clinical diagnosis of classical CCD. This mutation causes the change We detected 20 of 86 (23 %) positive AS probands with the following of the glycine at position 192 in arginine (G192R), in the runt domain. distribution: 18 (90 %) deletion forms, 1 (5 %) uniparental paternal A previous study describing mutations of neighbouring residues 190, isodisomy and 1 trisomy of chromosome 15 (5 %). Besides, we 191 and 193 showed that missense mutations affecting these positions detected a recombination between loci LS6-CA (D15S113) and GABR produced complete loss of both DNA-binding activity and in vitro B3 in 1 suspected case with AS. This case is still being analyzed. transactivation. In this study, the molecular properties of this mutation Our results agree with other published data. Complex diagnostic have been investigated. In gel-retardation assay experiments, the approach allows reliable genetic prognosis for the patients. DNA-binding activity of a bacterially-expressed runt domain bearing This work was supported by grant GAUK61/2004 the G192R mutation is mildly reduced with respect to the wild-type protein. However, in cell transfection studies, using the osteocalcin P0842. Genetic analysis of SLC12A3 gene of patients with as target promoter, the mutation completely abolished the activating Gitelman syndrom in the Czech Republic properties of the protein. These results suggest that G192R mutation M. Bromová1, R. Ryšavá2, J. Reiterová2, J. Štekrová1, M. Merta2, F. Votava2, V. effect is only in part explained by impairment in DNA binding activity. Tesar2; 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech P0840. Pathogenic mutation (R1329H) or normal variant in Republic, 2Department of Nephrology, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech Tuberous Sclerosis? Republic. S. Kjaergaard1, N. Rendtorff1, M. Frödin2, L. Lavard3, M. Schwartz4, K. Bron- To investigate the causes of inherited hypokalemic metabolic dum-Nielsen1; alkalosis assosiated with Gitelman syndrome, we have been 1The Kennedy Institute-National Eye Clinic, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Biotech Re- searching for mutations in the SLC12A3 gene (thiazide-sensitive NaCl search and Innovation Centre, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Glostrup University cotransporter). This inherited autosomal recessive renal disorder is Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, 4Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Co- linked with hypokalemic alkalosis, significant hypomagnesemia and penhagen, Denmark. low urinary calcium, and is manifested usually after the age of six. The diagnosis of Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) is based on DNA was isolated, amplified and analysed for mutation detection with clinical findings. Two causative genes, TSC1 and TSC2, have been SSCP and subsequent sequencing. 16 patients with characteristic identified. Missense mutations are common in TSC2, and the difficulties clinical features - abnormal levels of specific ions in blood and urine in interpreting the significance of this type of mutation are illustrated by (Mg2+, K+, Ca2+...) - have been collected from different regions of the a case referred to our molecular study of 65 TSC patients. Czech Republic. TSC1 and TSC2 mutation screening of a 4 y old boy with congenital Genetic analysis revealed several novel mutations. One of the astrocytoma identified a mutation, c.3986G>A; p.R1329H, in TSC2. patients, a 30-year-old man, manifested in childhood hypokalemia This missense mutation has previously been reported in a TSC patient and paresthesias of the upper extremities. He had a mild degree and considered putatively pathogenic. However, the mutation was also of mental retardation. Our laboratory tests confirmed hypokalemia found in our patient’s clinically normal mother. Hence, the R1329H (2.2mmol/l), metabolic alkalosis (pH of blood 7.54, HCO- 37mmol/l), 3 mutation is more likely to be a normal variant. hypomagnesemia (0.41mmol/l) and hypochloremia (91mmol/l). The Clinical re-evaluation of our patient revealed that the astrocytoma urinary excretion of calcium was decreased (2.33 mmol/24h). We was the anaplastic type and not the giant cell type, typically seen in also noted increased levels of plasma renin activity (PRA) and tubular TSC. Cerebral MRI did not show cortical tubera or subependymal dysfunction. Genetic analysis revealed the mutation c.1315G>A glial noduli. Renal ultrasonography, echocardiography, eye and skin (p.Gly439Ser). examination were normal. Conclusively, the patient did not fulfil the Among other mutations found are c.1222A>C (p.Thr408Pro) and diagnostic criteria for TSC. c.480dupC (p.Pro160fsX97). Mutation detection is still in progress for Intriguingly, the functional studies of the corresponding tuberin mutant all of the 16 patients. indicated modestly impaired growth repressing function. It can therefore be speculated that this missense mutation can give rise to abnormal cellular growth in limited tissues or a TSC phenotype depending on the genetic background.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 263 P0843. A skewed X-inactivation mechanism could explain the retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator (RPGR), represents the major severe hemophilia B feature of a 3-year old girl with a severe gene as it accounts for 70-90% of XLRP. The majority of the mutations hemorrhagic diathesis. is clustered in an alternative 3' terminal exon, ORF15, that represents R. Santacroce1, M. Schiavoni2, F. Sessa1, N. Ciavarella3, M. Margaglione1; the major splice variant of the transcript. Molecular studies of ORF15 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Foggia, Italy, 2U.O.S. Coagulazione/Medicina is known to be technically challenging because of its highly repetitive Trasfusionale-Policlinico, Bari, Italy, 3UOS/Medicina Trasfusionale- Policlinico, sequence. To avoid systematic difficult sequencing and since all Bari, Italy. the mutations described in this exon lead to premature termination Hemophilia B is a X-linked inherited hemorrhagic disease resulting of translation, we have investigated the efficiency of the Protein from deficiencies of blood coagulation factor IX. Usually hemophilia Truncation Test (PTT) as a scanning method. is transmitted by healthy heterozygous female carriers to affected The size (1,7Kb) of the ORF15 exon allows working on genomic males. Very rarely can a woman exhibit hemophilia B and the most DNA directly. After in vitro transcription and translation, the translated common explanations for how this can happen include compound proteins are separated by SDS-PAGE and autoradiography is heterozygosity and skewed X-inactivation. Few, isolated case-reports performed.The existence of abnormal pattern migration, compared to exist, so that we ignore the frequency of hemophilia B in women and a wildtype peptide, identifies a translation terminating protein. ORF15 whether the clinical phenotype is the same of that encountered in exon sequencing is performed whith multiple internal primers to confirm males. Our experience regards a 3 year-old little girl suffering from a the presence of a mutation. severe hemorrhagic diathesis. The first bleeding was an apparently We show that a PTT pattern is specific of a premature translation spontaneous hemarthrosis of the left knee, afterward she presented a termination as in our cohort we found that 10 different mutations, large hematoma of left ilio-psoas muscle. Laboratory data showed a leading to 6 different premature STOP codon, are associated to 6 prolonged PTT (R=1.97, n.v. 0.9- different PTT pattern. Because a PTT pattern is so far specific of a 1.2) and the dosage of F.IX <1% (n.v. 60-140%). No underlying diseases premature STOP codon, therefore one can limit the sequencing effort were found, an acquired inhibitor was excluded. The final diagnosis to a restricted portion of the exon. was strictly ascribed to inherited severe hemophilia B. In both the episodes the patient needed substitutive treatment with recombinant P0846. Molecular diagnosis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease : F. IX concentrate, reaching the complete resolution of bleedings with strategy refinement and results of the genetic exploration of a a good clinical outcome.The sequence of the entire coding region of series of 200 patients in Marseille. the F.IX gene and the exon-intron boundaries was done. We have R. Bernard1,2, A. De Sandre Giovannoli1,2, N. Martini1, A. Boyer1, C. Pécheux1, identified a heterozygous C-to-T transition within the exon 6 leading N. Lévy1,2; to an Arg-to-Trp substitution at position 180. This mutation, described 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d’enfants de la Timone, Mar- in several hemophiliacs B, was inherited from her mother. Since no seille, France, 2Inserm U491 Faculté de Médecine de la Timone, Marseille, further mutation was identified, we suggest that a skewed X-inactivation France. mechanism could be responsible for the disease. Hereditary sensitive and motor peripheral neuropathies also called Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) constitute a frequent demand for P0844. Novel spastin mutations in two Italian patients with genetic testing. This group of pathologies is characterised by its genetic hereditary spastic paraplegia heterogeneity. All modes of inheritance have been reported, and to A. Magariello1, A. Patitucci1, A. L. Gabriele1, T. Sprovieri1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. date more than 20 genes have been identified as mutated in CMT, Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, G. Peluso1, M. Mancuso2, D. Branca3, U. Aguglia3, M. while some others are still only localized, making the classification Muglia1; complex and constantly evolving. While electrophysiological criteria 1Institute of Neurological Sciences -CNR-, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of only allow distinction between demyelinating (CMT1), axonal (CMT2) Neurological Sciences, University Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 3Regional Epilepsy Center, or intermediate neuropathies, clinical history can sometimes orientate A.O. Bianchi Melacrino Morelli, Reggio Calabria, Italy. the molecular explorations but rarely allows focusing on one particular Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) comprise a genetically and gene. Furthermore, there is now evidence that several of the identified clinically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders genes are involved in axonal as well as in demyelinating forms (e.g. characterized by progressive spasticity and hyperreflexia of the lower P0), and/or in dominant as well as recessive CMT (e.g. P0, EGR2). limbs. Autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia linked to In this context, defining a molecular strategy for genetic testing has chromosome 2p (SPG4) is the most common form of HSP. It is caused become a real challenge that our laboratory is facing since 1997. by mutations in the SPG4 gene encoding spastin, a member of the According to recent data we explore at present 10 different genes of AAA protein family of ATPases. Over 100 spastin mutations including CMT: PMP22, P0, LITAF, EGR2, GJB1, MTMR2, GDAP1, NDRG1, missense, nonsense and splice-site point mutations, as well as little MFN2 and LMNA. Among these genes, some are explored in particular insertions and deletions have been described. A mutational screening of ethnic background situations (e.g. NDRG1) and/or in case of associated spastin gene by Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chromatography evocative clinical features (e.g. LMNA). The mutation frequency of (DHPLC) on Italian patients diagnosed as probable HSP revealed two newly identified genes (e.g. MFN2) remains to be determined. We novel mutations in exon10: a missense mutation C1429T and a one base wish to present here our strategies in molecular exploration of CMT pair insertion (1406insT). The C1429T missense mutation replaces a patients, and the results obtained on 200 patients included in such a proline at position 435 with leucine (P435L) and was not found in 100 genetic testing in our laboratory in Marseille. normal chromosomes. The one base pair insertion (1406insT) leads to frame shift (aa 427-441) and premature termination (442stop codon); P0847. Mitochondrial content reflects oocyte variability and it produces a truncated spastin protein lacking the ATPase domain , fertilization outcome the AAA cassette region, and one of two leucine zipper domain. Both T. Almeida Santos1,2, S. El Shourbagy3, J. St John3; mutations could impair the spastin function through either a dominant 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital da Universidade de Coimbra, Portugal, negative effect on the wild-type spastin or by a loss of function of the 2Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3The mutated protein. Mitochondrial and Reproductive Genetics Group, The Medical School, The University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TJ, UK., Birmingham, United P0845. Molecular studies of ORF15-RPGR in French patients: Kingdom. advantages of the PTT test approach. OBJECTIVE: To determine the content of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) V. Faugère1, C. Saquet1, S. Tuffery-Giraud1, C. Hamel2, M. Claustres1, A. F. in oocytes from a range of patients with fertilization success and Roux1; failure. DESIGN: Analysis of the mtDNA content in fertilized and 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 2Ser- unfertilized oocytes and embryos using real time PCR. SETTING: vice d'Ophtalmologie Montpellier, Montpellier, France. University hospital infertility and research center. PATIENT(S): Fifty- Among the various forms of inheritance, X-linked RP (XLRP) four women seeking infertility treatment. INTERVENTIONS: None. represents the severe form with an early age of onset of the disease MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: 142 fertilized and unfertilized oocytes and rapid progression. Of the five loci mapped on the X chromosome, were classified into three main groups. Group I consisted of 35Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 264 fertilized oocytes from 21 patients; Group II 65 unfertilized oocytes a putative role in synaptic vesicle exocytosis. However, patients in two from 36 patients; and Group III 42 degenerate oocytes from 23 separate families have been reported with an interstitial deletion taking patients. MtDNA content was determined by SYBR Green real time away RGS7 and at least five other genes without developmental delay PCR based assay. RESULTS: The mean mtDNA copy number for the or even mild dysmorphic features. This suggests that genes in the most fertilized oocytes was 250,454 whilst for the unfertilized group this was distal 6 Mb to the telomere are associated with mental retardation. 163,698 (p<0.002). There were significant differences for mtDNA copy The most distal 1.5 Mb contain predominantly putative genes and/or number between the male factor and female factor infertility unfertilized pseudogenes resembling olfactory receptors, characteristic for many oocytes (p<0.02) and for the unexplained infertility with female factor other chromosome ends. Thus, the genes between the olfactory infertility groups (p<0.005). The mean copy number for the degenerate receptor cluster and the deletion may be responsible for the clinical oocyte group was 44,629, which was significantly different to the other phenotype. This region spanning 4.5 Mb, contains 17 known genes subdivisions in this group. CONCLUSIONS: It is evident that mtDNA including 5 zinc fingers: ZNF496, ZNF124, SBZF3, SMYD3 and content is critical to fertilization outcome and serves as an important ZNF238. Interestingly, related zinc finger genes have been implicated maker of oocyte quality explaining some cases of fertilization failure. in other mental retardation disorders. P0848. PDS gene (SLC26A4) is frequently mutated in non P0850. BBS4 interacts with dynactin 1 in a manner compatible syndromic hearing loss with inner ear malformation DFNB4. with its intracellular transport by the dynein/dynactin complex S. Albert1, H. Blons2, F. Denoyelle1, D. Feldmann3, L. Jonnard2, B. Delobel4, J. Hill, A. J. Ross, H. May-Simera, P. L. Beales; H. Journel5, H. Dollfus6, A. David7, V. Drouin-Garraud8, C. Goizet9, C. Francan- Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom. net10, F. Fellmann11, J. Vigneron12, C. Petit13, E. N. Garabédian1, R. Couderc3, Dynactin 1, in concert with dynein and other complexed proteins, S. Marlin14; e.g. dynamitin, mediates retrograde transport of intracellular protein 1Serv ORL et Chir Cervico-Faciale, Inserm U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, cargoes along the microtubule cytoskeleton. We have shown Paris, France, 2Lab. Biochimie, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Lab. previously that wild-type BBS4, the protein product of a gene mutated Biochimie, Inserm U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Centre in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, interacts with full-length dynactin 1. In this Genet, Hôp St Antoine,, Lille, France, 5Unit Genet, CHR, Vannes, France, 6Serv study, dynactin 1 deletion constructs were made and their interaction Genet Med, Hôp Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 7Serv Genet, Hôtel Dieu, with BBS4 was examined using both immunoprecipitation and Nantes, France, 8Serv Genet, Hôp C Nicolle, Rouen, France, 9Unit Genet Med, cellular localisation studies. By immunoprecipitation, it was found that Hôp Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 10Unit Genet, Hôtel Dieu, Clermont Ferrand, BBS4 interacts with the C-terminal portion, amino acids 879-1278, France, 11Serv Cytogenet, Hôp St Jacques, Besançon, France, 12Mater Reg A of dynactin 1. Deletion constructs of dynactin 1 consisting only of Pinard, Nancy, France, 13Inserm U587, Inst Pasteur, Paris, France, 14Unit Genet amino acid residues from within this region formed discrete spherical Med, Inserm U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France. accumulations when transfected into 3T3 cells. BBS4-GFP, usually Sensorineural hearing loss HL is the most frequent sensory deficit of centrosomally localised, became aberrantly localised in the presence childhood, and is of genetic origin in up to 75% of cases. It has been of the C-terminal dynactin deletion constructs, often colocalising shown that mutations of the SLC26A4 (PDS) gene were involved either in with the cytoplasmic accumulations of the truncated dynactin 1. The syndromic deafness characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing previously characterised cargo-binding region of dynactin 1 to which loss and goitre (Pendred’s syndrome), as well as in congenital isolated BBS4 binds is distinct from the microtubule (amino acids 1-150) and deafness (DFNB4). While the prevalence of SLC26A4 mutations in dynein intermediate chain (amino acids 100-811) binding domains. Pendred’s syndrome is clearly established, it remains to be studied in The results shown here indicate that BBS4 binding of dynactin 1 is DFNB4. In this report, 112 patients from 103 unrelated families, with compatible with its transport by the dynactin/dynein complex. These NSHL and inner ear malformation, were genotyped for SLC26A4 using findings support the previously discussed putative role of BBS4 as DHPLC molecular screening and sequencing. Eighty-eight allelic an adaptor protein for the transport of other centrosomally destined mutations were observed in 103 unrelated families, of which eighteen cargoes, such as pericentriolar material 1. have never been reported. Most mutations were found in exons 6, 10, 16, 19 and 14, and many of these have already been described P0851. A Wilson disease patient homozygous for the Met645Arg in Pendred’s syndrome. The prevalence of SLC26A4 mutations was mutation. Genotype-phenotype correlations. 36.9% (38/103), with compound heterozygosity in 19.4% (20/103), E. Margarit1, R. Queralt1, M. Bruguera1, I. Marzana2, C. de la Riva2, F. Ballesta1; while one patient was homozygous. All patients included in this series 1Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital San Eloy, Barakaldo, Spain. had documented deafness (age of onset, severity, type, evolution Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder affecting copper status), associated with inner ear malformation (enlarged vestibular transport, resulting in intracellular copper accumulation that produces aqueduct, cochlear dysplasia) and without any evidence of syndromic hepatic and/or neurological damage. Molecular analyses of the ATP7B disease. Among patients with SLC26A4 mutations, deafness was gene in Wilson disease patients have identified more than 200 different more severe and fluctuated more than in patients with no mutation alterations. Our previous results in molecular diagnosis of Spanish (p<0.05). In conclusion, the incidence of SLC26A4 mutations is high in patients showed a high allelic heterogeneity, what makes difficult patients with isolated deafness and inner ear malformation and could genotype-phenotype correlations in our population. We have now represent up to 6% of NSHL. Therefore, deaf children with inner ear identified a patient homozygous for the Met645Arg mutation. Despite malformation should undergo SLC26A4 molecular screening. the high frequency of this particular alteration in the Spanish population, this is the first carrier of Met645Arg in both alleles. The patient was P0849. Delineation of the candidate region for mental retardation casually diagnosed following a routine clinical screening when he was in subtelomeric 1q deletions 52 years old. Minimal alterations in the hepatic biochemical values led L. Rooms1, E. Reyniers1, Y. van Bever1, A. Laridon2, F. Kooy1; to additional analyses. Low serum ceruloplasmine, low serum copper 1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2University Hospital Antwerp, Ede- levels and raised copper urinary elimination after penicillamine were gem, Belgium. found, suggesting a possible Wilson disease. SSCP analysis of the Subtelomeric deletions of chromosome 1q have been reported in ATP7B gene was performed, and sequencing of the shifted exons several screening studies of mentally handicapped. We identified revealed a T1934G substitution (exon 6) in both alleles. Considering a patient with a de novo subtelomeric 1q deletion of approximately the low clinical affectation of this patient, we suggest that Met645Arg is 8Mb. a mild mutation and that other individuals homozygous for this mutation To increase our insights in the mechanisms responsible for these might be unnoticed and misdiagnosed. Low clinical alteration would be subtelomeric rearrangements, we are trying to identify the breakpoint consistent with the position of the Met645Arg substitution in the ATP7B sequences of our subtelomeric deletions. Currently, the breakpoint protein, between the sixth copper-binding and the first transmembrane region for our 1q patient was refined to a 18 Kb XmnI fragment close domains, a region not essential for the protein function although it can to the RGS7 gene. The RGS7 gene, a regulator of G protein signaling, impair copper transport. seemed a strong candidate gene for the mental handicap as this neuron specific gene is primarily expressed in brain tissue and playsMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 265 P0852. Polymorphisms of RET gene involved in aetiology of with different forms of SMA. The Western blot analysis showed that the Hirschsprung disease SMN protein level in affected individuals was reduced by 97.1% in a R. Smigiel, A. Lebioda, D. Patkowski, R. Slęzak, J. Czernik, T. Dobosz; type I patient, 46 ± 15.6% in type II patients (n=5), 32.7 ± 21.6% in type Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland. IIIa patients (n=11), 20.8 ± 16.8% in type IIIb patients (n=9) and 11.3% Hirschsprung disease (Hd) is a congenital disorder, characterized by in a type IV patient. These differences were statistically significant the absence of intestinal ganglion cells. Various genes are included for types I and II, but not for types III and IV patients. Additionally, in aetiology of Hirschsprung disease. Diverse models of inheritance, there was certain overlap between the normal range of expression co-existence of genetic disorders and chromosomal aberrations and level and the levels detected in type II-IV patients. Together, these involvement of various genes confirm genetic heterogeneity of Hd. It results suggest that tissue-specific regulation of SMN expression in seems that RET gene plays the most important role in its aetiology. affected cells (motor neurons) as well as other factors may additionally There are a variety of mutations showed in this gene resulting in a contribute to the observed diversity in clinical manifestation of SMA. clinical heterogeneity. Recent advances showed that variants of RET Supported by the State Committee for Scientific Research grant 2 polymorphisms are over- or under-represented in Hd populations. P05E 007 27 and the Polpharma grant 201/II/2003. The aim of the study was to analyse single nucleotide polimorphisms of RET gene in several exons. To test how the Hd phenotype may P0855. Mutation analysis of the MECP2 gene in Czech, Slovak be affected by the presence of genetic variants, we compared the and Ukrainian patients with Rett syndrome molecular results with clinical and long-term folow-up data. The D. Zahorakova1, R. Rosipal1, J. Hadac2, N. Misovicova3, A. Zumrova4, V. Bz- study group comprised 120 Polish patients. Molecular analyses were duch5, J. Zeman1, P. Martasek1; performed in 50 cases. Only 4 investigated patients with Hd have a 11st School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2De- family history. We found a short segment of aganglionic gut in 64%, partment of Child Neurology, Thomayer University Hospital, Prague, Czech ultra-short segment in 16% and long-segment in 20%. The 135A and Republic, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Martin University Hospital, Martin, 1296A and 2712G RET variants have been shown to be strongly Slovakia, 4Department of Child Neurology, University Hospital Motol, Prague, associated with the Hd phenotype. These data suggest a role for RET Czech Republic, 5Department of Pediatrics, Commenius University Hospital, polimorphisms variant in the aetiology of Hd. In nearest future, the Bratislava, Slovakia. genetic tests could determine the severity of clinical picture of Hd and Background: Rett syndrome (RTT), is a severe X-linked the risk of Hd patients family. neurodevelopmental disorder affecting 1/10,000-15,000 females. It is caused by mainly de novo mutations in the MECP2 gene. Its product P0853. Asymptomatic hyperCKemia in a case of Danon disease methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) binds specifically to methylated due to a missense mutation in Lamp-2 gene DNA and plays an important role in gene silencing. Mutations in O. Musumeci1, C. Rodolico1, I. Nishino2, G. Di Guardo3, M. Aguennouz1, A. MECP2 lead to decrease/loss of MeCP2 function. To date, more than Migliorato1, C. Messina1, G. Vita1, A. Toscano1; 200 mutations have been identified in MECP2 including missense, 1Dept. of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, University of Mes- nonsense, deletions and insertions. We report mutation analysis of 85 sina, Italy, 2Dept. of Neuromuscular Research National Istitute of Neuroscience, girls with RTT from Czech Republic, Slovakia and Ukraine. Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan, 3Dept. of Cardiology, Ospedale Garibaldi, Catania, Italy. Matherials and methods: Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral Primary lysosome-associated membrane protein-2 (LAMP-2) blood lymphocytes and used to amplify coding sequence and exon/ deficiency is an X-linked disease, characterized by the clinical triad intron borders of MECP2 gene. PCR products were examined by of cardiomyopathy, vacuolar myopathy and mental retardation, automated DNA sequencing and RFLP. previously known as Danon disease. Mutations of lamp-2 gene have Results: The analysis revealed 24 different mutations in 54 sporadic been reported so far in about 20 patients, one of whom was Italian. patients (63.5%). Two of them have not been previously published: We describe herein a 23 year-old man with a Wolf-Parkinson-White L108H and P388S. The frequency of mutation T158M compared to syndrome and a non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. He other databases (e.g. RettBASE 9.25%) has been much more higher was admitted to our department because, in several occasions, blood in our patients (20%) and further investigations will show whether this tests revealed persistently increased serum CK (max 783 IU/L, n.v. mutation is prevalent in the Slavonic population. <200). A muscle biopsy revealed a vacuolar myopathy with mild Conclusions: Our results show molecular heterogeneity in patients glycogen storage and immunohystochemical studies detected LAMP- with RTT, facilitate the molecular diagnosis of RTT in the Slavonic 2 deficiency. A new nucleotide substitution (T961C) on exon 8 of lamp- population, and provide insight into the molecular pathology of RTT. 2 gene was identified as responsible of the protein deficiency. This is a Supported by grant GAUK8/04. new Italian case with persistent hyperCKemia, exercise intolerance and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy but with no muscle weakness or mental P0856. Molecular diagnosis of dysferlinopathies in a clinical impairment. Different mutations have been described, but almost all setting and report of novel DYSF mutations of them determined a truncated not functional protein. In our case the M. Krahn1, K. Nguyen1, R. Bernard1, G. Bassez2, V. Labelle1, D. Figarella- patient harboured a missense mutation so far never described. We Branger3, J. Pouget4, E. H. Hammouda5, R. Ben-Yaou6, C. Béroud7, A. Urtiz- suggest that LAMP-2 deficiency has to be included among the causes berea5, B. Eymard2, F. Leturcq8, N. Lévy1,9; of asymptomatic hyperCKemia, especially in patients with arrhytmias 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d'enfants de la Timone, Mar- or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy seille, France, 2Institut de Myologie, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Laboratoire d'Anatomopathologie, Hôpital Timone, Marseille, France, P0854. The relationship between the SMN protein expression 4Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Timone, Marseille, France, 5AFM et Généthon, level in fibroblasts and the clinical phenotype of SMA patients Evry, France, 6Institut de Myologie, Inserm U582, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié- M. Milewski1, M. Jedrzejowska2, M. Jurek1, D. Sielska1, J. Borkowska2, I. Haus- Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 7Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de manowa-Petrusewicz2; Génétique Humaine, Montpellier, France, 8Laboratoire de Biochimie Génétique, 1Cell Biology Laboratory, Medical Genetics Dept., Institute of Mother and Child, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 9Inserm U491 : "Génétique Médicale et Dével- Warsaw, Poland, 2Neuromuscular Unit, Medical Research Center, Warsaw, oppement", Faculté de, Marseille, France. Poland. Dysferlinopathies belong to the heterogeneous group of autosomal Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder recessive muscular dystrophies. Mutations in the gene encoding characterized by the loss of motor neurons of the spinal cord. Several dysferlin (DYSF) lead to distinct phenotypes, mainly Limb Girdle SMA forms (types I-IV) have been distinguished on the basis of disease Muscular Dystrophy type 2B (LGMD2B) and Miyoshi myopathy (MM). severity and the age of onset. The disease-causing mutations in the Due to the clinical heterogeneity, initial Dysferlin protein analysis on SMN1 gene are thought to affect the level of functional SMN protein. muscle sample is essential to orientate diagnosis. However, diagnosis However, although the SMN protein expression level is drastically should be confirmed by molecular analysis of the DYSF gene. reduced in fibroblasts of the most severely affected type I patients, The large size of the DYSF gene (> 150 kbp, 55 exons) makes this a similar reduction in type II-IV patients remains a matter of controversy. challenging task on a routine basis. Methods for mutation screening We examined the protein level in fibroblasts isolated from 27 patients are particularly useful in this regard.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 266 Here, we report the results of mutational screening in a cohort of families. To date the sequencing of exons 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 13 of fVIII LGMD2B and MM patients, identified using SSCP and/or DHPLC gene was completed. We found three novel point mutations (Lys48Gln, analysis, and subsequent sequencing of detected variants, in a routine Trp68STOP, His256Arg) and one published missense mutation in fVIII diagnostic setting. gene. Among 20 HB-patients, the entire coding region was sequenced In 31 unrelated patients, molecular analysis confirmed the diagnosis and one novel (Asp64Val) and 17 published fIX gene mutations were of primary Dysferlinopathy. 12 of these patients carry an homozygous found. This new mutation was detected in two unrelated Hungarian deleterious mutation, while 19 patients are compound heterozygotes. families. Our results further confirm, that HA and HB can be caused by Furthermore, one mutation was identified in 18 patients, without a wide variety of point mutations. identification of a second deleterious allele. Complementary analysis is still ongoing for these patients. P0859. HMG-Box deletion of the SRY gene in two sisters with Most of the identified mutations have not been reported before, and 46XY gonadal dysgenesis are predicted to produce a truncated protein (38%) or one amino-acid A. Galani1, A. Galla2, C. Sofocleous1, G. C. Hadjiathanasiou3, H. V. Kosmidis4, substitution (52%). I. Giannatou2, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, A. Mavrou1; We did not find evidence for genotype-phenotype correlations. 1Medical Genetics, Athens University, "Aghia Sophia" Childrens' Hospital, All genetic and phenotypic data were compiled in a newly created Athens, Greece, 2Genetics Unit, 2nd Dept of Pediatrics School of Medicine,, database, the “Universal Dysferlin Mutations Database“ (UDMD). This Athens, Greece, 3Department of Endocrinology, "P. & A. Kyriakou" Childrens' database compiles all mutations, either novel or previously reported in Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4Oncology Department, "P. & A. Kyriakou" Childrens' the literature, as well as all polymorphisms known in the DYSF gene. Hospital, Athens, Greece. Mutations in the SRY gene, which is involved in human sex determination, P0857. Characterization of a balanced X/autosomal translocation result in XY sex reversal and pure gonadal dysgenesis. in a female patient displaying a Rett-like phenotype We report on a familial case of 46 XY pure gonadal dysgenesis in two M. Morleo1, D. Iaconis1, D. Chitayat2, F. Mari3, F. Ariani3, R. Caselli3, A. Renieri3, sisters, 12 and 13 years old, which was fortuitously detected after the B. Franco1; development of dysgerminoma and gonadoblastoma in the younger 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy, 2The Hospital for one, at the age of 11 years old. The tumor originated from the right Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Medical Genetics, Dept. Mol. Biol., Uni- gonad which was surgically removed. The left gonad and the tubes were versity of Siena, Siena, Italy. not removed at this time. Both sisters present unambiguous female We report the study of a female patient with an apparently de novo external genitalia, normal size of uterus and streak gonads. Hormonal balanced X/autosomal translocation between the short arm of the studies are consistent with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. The X chromosome and the long arm of chromosome 20. This patient oldest sister remains asymptomatic. developed at 15 months severe infantile spasms which have been Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood refractory to therapy. The first 6-8 months of development were normal lymphocytes of both individuals. Molecular analysis of Y chromosome but subsequently her development slowed and she now displays a was performed by PCR amplification of the SRY and ZFY loci as well profound developmental delay. as the AZF region. Cytogenetic characterization using fluorescent in situ hybridization Results: A deletion within the SRY gene which includes the HMG-box showed disruption of an unknown transcript in Xp11. was revealed in both sisters. The pattern of expression of this transcript was evaluated by RNA Conclusions: Molecular analysis is consistent with the diagnosis of in situ hybridization on sections from murine embryos at different pure gonadal dysgenesis. The remaining ovary of the youngest sister developmental stages (E12.5-E14.5-E16.5 and P0). Our preliminary was removed due to the high risk of developing a new tumor and study revealed expression of this transcript in the olfactory bulb, the gonadoblastoma was histopathologically confirmed in the removed cerebral cortex, the cerebellum, the hippocampus, and the spinal gonad. Bilateral gonadectomy was recommended to the oldest cord. asymptomatic sister in order to avoid the development of a gonad Considering that the phenotype observed in the patient, closely tumor in the future. resembles the phenotype described in Rett syndrome (RTT), we Since the deletion is detected in both patients the case is characterized decided to evaluate this gene as a candidate for RTT. Mutation as familial and the possibility o paternal gametic mosaicism should be analysis is ongoing in a cohort of 40 cases who had been diagnosed considered. with classical RTT syndrome or with a variant of RTT. Mutations in the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2), the major gene of RTT, P0860. Molecular-genetic study of Russian PKU patients and the cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 gene (CDKL5), responsible for A. Anichkina, N. Galeeva, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov; early seazure variant of RTT have both been excluded in this cohort Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. of patients. Phenylketonuria is an autosomal recessive human genetic disease Data will be presented on the complete characterization of this caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. To transcript. date more than 400 mutations have been described. This disease is associated with severe mental retardation. P0858. Genetic analysis of the coagulation factor VIII and IX We studied 296 PKU patients from different Russian regions. For genes in Hungarian patients with haemophilia screening of 8 most frequent mutations in exons 3, 5, 7, 11 and 12 A. Bors, H. Andrikovics, A. Szilvási, A. Fehér, L. Nemes, A. Tordai; of the PAH gene a multiplex system for ACRS PCR analysis was National Medical Center, Budapest, Hungary. developed. This system detected 78.3% mutations in our patients. Haemophilia A (HA) and haemophilia B (HB) are common X-linked For other PKU chromosomes PCR-SSCP analysis of all PAH exons bleeding disorders resulting from the inherited deficiency of coagulation and intron/exon junctions with sequence analysis of fragments with factors VIII (fVIII) and IX (fIX), respectively. Female relatives of patients altered electrophoretic mobility was performed. We have revealed with haemophilia may be carriers and many of them request carrier 28 different mutations, including 4 novel mutations (I421N, G256D, status determination. Previously, large gene inversion detection in Ala132Val, del865-872nt) that represent 86.8% of all defective HA patients and linkage analysis using intragenic polymorphisms chromosomes. Two patients from our group have three mutations in in HB and in inversion-negative HA patients were used for carrier their genotype. One of them has R408W on one chromosome and and prenatal diagnosis in our laboratory, but in some cases linkage (IVS10-14c->g+ IVS 11+1g->c) in cis on the other; the other patient analysis had limitations. A high number of different mutations can be has P281L on one chromosome and (A132V +del865-872nt) in cis identified by direct sequencing of the fVIII and fIX genes, which is now on the other. Our approach failed to reveal any PAH mutations on 78 the preferred method for genetic counseling. The aim of our study was PKU chromosomes (13.2%). This group includes 60 chromosomes to identify the disease causing mutations in 15 severe HA-patients with in patients with one confirmed mutation. In 9 PKU patients we have no intron inversions and in 20 Hungarian HB-patients by sequencing not found any mutations in the PAH gene and suppose that they may the promoter and the exons with flanking regions of the fVIII and fIX have a disorder in the QDPR gene. Investigations of this gene are in genes and to provide precise carrier status determination in the affected progress now.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 267 P0861. Cryptic genomic rearrangements in Beckwith- of cytochrome P4501B1 result in primary congenital glaucoma, Wiedemann patients. mutations in other regions hold the potential to define differences in the S. Russo1, P. Finelli1, S. Ferraiuolo1, F. Cavalleri1, F. Cogliati1, A. Gessi1, M. estrogen metabolism. In the present study, we analyzed the CYP1B1 Recalcati1, M. Tibiletti2, L. Zoccante3, M. Bonati1, L. Larizza1,4; gene in Mexican patients with primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) 1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino (MI), Italy, 2Insubria University, and described four novel mutations and a novel allele variant of the Varese, Italy, 3Policlinico G. Rossi, Verona, Italy, 4Biology and Genetics Dept CYP1B12 gene. Sample included 12 non-related cases with PCG. - University of Milan, Milano, Italy. Analysis of coding regions of the CYP1B1 was performed through PCR Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS; MIM 130650) is a and DNA sequencing analysis from genomic DNA. Molecular analysis developmental disorder, characterized by prenatal and postnatal of the CYP1B1 gene showed the following molecular defects: 1) a overgrowth, macroglossia and anterior abdominal wall defects. The novel single base pair deletion within codon 370 (1454delC); 2) a novel etiology involves genetic and epigenetic alterations affecting the 11p15 single base pair deletion within codon 277 (1176delT) 3) a novel single region, which is organised into two imprinted domains under the control base pair deletion within codon 179 (880delG); 4) a duplication (or of DMR1, 4Kb distal to 5’H19, and DMR2 in KVLQT1 IVS10. Only insertion) of ten base pairs within codon 404 (1556dupATGCCACCAC) 2% of BWS patients were found to carry cytogenetics abnormalities. and a novel polymorphic variant of the cytochrome P4501B1 with six A cohort of 60 BWS patients was investigated for the most common single nucleotide polymorphisms. We observed that deletions and pathogenetic mechanisms: 11p15 mosaic paternal UPD and defects insertions are the principal molecular defects of the CYP1B1 gene in in methylation pattern of the imprinted H19 and LIT1. Microsatellite PCG in Mexican population, it has important implications in diagnosis segregation analysis, carried out to search 11patUPD, showed in and genetic counseling of this population. two patients a profile compatible with the presence of cytogenetic rearrangements. P0864. Mutation analysis in the DCX gene confirms the high FISH analysis confirmed that the first case, trisomic for D11S318 and prevalence of mosaicism as a cause of subcortical band heterotopia / double cortex syndrome showing both paternal methylated alleles at H19, carries de novo dup(11)(p15.5p15.5), likely resulting from unequal recombination D. J. Morris-Rosendahl1, S. Ravaglia2, G. Uyanik3, L. Mainberger1, A. de la at meiosis I in paternal gametogenesis. The second patient carried Guardia1, U. Moog4, J. Kohlhase1; a der(21)t(11;21)(11p15.4;q22.3) originated from missegregation 1Institute for Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany, 2Institute of Neurology, of a cryptic paternal translocation. An additional patient referred University of Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Neurology, University of Regensburg, to have Wolf syndrome with unusual heigth was shown to carry Germany, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Maastricht, The a t(4;11)der(p16.3;p15.4) and characterised by FISH analysis. Netherlands. Interestingly, refined breakpoint mapping evidenced that both Mutations in the X-linked gene doublecortin (DCX) are the cause of X- translocations affecting 11p15.4 are mediated by segmental linked lissencephaly in males and X-linked subcortical band heterotopia duplications. (SBH, double cortex syndrome) in females. We have performed mutation analysis in the DCX gene in 19 patients (15 females, 4 P0862. Connexin 26 mutation 35delG in nonsyndromic males)with double cortex syndrome, by sequencing the entire coding sensorineural hearing loss in Latvia: preliminary findings region to look for small intragenic mutations and performing Southern O. Olhovaya1, N. Pronina1, I. Balode1, S. Kuske2, A. Krumina3, R. Lugovska1; blotting to look for larger deletions or duplications. We have found 1Latvian State Medical Genetics centre; Latvian State Childrens` Hospital small intragenic mutations in 6 of the female patients, and in one male "Gailezers", Riga, Latvia, 2Latvian Childrens` Hearing centre, Riga, Latvia, patient. 3 of the mutations are new: two missense mutations in exon 3Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. 4 (N60D and T88R) and a 3 bp deletion in exon 5 (c.648-650delAGA) Congenital profound hearing impairment affects about one in 1,000 which leads to the deletion of a lysine residue. The previously neonates; half of these cases are due to genetic factors. Approximately described mutation, c.684-685delCT was found to be heterozygous 80% of all hereditary deafness cases are classified as nonsyndromic in a 51-year old male patient with SBH. The patient had no family and recessive. So far 46 genes that, if mutated, result in nonsyndromic history of lissencephaly and sequence analysis in both his parents recessive hearing loss have been identified. Mutations in GJB2 gene, and healthy brother and sister did not reveal the DCX mutation. The which encodes a gap-junction beta-2 protein (connexin 26), are the possibility of an extra X chromosome was eliminated via chromosome main cause of nonsyndromic sensorineural autosomal recessive and FISH analysis. The inheritance of a single X chromosome from the deafness. Connexin 26 is a transmembrane protein that forms patient’s mother was demonstrated via fragment analysis of the CAG intracellular channels known as connexons. These channels regulate repeat in the HUMARA gene on Xq11-q12. The most likely conclusion cell metabolism, differentiation, and the transmission of the electrical is that the patient is mosaic for the c.684-685delCT mutation. Somatic impulses. The 35delG mutation is the most common mutation in the mosaicism has previously been reported in 4 male patients with double GJB2 gene in many populations. cortex syndrome, and although a relatively rare event, should not be In Latvia there were registered 1613 children with hearing impairments overlooked as a possible cause in males with a similar phenotype. in May 2004 and every year about 150 more are born. We obtained DNA samples from patients with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing P0865. The 2P16 deletion syndrome: Characterization of the trancription content loss and their relatives. During the period from December 2003 till May 2004 19 patients were screened for 35delG mutation, 13 (68%) I. Alshafee, Y. Gonen, S. Buriakovsky, D. Abu Hani, E. Hershkovitz, R. Parvari; are heterozygous for this mutation. One patient (5%) has genotype Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. 35delG/N or 35delG/X, where X is unknown mutation, possibly he is The vast majority of small deletions syndromes, involving several a compound heterozygote. For 5 patients (26%) there was no 35delG genes, are caused by haploinsufficiency of one or several genes mutation found. Eight from 14 relatives of the screened patients found and are transmitted as dominant traits. We have previously identified to be heterozygous for the searched mutation. We are planning to patients originating from an extended family presenting a unique continue 35delG screening as well as to analyze heterozygotes and syndrome, inherited in a recessive mode, consisting of cystinuria, 35delG unaffected patients by direct sequencing to reveal full spectrum neonatal seizures, hypotonia, severe somatic and developmental of mutation in GJB2 in Latvian patients. delay, facial dysmorphism, and lactic acidemia. Reduced activity of all the respiratory chain enzymatic complexes that are encoded in the P0863. Characterization of novel mutations in the CYP1B1 gene mitochondria was found in muscle biopsy specimens of the patients in Mexican patients with primary congenital glaucoma examined. The molecular basis of this disorder is a homozygous O. M. Messina1, L. M. Gonzalez2, I. Babayan3, S. A. C. Cuevas3; deletion of 179,311 bp on chromosome 2p16, which includes the type 1Servicio de Oftalmologia, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D,.F., Mexico, I cystinuria gene SLC3A1, the protein phosphatase 2C beta gene, an 2Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D,.F., Mexico, 3Hospital General de unidentified gene (KIAA 0436) and several ESTs. We now present Mexico, Facultad de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D,.F., Mexico. the transcription content of this region: Each of the three previously Mutations and polymorphisms have been identified in the CYP1B1 reported genes encodes multiple, previously unidentified, splice gene, while mutations that affect the conserved core structures variants. In addition two transcripts with no open reading frame andMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 268 a short, predicted gene, that encodes a putative protein of 67 a.a. not H63D complex allele has consequences as severe as that of the C282Y similar to any other protein are encoded in the region. The first exon allele and thus that G43D-H63D/C282Y genotype is responsible for of an additional gene (FLJ23451) is encoded in the deleted region the disease and the gene is not expressed in the patients. The absence of the deleted genes cause the specific clinical phenotype observed in the P0868. Molecular analysis of myotonic dystrophies DM1 and 2p16 patients. DM2 in Czech Republic. J. Kraus1, Z. Musova2, R. Mazanec3, T. Marikova2, A. Boday2, M. Havlovicova2, P0866. Inheritance of novel LMNA and ZMPSTE24 mutations M. Malikova2, M. Mares4, M. Bohm5, V. Matousek6, A. Krepelova2; associated to segmental ageing syndromes. 1Department of Child Neurology, Charles University - 2nd Medical Faculty, A. De Sandre-Giovannoli1, C. Navarro2, A. Boyer1, I. Boccaccio2, P. S. Jouk3, Prague 5, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd A. Hadjian4, J. L. Alessandri5, S. Hadj-Rabia6, R. Bernard1, N. Lévy1,2; Medical Faculty and University Hospital, Charles University, Prague 5, Czech 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Département de Génétique Médicale, Republic, 3Department of Neurology, Charles University - 2nd Medical Faculty, Hôpital d'Enfants la Timone, Marseille, France, 2INSERM U491, Génétique Prague 5, Czech Republic, 4Department of Neurology, University Hospital Brno, Médicale et Développement, Faculté de Médecine la Timone, Marseille, Brno, Czech Republic, 5Department of Neurology, Hospital Karvina, Karvina, France, 3Service de Génétique, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 4Enzymolo- Czech Republic, 6Department of Neurology, University Hospital Plzen, Plzen, gie/DBPC, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 5Service de Néonatologie, Centre Czech Republic. Hospitalier Départemental Félix Guyon, Saint-Denis, Reunion, 6Service de Myotonic dystrophies are the most common form of adult muscular Dermatologie, Groupe Hospitalier Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. dystrophy with estimated incidence of 1/8000. It can be caused by a Several segmental progeroid disorders are due to mutations of at least mutation on either chromosome 19q13 (DM1) or 3q21 (DM2/PROMM). two genes, LMNA and ZMPSTE24, respectively encoding Lamins A/C, The DM1 is caused by an unstable CTG repeat expansion in the ubiquitous and multifunctional nuclear proteins, and a metalloprotease 3´untranslated region of the dystrophia myotonica-protein kinase gene involved in post-traductional Prelamin A processing. In the absence of (DMPK) and DM2 is caused by a CCTG expansion in intron 1 of the mature Lamin A with accumulation of Prelamin A, or in the presence zinc finger protein 9 (ZNF9) gene. of truncated Lamin A forms, segmental progeroid syndromes seem to We present a cohort of 426 patients with the myotonic dystrophy. We develop. We report here three familial cases of segmental progeroid confirmed the diagnosis DM1 by the molecular genetic analysis in the syndromes carrying mono-, di- or tri-allelic inherited mutations. In 121 patients (53 families). DM1 negative patients (142) were already one consanguineous family, two sibs were affected with progeria tested for the DM2 mutation. The DM2 diagnosis was excluded in associated to neonatal signs. Only a retrospective study was possible, 128 of them and 6 patients (5 families) had an CCTG expansion in since no biological material was available from the affected sibs. The ZNF9 gene. We also found a patient with suspected myotonia and parents carried both a heterozygous ZMPSTE24 c.1053_1055del with a premutation and another patient with the myotonic dystrophy and the mother carried in addition a heterozygous LMNA c.1643G>A diagnosis who has both alleles of DMPK gene expanded with the (p.R545H). We infer that the two affected sibs carried the homozygous different number of CTG repeats. ZMPSTE24 deletion and the heterozygous LMNA substitution. In Supported by project IGA MZ 8052-3 and Institutional Research another consanguineous family, the index case, affected with neonatal Project 2005-2009. progeria, inherited from the father and the mother respectively, heterozygous IVS8+6T>G and Lamin A-specific c.1961_1962insG. P0869. Our first experience in preimplantation genetic diagnosis Western Blot studies from fibroblast cultures showed a reduction of I. Valášková1, J. Kadlecová1, P. Kuglík1,2, I. Slámová1, R. Gaillyová1; Lamin A levels. A third patient, affected as his father with a localised 1University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University, Faculty form of acrogeria, carried a novel heterozygous LMNA substitution, of Science, Brno, Czech Republic. c.1771T>A (p.C591S), specifically affecting as well Lamin A. These Prevention of the birth of affected children in couples at risk for results confirm a major involvement of Lamins A/C and functionally transmitting a genetic disorder is currently based on population related proteins in segmental progeroid disorders, predicting the screening and prenatal diagnosis, followed by termination of affected existence of a much larger series of allelic disorders, and underscore pregnancies. However, this is the most sensitive problem in the control the need to expand molecular and functional explorations on affected of genetic disease, which is incompatible with life or not tolerated in patients. populations and ethnic groups. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is a principally new approach P0867. Detection of a new complex allele associated with HFE 1 for the prevention of genetic disorders, which allows the selection of hereditary haemochromatosis unaffected IVF embryos for establishing pregnancies in couples at risk. s. pissard1, M. Coulhon2, M. Lefebvre2, C. Fourcade2, P. Genêt2, D. Duchassa- PGD may be achieved by testing female gametes (polar body analysis), ing2, F. Dupradeau3, M. Goossens1, J. Rochette3; blastomeres from cleavage stage embryos, or blastocysts. PGD can 1INSERM -AP-HP, Creteil, France, 2CH Victor Dupouy, Argenteuil, France, be applied for monogenic disorders or chromosomal abnormalities, 3UPRES EA 2629 et Unité INERIS, Amiens, France. using diagnostic protocols based on the polymerase chain reaction The majority of type 1 haemochromatosis (HH) patients in North of (PCR) or fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), respectively. France are homozygous for the missense mutation 845C à A (C282Y) Our genetic centre at present concentrates on chromosomal in the HFE gene . About 5% of patients are compound heterozygotes abnormalities, while also on genotyping for single-gene disorders. for C282Y and a second common missense mutation 187CàG (H63D). Genetic analyses are performed on biopsied blastomeres . The effect of this second allele is much less severe than the C282Y PGD of chromosomal abnormalities is applied in patients with repeated mutation as it does not prevent the cell surface localization of the IVF failures or spontaneous abortions. This application is essentially HFE protein. Depending on the population studied, from 4 to 35 % of a screening procedure to detect aneuploidies/polyploidies or patients presenting with the HH phenotype carry only a unique C282Y translocations most commonly observed postnatally or in spontaneus or H63D allele or none at all. HH in such patients suggests genetic and/ abortions. or allelic heterogeneity. Indeed, rare HFE gene mutations have been We optimise the first PCR based PGD protocol for genotyping of documented that are mostly only associated with haemochromatosis Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Regulator (CFTR) gene with focusing when found in conjunction with either H63D or C282Y. on several inherent difficulties associated with single cell DNA In a patient presenting with iron overload (ferritin 1900 mg/L ; transferrin amplifications including potential sample contamination, total PCR saturation 94%) we first identified a new missense mutation : G43D failure and allelic drop out. These difficulties should be minimised for which was shown to segregate within the family with the allele also any PGD PCR protocol before clinical application. carrying the H63D mutation. The association of the G43D mutation in cis-combination with H63D mutation produces a complex allele with both the mutations in the same protein domain. Molecular modelling studies were in favour of a destabilizing effect of the G43D mutation within the a1 domain of the HFE protein. We conclude that the G43D/Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 269 P0870. A novel exonic mutation triggers mRNA degradation in a (CREBBP). Various techniques used so far to identify these deletions GM1 gangliosidosis patient (FISH, microsatellite analysis or quantitative PCR) all suffer from R. Santamaria1, A. Chabás2, D. Grinberg1, L. Vilageliu1; several drawbacks. Due to the high heterogeneity of deletions in 1Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, terms of both size and location inside the gene, array-CGH seems to Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Clínic, Corporació be a very appropriate technique to analyse CREBBP deletions. We Sanitària Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. therefore constructed a microarray carrying various types of genomic GM1 gangliosidosis is a lysosomal storage disease caused by a resources derived from the 16p13.3 region, including 7 BACs and 35 hereditary deficiency of lysosomal acid beta-galactosidase noted by cosmids (spanning 2 Mb). In order to visualize deletions as small as visceromegaly and neurologic symptoms. 10-20 kb, a set of 28 low molecular weight probes (800-1500 bp) was Three major clinical phenotypes are distinguished in GM1 also designed, that are spread along the CREBBP gene at an average gangliosidosis: infantile, juvenile and adult. density of one clone every 6 kb. A mutational analysis in a large cohort of GM1 Spanish patients was In the present study we show that this microarray was able to visualize performed. Here we present the characterization of a novel mutation all previously known deletions and to refine the position of the deletion found in an infantile patient. After completely sequencing the cDNA breakpoints in some cases. We also demonstrated that targets as of the patient, only one mutation (c.1491G>T; p.G481X) was found. small as 1000 bp can be used efficiently to detect heterozygous To identify the second mutation, the genomic DNA was sequenced. deletions. This constitutes the first example of the use of this kind of The nucleotide substitution (c.952C>T), in exon 8, was found. The small targets for a region- or gene-specific microarray as a tool for fact that this substitution appeared in the genomic DNA but not in the deletion identification in a genetic disease, and paves the way for a cDNA suggested that the change could trigger the degradation of the wider use of the technique as a diagnostic tool, especially since a high mRNA by nonsense mediated decay (NMD), a mechanism that clears level of resolution can be attained. mRNAs containing premature termination codons (PTC). Skin fibroblasts of the patient were cultured with cycloheximide (CHX), P0873. Variability of disorders caused by mutations in LMNA a known inhibitor of protein synthesis and of NMD. The sequencing gene of the cDNA from the treated fibroblasts revealed the presence of A. Chukhrova1, G. Rudenskaya1, S. Tverskaya1, H. Zaklyazminskaya1, O. an additional transcript. It contained a deletion of the last 14 bp of Strakhova2, H. Dadali1, A. Polyakov1; exon 8 resulting in the generation of a PTC that elicits NMD on the 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute novel transcript. The c.952C>T mutation in exon 8 is in fact a splicing of Pediatrics and Child Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. mutation that affects the normal splicing by creating a novel 5’ donor LMNA gene encoding two proteins, lamins A and C, is responsible splice site with a higher splice site score than the usual one. A minigene for about fifteen various disorders named laminopathies. We have assay was also used to confirm the results. studied 87 unrelated families with different laminopathies including Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD), myodystrophy with P0871. A new mutation causing multiple sulfatase deficiency cardiomyopathy, dilated cardiomyopathy type 1A (DCM), autosomal A. Diaz-Font1, R. Santamaria1, A. Chabás2, M. Coll2, N. Chamoles3, L. Vilage- recessive congenital polyneuropathy, limb girdle muscular dystrophy liu1, D. Grinberg1; (LGMD), progeria, lipodystrophy. A search of LMNA gene mutations 1Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, and polymorphisms was performed by SSCP method with follow Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Clínic, Corporació sequencing. We have found eight different missense mutations Sanitària Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Fundación para el estudio de las enferme- (Asp47His, Gly232Arg, Arg249Gln, Arg541His, Ala350Pro, Asn459Tyr, dades neurometabólicas, Buenos Aires, Argentina. Gly635Asp, delLys261+ins15bp) in nine families. Fore families Multiple sulfatase deficiency (MSD) is a rare autosomal recessively presented autosomal dominant EDMD including one with atypical inherited lysosomal storage disorder characterized by the accumulation severe course. In one case LGMD type 1B was diagnosed. Three of sulphated lipids and carbohydrates. The disorder combines features families had DCM, including atypical early variant in one. Autosomal of metachromatic leukodystrophy and of mucopolysaccharidosis. recessive congenital polyneuropathy in two sibs being different Increased amounts of acid mucopolysaccharides are found in several from HMSN type 2B1 may present a novel, previously undescribed tissues. The defect in this disorder involves a posttranslational phenotype. Seven found mutations were novel. Arg249Gln mutation process, common to 7 or more sulfatases (Rommerskirch et al., previously described in three unrelated patients with typical 1992) and decrease the capacity of a process that renders sulfatases EDMD was detected in two unrelated families with different clinical enzymatically active or prevents their premature inactivation. C- phenotypes, namely LGMD type 1B and mild EDMD. This fact points alpha-formylglycine (FGly), the catalytic residue in the active site of to existence of relatively frequent LMNA mutations and also to a role eukaryotic sulfatases, is posttranslationally generated from a cysteine of some modifying factors in phenotype formation. Also we have found in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The SUMF1 gene encodes FGly- seven different polymorphisms in the coding region of LMNA gene. generating enzyme (FGE) and is mutated in MSD. Dierks et al. (2003) Two undescribed polymorphisms, G824A and G1973A, don’t lead and Cosma et al. (2003) identified several mutations in the SUMF1 to aminoacid substitution but may cause the alternative splice site gene in patients with MSD. formation according to computer programme predicted exon-intronic Here we present the mutation analysis of 3 MSD patients, two from gene structure. The population frequency of these polymorphisms is Spain and one from Argentina. The first patient (MSD1) is homozygous studied now. for a 463T>C substitution (S155P) and the second patient (MSD2) is This work was support in part by grant RFBR 03-04-49311a homozygous for a 1033C>T substitution (A345C). These two mutations were previously described by Cosma et al. (2003). The third patient P0874. Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency: Biochemical and mutation analysis in Latvia (MSD3) is homozygous for a novel mutation, IVS7+5 G>T, which affects the splice donor site of intron 7. Since no sample from this Z. Muceniece, Z. Krumina, P. Vevere, N. Pronina, R. Lugovska; patient was available, we used a minigene approach to analyse the Latvian State Medical Genetic Centre, Children`s Hospital "Gailezers", Riga, change and confirmed that it produced an aberrant splicing. Latvia. Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency is P0872. Characterization of CREBBP deletions in Rubinstein- an autosomal recessive disorder of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation Taybi patients using array-CGH (MIM# 143450). The LCHAD enzyme is part of the mitochondrial M. Stef1, I. Burgelin1, B. Mardirossian1, M. Delrue1,2, I. Coupry1, M. Marche1, F. trifunctional protein (MTP). A common point mutation 1528 G>C Bonnet-Dorion1,3, P. Gorry1,3, M. Longy1,3, D. Lacombe1,2, B. Arveiler1,2; (E510Q) in the gene coding for the α-subunit of the MTP harbouring 1University Victor Segalen Bordeaux2, Bordeaux, France, 2CHU de Bordeaux, LCHAD activity is found in 87%-90% of the alleles of patients. Bordeaux, France, 3Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France. We have two confirmed cases of LCHADD in our centre. Both were The Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare autosomal dominant confirmed with the kind help of colleagues abroad - Prof. Sass (Metabolic disease that is associated in 10-15% of cases with 16p13.3 Unit, University Children`s Hospital Freiburg), Prof. Zschocke (Institute microdeletions, all involving the CREB-Binding Protein gene of Human Genetics, Heidelberg), Dr. Huijmans (Erasmus University,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 270 Rotterdam). variants in 80 patients with a clinic diagnosis PKAN and in a sample Case 1 was diagnosed using biochemical methods in the Netherlands, of 800 controls. mutation analysis was performed in the Latvian State Medical Apart from missense and nonsense mutations, we also found a small Genetics Centre (LSMGC) at the end of 2004. Case 2 was screened proportion (5%) of deletions. There was no one to one correlation biochemically in the LSMGC, the diagnosis of LCHADD was confirmed between PKAN2 mutations and the radiological sign of an “eye of tiger” with biochemical analysis and mutation analysis in Germany. Mutation as repeatedly reported in the literature. No mutation was detected in analysis for parents of both LCHADD patients was performed in our 35% of cases which strongly argues for non-allelic heterogeneity of centre. the disorder. Mainly the age of onset, but to a lesser extent the course During biochemical screening for organic acid analysis by gas of the disease is negatively correlated with the rest activity of the chromatography (GC) for LCHADD patient C6-C10 dicarboxylic mitochondrial PKAN2 isoform. The PANK2 activity was predicted from aciduria was found (adipic acid↑, suberic acid↑, sebacic acid↑) in our a completation assay in E. coli. laboratory. The results of organic acid screening in urine had led us to A coding polymorphism in exon 1 shows a markedly reduced activity a diagnosis of defects in fatty acid beta-oxidation. and is found to be heterozygote (50/800) and homozygote (7/800) in The molecular studies revealed that both of our patients are the general population with potential consequences for therapeutic homozygous for the 1528 G>C mutation. PCR-RFLP was used for options provided by substrate supplementation. mutation analysis. We suggest that mutation analysis for common 1528 G>C mutation should be performed for patients with positive P0877. A CYP21B/CYP21P chimeric molecule as a possible biochemical screening. cause of nonclassical form of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia N. S. Osinovskaya, T. E. Ivaschenko, E. L. Soboleva; P0875. Abnormal microvilli function in autosomal dominant Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa- hearing loss due to mutations in the espin (ESPN) gene tion. F. Donaudy; Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a monogenic autosomal TIGEM-Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy. recessive disorder; deficiency of 21-hydroxylase (21OH) accounts for Espins represent a family of multifunctional actin cytoskeletal regulatory 90-95% of cases. The structural gene (CYP21B) for 21OH is in the HLA proteins with the potential to differentially influence the organization, class III region on the short arm of chromosome 6 (6p21.3), as also dimensions, dynamics, of the actin filament-rich, microvillus- is the pseudogene (CYP21P). This region of the genome is subject to type specializations that mediate sensory transduction in various unequal crossover events and gene conversions because of the high mechanosensory and chemosensory cells ;they are associated with the homology and tandem-repeat organization of both genes. The region parallel actin bundles of hair cell stereocilia The espin COOH-terminal between intron 2 and the 3’end of exon 3 in CYP21 is considered as a peptide, which contains the 116-amino acid actin-bundling module, is hotspot for recombination and microconversion. necessary and sufficient for the microvillar lengthening activity. This We previously reported that a novel CYP21B/21P hybrid gene was ability to increase microvillar length in transfected epithelial cells has found at the 6p21.3 locus. It is characterized by a junction site after led to the hypothesis that espins play an essential role in determining exon 8 and differs from the normal CYP21 gene in its 3’-region, which the length of hair cell stereocilia In support of this hypothesis, espin corresponds to the CYP21P pseudogene. protein level is correlated with stereocilium; a recessive mutation in Using PCR we analyzed the frequency of CYP21B/21P and the espin gene has been detected in the jerker mouse and causes CYP21P/21B hybrid genes in 33 unrelated Russian CAH patients deafness and vestibular dysfunction and hair cell degeneration. with nonclassical forms of CAH-21OH deficiency, in 19 patients with More recently ESPN mutations have been described in two families idiopathic androgenization and in 29 controls. affected by autosomal recessive hearing loss and vestibular areflexia. The frequencies of both genes in the patients with nonclassical CAH Here, we report the identification of 4 additional ESPN mutations in (32% and 12% respectively) and with idiopathic androgenization (16% patients affected by autosomal dominant hearing loss. To determine and 3% respectively) were significantly higher than in the controls whether ESPN mutated alleles affected the biological activity of the (3.5% and 0% respectively (p<0.05)). corresponding espin proteins in vivo, we investigated their ability to A chimeric CYP21B/21P gene might be suggested as a feasible target and elongate the parallel actin bundles of brush border microvilli cause of the nonclassical form of CAH. The patients with idiopathic in transfected LLC-PK1-CL4 epithelial cells. For three mutated alleles androgenization, possessing this gene might be considered as having clear abnormalities in microvillar length or distribution were obtained. a nonclassical form of CAH. These findings further strengthen the causative role of the espin gene in nonsyndromic hearing loss and add new insights in our knowledge P0878. Molecular characterization of a t(2;6) balanced on ESPN activity in the hearing system. translocation associated with complex phenotype and leading to the truncation of the TCBA1 gene P0876. Rare and frequent sequence variation in PKAN and the R. Bocciardi1, R. Giorda2, V. Marigo3, P. Zordan1, D. Monatanaro3, S. Gimelli1, correlation with neurodegeneration M. Seri4, M. Lerone1, R. Roberto1,5, G. Gimelli1; M. Ebhardt1, K. Hörtnagel1, E. Botz1, B. Garavaglia2, J. Seeger3, N. Nardocci2, 1G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 2IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini M. Schülke4, I. Novacovic5, T. Kmiec6, A. Weindl7, T. Mayer7, E. Löhmussar1, J. (LC), Italy, 3TIGEM, Napoli, Italy, 4University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Dept. Müller1, H. Prokisch1,7, T. Klopstock8, T. Meitinger1,7; of Pediatrics, University of Genoa - Genoa, Italy. 1GSF Research Centre for Environment and Health, Neuherberg, Germany, Molecular characterization of chromosome rearrangements associated 2National Neurological Institute "Carlo Besta", Milan, Italy, 3German Clinic for with abnormal phenotypes has often provided crucial clues for the Diagnostics, Wiesbaden, Germany, 4Charity, Virchow University Hospital, Ber- positional identification of disease-associated genes. In several cases, lin, Germany, 5School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia and these rearrangements may be associated with a variety of different Montenegro, 6Pomnik-Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka, Warszawa, Poland, 7Techni- phenotypes, thus establishing a genotype-phenotype correlation might cal University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 8Klinikum Großhadern, Ludwigs- be quite complex. Nevertheless, the molecular characterization of the Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. rearrangement remains of help either in providing tools for diagnosis, Panthotenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration is a very rare or for the prognosis or finally in establishing a gene to function autosomal recessive enzyme deficiency. The disorder is characterized relationship. We have recently investigated a de novo balanced by a progressive loss of neurons mainly affecting cells in the basal translocation t(2;6)(q24.3;q22.31) found in a patient with a complex ganglia and the eye. Both missense and nonsense mutations phenotype. The major clinical finding was an epileptic encephalopathy have been described in the hPKAN2 gene, one of the four highly associated with cerebral atrophy involving the periventricular white homologous kinases which are predicted to catalyse the first step matter, spastic tetraparesis and severe psychomotor retardation. on CoA-biosynthesis. Recently, we have shown that an alternative The molecular characterization of this translocation showed that the PKAN2 transcript is coding for a mitochondrial isoform of the enzyme. truncation of the TCBA1 gene on 6q had occurred. We found that this In an attempt to improve the mutation detection rate and to predict gene is transcribed in different splice variants and is highly specific the activity of the enzyme, we now determined both rare and frequent for the central nervous system. TCBA1 does not show any similarityMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 271 with other known genes and its function is unknown. However, it P0881. Preliminary data suggest that mutations in the CgRP appears to be well conserved among species and we were able to pathway are not involved in human sporadic cryptorchidism infer the sequence of a putative mouse homologue of TCBA1. This D. Zuccarello1,2, E. Morini2, S. Douzgou2, A. Ferlin1, A. Pizzuti2,3, C. D. Salpi- allowed us to perform a more detailed expression study in mouse thus etro4, C. Foresta1, B. Dallapiccola2,3; confirming its specificity for the nervous system. This is of particular 1Department of Histology, Microbiology, and Medical Biotechnologies, Padova, interest because it suggests that TCBA1 could be correlated with the Italy, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, University La Sapi- neurological phenotype of our patient and possibly mutated in genetic enza, Roma, Italy, 3IRCCS-CSS San Giovanni Rotondo, CSS-Mendel, Roma, diseases with a similar neurological phenotype. Italy, 4Pediatric Immunology and Genetics Operative Unit, University Hospital, Messina, Italy. P0879. MBL2 genotypes and the risk of premature birth In testicular descent to the scrotum, a multistep process, many W. M. Schmidt1, G. Mitterer2, W. Maurer3, O. A. Bodamer3; anatomical and hormonal factors play a role. Cryptorchidism occurs 1Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, in about 1-2% of males and may cause secondary degeneration Austria, 2VBC-GENOMICS Bioscience Research, Vienna, Austria, 3Children's of the testes. Animal models have shown that abnormalities, in the Hospital, University Hospital Vienna, Vienna, Austria. calcitonin generelated peptide (CgRP) activity, could be relevant in the Allelic variants in the mannose-binding lectin 2 (MBL2) gene are pathogenesis of cryptorchidism. We performed a mutation screening associated with increased risk of infections in newborns or immune by PCR exon amplification, single-strand conformation polymorphism deficient patients. Recently, women if carriers of the common codon (SSCP) and sequencing in four candidate genes, CgRPs (αCgRP, 54 variant were found to have a higher risk of preterm delivery. Here, βCgRP), their receptor (CgRPR) and the receptor component we evaluated if the genotype of the child might contribute to the risk protein (CGRP-RCP), in 90 selected cases of idiopathic unilateral or of premature birth. By applying an on-chip PCR genotyping method, bilateral cryptorchidism. Mutation screening of the coding regions and suitable for the simultaneous detection of common variants (codons intron-exon boundaries revealed some polymorphic variants but no 52, 54, and 57; promoter -551 and -220), we tested 204 genomic pathogenic sequence changes. These preliminary data suggest that DNA samples, isolated from blood spots on Guthrie cards. The panel these genes are not major factors for cryptorchidism in humans. of polymorphisms allowed the exact assignment of genotypes to either MBL wild-type (A), MBL-deficient (0), or low MBL-producing P0882. Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene in Ashkenazi haplotypes (LXA). The MBL2 genotype of children born before the patients with Parkinson's disease: genotype-phenotype 35th week of gestation (n=102) was compared to a that of a term correlation analysis. birth control group (n=102). The codon 52 variant was significantly R. Gershoni-Baruch, J. Aharon-Peretz, H. Rosenbaum; overrepresented in the group of preterm birth (prevalence of variant Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. allele = 11% vs. 5%), whereas the codon 54 polymorphism was not Background: Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene have (12% in both groups). The rare codon 57 polymorphism was also more been recently identified as contributory to parkinson's disease (PD), in common in the case group (2% vs. 1%). Furthermore, a biochemical Ashkenazi Jews. The objective of the present study was to evaluate phenotype of potentially low MBL levels assigned to the 0/0, XA/0, and whether the clinical characteristics of PD patients, carriers of a GBA XA/XA haplotypes was also significantly more frequent in the group of mutation differ from those of non-carriers. premature birth compared to the controls (22.5% vs. 9.8%). Our results Methods: A clinic-based case series of 137 Ashkenazi patients with suggest that the MBL2 genotype of the unborn child might contribute to idiopathic Parkinson disease was screened for the six most common the risk of premature delivery. GBA mutations (N370S, L444P, 84GG, IVS+1, V394L, R496H) found in Ashkenazi Jews. Family history, demographic and clinical data were P0880. Predominance of splicing mutations in the central obtained using structured questionnaires. Fanconi anemia gene FANCD2 Results: Thirty-seven (27%, 95% confidence interval 19.6-34.4%) of R. Kalb1, K. Neveling1, H. Hoehn1, R. Vervenne2, E. Velleuer3, J. de Winter2, J. the Ashkenazi PD patients carried a mutated GBA allele. Altogether, Surralles4, E. Callen4, A. Auerbach5, H. Joenje2, H. Hanenberg3, D. Schindler1; 26 N370S heterozygotes, 5 N370S homozygotes, two R496H 1University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, heterozygote and four 84GG heterozygotes were identified. All PD The Netherlands, 3University of Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany, 4Universi- patients had an initial favorable response to dopaminergic agonists tat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 5Rockefeller University, NY, NY, or L-Dopa. GD carriers did not differ from non-carriers with regard to United States. age of disease onset (mean age of disease onset 60.29+13.65 years Fanconi anemia (FA) is a recessive genetic instability disorder and 63.15+11.4 years, respectively), gender, family history of PD in a characterized by congenital abnormalities, bone-marrow failure, first-degree relative, initial motor manifestations or initial response to sensitivity to crosslinking agents, and cancer susceptibility. To date, levodopa or dopaminergic agonists. Patients with a family history of nine FANC genes have been identified which interact in the recognition PD, either GBA carriers or non-carriers, had a significant earlier age of and repair of DNA-damage. We screened FA patients excluded from onset (57.08+ 10.57 vs. 62.56+11.22 years, p=0.01). complementation groups FA-A, -C, D1, E, F, G or L for mutations in Conclusions: Sporadic PD patients who carry a GBA mutation FANCD2, the central effector protein of the FA/BRCA pathway. Even manifested typical PD and did not differ clinically from PD patients who though mutation analysis of FANCD2 is complicated by the presence did not carry a GBA mutation. of pseudogene regions, we identified biallelic FANCD2 mutations in 25 of 26 patients. The predominant types of mutations result in P0883. Usefullness of quantitative techniques using PCR to aberrant splicing causing exon skipping, exonisation of intronic assess small genomic rearrangements : example of the Golli- sequence, activation of cryptic and creation of new 3´ splice sites. MBP locus study in hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HL) Exon 22 skipping caused by two different base substitutions in the C. Vaurs-Barriere1, M. Bonnet-Dupeyron1,2, P. Combes1, F. Gauthier-Barich- polypyrimidine tract of the splice acceptor was prevalent in patients of ard1, P. Vago2, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1; German and Turkish origin. Three other patients showed skipping of 1INSERM UMR384, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2Cytogenetics Laboratory, Cler- exon 5 caused by insertion of an Alu repeat into the preceding intron mont-Ferrand, France. sequence. Except for 36 missing nucleotides (1 to 36), the inserted Leukodystrophies represent a heterogeneous group of rare inherited Alu element was identical with Yb9. The mutation in the newly created disorders that involve primarily the white matter of the central nervous donor sequence causes a change of donor strength from low to high system (CNS). The proteolipoprotein (PLP) gene is implicated in X- complementarity, and thus in the recognition of a new exon. Among linked HL. However, only 50% of HL are associated to PLP mutation the 9 known FA genes, only FANCD2 shows this high prevalence of and as both males and females present HL other gene(s) may be splicing mutations. implicated in this disease. The myelin basic protein (MBP) gene, localized on chromosome 18q, is included in a gene structure called Golli-MBP complex and encodes for the second most important class of CNS myelin proteins. As Mbp rearrangements have been found in spontaneous dysmyelinatingMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 272 murin mutants and as patients with a 18q deletion syndrome displayed We found mutations in 51 subjects (57.96%); 32 of them (62,75%) abnormal myelination pattern on MRI, we looked for Golli-MBP were mutated in ACVRL1 gene, 19 (37,25%) in ENG. We found 26 rearrangements in 195 HL without PLP mutation. different mutations in ACVRL1 and 17 in ENG. As preliminary results obtained by FISH in a pre-screening step led us 7/32 subject are carriers of mutations in ACVRL1 never reported by to think that duplication in a mosaic form may exist, we adapted the other groups. The same observation can be made for 15/19 ENG Multiplex Amplifiable Probe Hybridization (MAPH) and the Quantitative mutated patients. Mutiplex PCR of Short Fluorescent fragments (QMPSF) techniques to We compared the distribution of mutations along the two genes with quantify Golli-MBP copy number in our large cohort. The 3 “suspected” similar European reports. duplications could not be confirmed by both PCR-based techniques (eventhough their sensitivity to detect a mosaicism), neither by FISH P0886. Non Muscle Myosin Heavy Chain II A and II B interact and using a different labeling protocol. In the 185 remaining patients no co-localize in living cells: relevance for MYH9-related diseases duplication nor deletion was found. This work highlights the difficulty M. Marini1, M. Bruschi1, A. Pecci2, R. Romagnoli3, L. Musante1, G. Candiano1, to use FISH for rearrangement detection (particularly duplications) G. Ghiggeri1, C. Balduini2, M. Seri4, R. Ravazzolo1; and allowed us to compare advantages and disadvantages between 1G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 2University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3University QMPSF and MAPH. Finally, rearrangements at the Golli-MBP locus of Siena, Siena, Italy, 4University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. seem not involved in the etiology of HL. Myosins of class II constitute part of a superfamily of several classes of proteins expressed in almost all eukaryotic cell types. For class II P0884. Shox2 acts upstream of Bmp4 in regulation of sinus nonmuscle myosin heavy chains (NMMHCs), three genes, MYH9, venosus and venous valve development MYH10 and MYH14, encoding for NMMHC-A, -B, and -C isoforms, R. J. Blaschke1, S. Kuijper2, A. Hubert1, S. Just1, K. Anastassiadis3, J. Spitzer1, are respectively located on chromosomes 22q12.3, 17p13.3, 19q13.3. H. Schöler4, J. Korving2, H. Feitsma2, W. Rottbauer1, L. J. Wisse5, A. C. Gitten- Functional studies and knock-out mice on the A and B isoforms, berger-de Groot5, F. Meijlink2, G. Rappold1; reported differences in their biological properties, suggesting that they 1University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Hubrecht Laboratory, Utrecht, might play different biological roles. The Netherlands, 3TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 4Max-Planck-Institute of Heterozygous mutations of MYH9 cause a complex disorder named Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany, 5Leiden University Medical Center, MYH9-related disease, characterized by a combination of different Leiden, The Netherlands. symptoms: platelet macrocytosis, thrombocytopenia and leukocyte The striking expression pattern of the homeodomain transcription inclusions, variously associated with sensorineural hearing loss, factor SHOX2 in the heart of human and mouse embryos suggests its cataracts and glomerulonephritis. No genotype-phenotype correlation involvement in the early stages of heart development. We have created is reported. a null allele of the Shox2 gene by targeted mutation and here report In accordance with the clinical picture, NMMHC-A is expressed in on fatal heart malformations in Shox2 homozygous mutant embryos. platelets, leukocytes, kidney, and cochlea. Shox2-/- mouse embryos exhibit retarded development of the sinus A still unresolved problem in MYH9-relate desease, is its remarkable venosus region, lack the sinoatrial valves, and develop atrial dilation symptomatic variability. One hypothesis is that it derives from the joint and thoracic oedema. They die from heart failure between embryonic effect of MYH9 mutations and additional factors, such as polymorphic day 11 and 13. In situ hybridization revealed a dramatic down regulation variants of proteins interacting with NMMHC-A. of Bmp4 expression in the myocardial wall of the sinus venosus and in These results describe the interaction between NMMHC-A and the proepicardial organ. These observations demonstrate an essential NMMHC-B, discovered by a yeast two hybrid screening and confirmed function of Shox2 upstream of Bmp4 in the development of the inflow by co-immunoprecipitation experiments. tract region and for the first time demonstrate an indispensable role of Analysis by confocal microscopy in different cell types showed the sinus venosus and the venous valves in development of the inflow complete matching of NMMHC-A and NMMHC-B signals in cultured tract region. renal podocytes and native bone marrow erythroblasts, whereas partial matching was observed in skin fibroblasts and cultured tubular P0885. Screening for mutations in the whole coding regions of epithelial cells. ACVRL1 and ENG genes in a group of 88 Italian patients affected This study provides direct evidences that NMMHC-A and -B interact with Hereditary Haemorrhagic Telangiectasia. in vivo by their C-terminal tail region suggesting functional relevance C. Olivieri1, E. Buscarini2, C. Valacca1, A. Pilotto3, F. Pagella4, L. Semino4, S. both in physiological and pathological conditions. Corno4, M. Grosso5, G. Pongiglione6, A. Zambelli2, E. Mira4, C. Danesino1,7; 1Medical Genetics, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Unità Operativa di P0887. New mutations and a grey zone of CAG repeats in Gastroenterologia, Ospedale Maggiore, Crema (CR), Italy, 3Anatomia Pato- Huntington disease. logica, IRCCS "S.Matteo", Pavia, Italy, 4Clinica Otorinolaringoiatrica, IRCCS A. Sulek1, W. Krysa1, D. Hoffman-Zacharska1,2, E. Zdzienicka1, J. Zaremba1; "S.Matteo", Pavia, Italy, 5Radiology Department, Hospital of Cuneo, Cuneo, 1Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Mother and Italy, 6Paediatric Cardiology Department, Hospital Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 7Ge- Child, Warsaw, Poland. netica Medica, IRCCS Policlinico “S. Matteo”, Pavia, Italy. Huntington disease (HD) is one of the group of the neurodegenerative Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) (OMIM#187300) is an disorders caused by CAG repeats expansion. The main clinical autosomal dominant vascular dysplasia leading to telangiectases of features of this disease are involuntary movements, speech and gait skin, mucosa (frequent complications are epistaxes and gastrointestinal disturbances as well as depression, cognitive decline and dementia. bleeding), and visceral arteriovenous malformations (principally in The dynamic mutations may lead to increasing of the CAG repeats lung, liver, and brain). Two genes have been so far identified to cause number form one generation to another, simultaneously worsening HHT if mutated: ENG (OMIM#131195, chromosome 9q34.1), a type III the progression of the disease and decreasing the age of onset. The TGF-beta receptor; ACVRL1 (OMIM#601284, chromosome 12q11-14) frequency of HD is estimated for caucasian population for 1: 10.000. a TGF-beta receptor Type I. Wallace and Shovlin in 2000 excluded The occurrence of new mutation probably depends on the upper non- both genes in a HHT family and demonstrated the existence of a third pathological range of the CAG repeats beacuse it is known that large HHT locus. More recently, Gallione et al. (2004) described a combined normal alleles are prone to expansions. Moreover, the range of 36-39 syndrome of juvenile polyposis and HHT associated with mutations in CAG repeats seems to involve incomplete penetrance of the mutated SMAD4. gene. The collaboration between three Italian HHT centers let us collect more The aim of our study was to find families with new mutations in IT15 than 530 DNA samples from HHT Patients and their relatives. We have gene. First, we analysed the polymorphic CAG tract within IT15 more than 150 different families from all Italian regions. gene and established the normal range for Polish control group (200 We have screened for mutation by SSCP and/or dHPLC the entire chromosomes): 9 to 32 CAG. Then we examined 584 patients of coding region of ACVRL1 and ENG in 88 index cases, each one from 520 pedigrees with confirmed HD. Here we present two families with different families, who were definitely affected with HHT, according to confirmed presence of the new mutation and 12 families in whom the the Curaçao diagnostic criteria. grey zone of 36-39 CAG repeats was documented.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 273 P0888. Identification of two mutations in CLC-1 gene in patients cell metastasis. Overexpression of OPN is the main finding in affected with hereditary myotonia tissues. J. Kuropatkina1, V. Fedotov2, S. Tverskaya1, A. Polyakov1; Our previous work to understand molecular mechanisms underlying 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Diag- regulation of transcription of human OPN gene lead us to identify nostic Centre, Voronezh, Russian Federation. and evaluate common variants with functional effect on transcription Non-dystrophic myotonia congenita is an inherited disorder of the in the promoter region. We are now investigating the effect of TGFb, skeletal muscle characterized by a delayed muscle relaxation after an important mediator of inflammatory and immune processes on the contraction. Myotonia congenita may be inherited in an autosomal OPN promoter and its different haplotype combinations. We describe dominant (Thomsen disease) or recessive (Becker disease) manner. here an inhibitory effect of TGFb on the OPN promoter: co-transfection The recessive form of myotonia is more frequent and more severe experiments showed that TGFb downregulation was mediated by its than the dominant one. The both forms of myotonia congenita are intracellular mediator SMAD3; no differential response on constructs caused by mutations in the gene of a skeletal muscle chloride channel differing for the variant at -66 in the SP1 site was observed, while this (CLC-1) which is located on chromosome 7q35. CLC-1 is important for needs to be evaluated for the other sites. the normal repolarization of muscular cells membrane. The loss of its Since both OPN and TGFb are involved in diabetic nephropathy, we function result to the plasma membrane is hyperexcitable and leads carried out an association study in a group of type 2 diabetic patients to the typical `myotonic runs' which are seen in electromyograms of (112), with and without nephropathy, in which promoter variants, patients with myotonia. The study group consisted of 37 families which including one at -1747 in a putative SMAD3 binding site, were were mainly from Voronegsky region. In this account 30 probands had evaluated for allele frequency in the two diabetic subgroups. We found clinical diagnosis of Tomsen disease and 7 ones were with Becker a significantly different allele frequency of the -1747 variant in diabetic disease. We have investigated coding sequencing with exon-intron patients with nephropathy compared to non nephropathic (P=0. 015). junction fragments of the CLC-1 gene by PCR-SSCP analyses with These results suggest that OPN promoter polymorphisms affect the follow sequencing of the fragments with alteration of the electroforetic gene transcription rate and one of them, located in a target site for the motility. To now we have revieled heterozygous Thr268Met mutation TGFb signaling pathway, is associated with susceptibility to diabetic from the proband with Tomsen myotonia which is published in CLC-1 nephropathy. data based. In armenian family with Becker myotonia we have detected novel mutation Pro342Ser in homozygous. Probably this mutation has P0891. The correlation between insertion in the promoter region armenian origin. The investigation is in process now. of the UGT1 gene and the intolerance of some xenobiotics. A. Polyakov1, J. Kuropatkina1, A. Karabanov2, I. Shulyatiev3, S. Tverskaya1; P0889. The importance of non - invasive genetic analysis in the 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re- initial diagnostics of Alport syndrome search Centre for Neurology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Research Centre G. Berginc1, M. Šlajpah1, A. Meglič2, P. Furlan3, D. Glavač1; for Gastroenterology, Moscow, Russian Federation. 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Medical Faculty, The UGT1 gene, which is located on chromosome 2q37, encodes Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Pediatric Nephrology Department, Children's Hospital, uridine diphosphate glycosyl transferase 1. This enzyme catalyzes the University Medical Center, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Department of Nephrology, transformation indirect to direct bilirubin in hepatocytes by conjugation General Hospital Novo mesto, Novo mesto, Slovenia. with glycuronic acid. Mutations in the UGT1 gene result in Gilbert Alport syndrome is a hereditary disease, characterized by progressive syndrome which is characterized by low activity of the enzyme. In hematuric nephritis with structural changes of glomerular basement patients with Gilbert syndrome use of some drugs leads to an increase membrane, frequently associated with sensorineural hearing loss. of the indirect bilirubin level. The most frequent genetic defect in Gilbert Major changes in glomerular basement mebrane are associated with syndrome is a dinucleotide insertion in a TA repeat A(TA) 6TAA in the mutations in Col4a5 which encodes for α5 collagen chain. The disease promoter region of the UGT1 gene, in homozygous or heterozygous was also associated with Col4a3 and Col4a4. Alport syndome has state. In our work we have investigated the correlation between therefore been subdivided into different types: X-linked Col4a5 (~85% intolerance to medicine for the treatment of Parkinson disease and the cases) and autosomal recessive Col4a3 or Col4a4 disease (~15%). presence of the defect in the promoter region of the UGT1 gene. We X-linked form is always symptomatic and more severe in affected have studied 17 patients with extrapyramidal abnormalities who had males (homozygotes). In autosomal recessive form only homozygotes raised levels of the indirect bilirubin fraction and suffered from iatrogenic (males, females) develop a progressive disease. hepatitis. We found out that 14 of the 17 patients had the A(TA) 7TAA DNA was extracted from peripheral blood of five children aged 10 insertion. Eight patients were homozygous and 6 were heterozygous. months to four years. Col4a3, Col4a4 and Col4a5 were amplified in The presence of 7 TA repeats in the promoter region of the UGT1 PCR and analyzed using single stranded comformation analysis and gene leads to a decrease of the enzyme’s activity and this result in sequenced on ABI PRISM 310 Genetic Analayzer. Clinical data were disturbance of metabolism of xenobiotics with drug intolerance obtained from clinitian who performed precise urine, hearing and ocular examination. P0892. Prevalence of SLC22A4 and RUNX susceptibility SNPs in Three novel mutations, G198E, G3189D, and G669R, were detected rheumatoid arthritis patients in Col4a5. We assume their pathogenic effect due to glycine key G. C. Talián1, B. Kovács1, V. Cserép1, J. Bene1, K. Komlósi1, V. Havasi1, L. structural role in collagen protein. Czirják2, B. Melegh1; In our study we have demonstrated that non-invasive genetic method 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, is a powerful tool in early and precise diagnosis of the disease, Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, University of specially in young patients. Diagnosis of Alport syndrome in children Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. is not appearent, because the clinical presentation may not always Rheumatoid arthritis is a polygenic inflammatory desease of the joints. meet proposed strict diagnostic criteria. Screening of three important A recent study (Tokuhiro et al, Nature Genetics 2003;35:341) suggested disease genes (Col4a3, Col4a4, Col4a5) in association with clinical involvement of two SNPs as susceptibility factors for the disease: one data provide sufficient information for correct diagnosis, therefore of them is an intronic polymorphism, called SLC2F2 (C6,607T change generally accepted invasive approaches can be avoided. in the first intron of the gene) in the gene coding for the OCTN1 organic cation transporter, the low activity carnitine transporter. This nucleotide P0890. Functional characterization of polymorphic variants in position is located within a recognition site for the transcription factor the Osteopontin promoter and their association with diabetic RUNX. The second polymorphism is in the RUNX gene (G24658C nephropathy transversion in the 6th intron). With specific PCR/RFLP methods we F. Giacopelli1, R. Marciano1, M. Gandolfo2, G. Garibotto2, R. Ravazzolo1; investigated the distribution of these two SNPs in Hungarian patients 1G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 2University of Genova, Genova, Italy. with rheumatoid arthritis (n=209) and in healthy controls (n=217); in Osteopontin (OPN) displays several functions in different physiological addition we determined the plasma carnitine ester profiles by ESI and pathological processes: bone remodeling, cell-mediated tandem mass spectrometry in the same groups. The allele frequencies immunity, tissue remodeling during inflammatory processes, tumor of the SNPs did not differ from each other comparing the rheumatoidMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 274 arthritis vs. the control groups. The allele frequencies of the Japanese using a human GAA deficient cell line. All mutant proteins remained as population, as referenced in the original article, significantly differed the 110kD precursor expressing no enzyme activity. from that found in the Hungarian subjects. The carnitine ester profiles did not exihibit genotype dependent changes, either in the patients P0895. Clinical features of infertile men with androgen receptor with arthritis or in the control persons. These result strongly suggest mutations and identification of seven novel mutations that the above SNPs do not mean real susceptibility factors for the A. Ferlin, C. Vinanzi, D. Zuccarello, F. Ganz, P. Dabrilli, L. Bartoloni, A. Garolla, rheumatoid arthritis in the Hungarian population. C. Foresta; University of Padova, Padova, Italy. P0893. Alteration of DNA binding, dimerisation and nuclear Mutations in the androgen receptor (AR) gene cause a variety translocation of SHOX homeodomain mutations identified in of defects related to androgen insensitivity with the less severe idiopathic short stature and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis phenotype represented by male infertility. However, few studies have K. U. Schneider1, A. Marchini1, N. Sabherwal1, R. Röth1, B. Niesler1, T. Mart- analysed the prevalence of AR gene mutations in male infertility and tila1, R. J. Blaschke1, M. Lawson2, M. Dumic3, G. Rappold1; a genotype-phenotype relation is still unclear. We screened for AR 1University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Childrens Hospital of Eastern gene mutation by sequencing 1517 oligozoospermic men. Of them, Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 3University Hospital Zagreb-Rebro, Zagreb, 492 were azoospermic, 849 severely oligozoospermic (sperm count < Croatia. 5 mil/mL), and 176 moderately oligozoospermic (5-10 mil/mL). Clinical Haploinsufficiency of the short stature homeobox gene SHOX has evaluation of patients with AR gene mutations included determination been found in patients with idiopathic short stature and Leri-Weill of FSH, LH, T and oestradiol, and the androgen sensitivity index dyschondrosteosis. In addition to complete gene deletions and (ASI) was calculated. These data were compared to 425 of the 1517 nonsense mutations, several missense mutations have been identified subjects without AR gene mutations and with 310 normozoospermic in both patient groups leading to amino acid substitutions in the SHOX controls. We found 20 mutations leading to aminoacid changes in 26 protein. The majority of missense mutations were found to accumulate of 1517 patients (1.7%), with a similar prevalence in azoospermia, in the region encoding the highly conserved homeodomain of the severe oligozoospermia, and moderate oligozoospermia. Of the 20 paired-like type. In this report, we investigated nine different amino mutations, 7 represent novel mutations. With respect to idiopathic acid exchanges in the homeodomain of SHOX patients with idiopathic patients, men with AR gene mutations have lower sperm count short stature and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. We were able show (2.2+2.8 vs 3.9+2.6 mil/mL, P<0.01), lower ejaculate volume (2.3+1.2 that these mutations cause an alteration of the biological function vs 3.2+1.5 mL, P<0.01), higher T levels (23.8+7.8 vs 15.4+4.8 nmol/ of SHOX by loss of DNA binding, reduced dimerisation ability and/ L, P<0.001), higher oestradiol levels (80.3+27.8 vs 66.1+29.0 pmol/ or impaired nuclear translocation. Additionally, one of the mutations L, P<0.05), and higher ASI (204.5+273.0 vs 96.2+50.1 IU x nmol/L2, (p.R153L) is defective in transcriptional activation even though it is still P<0.001). However individual hormonal data cannot distinguish men able to bind to DNA, dimerise and translocate to the nucleus. Thus, with and without AR gene mutations. Also clinical manifestations of we demonstrate that single missense mutations in the homeodomain AR mutations are not unique: two men had cryptorchidism, one had fundamentally impair SHOX key functions, thereby leading to the cryptorchidism and hypospadias, and one had gynecomastia, whereas phenotype observed in patients with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and 22 men had only spermatogenic impairment. idiopathic short stature. P0896. Screening for mutations in the GTPase mitofusin 2 that P0894. Acid CID Alpha Glucosidase Gene: Identification and cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2A functional characterization of 12 novel alleles causing the O. Schagina, H. Dadali, A. Polyakov; juvenile-adult form of glicogen storage disease type II Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. A. L. E. Montalvo1, M. Filocamo2, A. Dardis1, M. Stroppiano2, M. Donna- Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy (CMT) comprises a genetically rumma2, C. Danesino3, L. Merlini4, G. Parenti5, R. Addobbati1, B. Bembi1, M. G. heterogeneous group of hereditary neuromuscular diseases with Pittis1; a similar clinical picture. Now some disease-causing genes have 1Unità di Malattie Metaboliche,IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Laboratorio been identified for the axonal variant of autosomal dominant CMT or Diagnosi Pre - Postnatale Malattie Metaboliche IRCCS,G. Gaslini, Genova, CMT2. Italy, 3Università degli Studi di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 4Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Recently the MFN2 gene has been identified as the cause of Charcot- Bologna, Italy, 5Università Federico II, Napoli, Italy. Marie-Tooth neuropathy 2A. Fibers of mitofusins, which reside at the Glycogen Storage Disease type II (GSDII) is an autosomal recessive outer mitochondrial membrane, determine the mitochondrial network inherited disorder in which deficiency of acid alpha glucosidase (GAA) architecture by fusion of mitochondria. MFN2 is involved in apoptosis results in impaired glycogen degradation that acuumulates within by colocalization with the proapoptotic protein Bax, and it is essential lysosomes. for embryonic development. Patients have been traditionally classified, according to disease onset, In 57 families with CMT2 and a classic clinical phenotype we as infantile, juvenile and adult form. Clinical as well as biochemical undertook mutation screening by SSCP (single-strand conformation heterogeneity have been described in GSDII: the infantile form is polymorphism); variants were characterized by bidirectional sequencing the most severe subtype characterized by absent o nearly absent of the coding region of the MFN2 gene. enzymatic activity, progressive muscle weakness and severe cardiac In two families we found two new mutations Arg94Trp and Val705Ile involvement. Juvenile GSDII is associated whith reduced enzymatic in exons 4 and 18. In four families we found the previously described activity and glycogen storage is generally limitated to skeletal muscle. mutation Arg94Gln in the fourth exon. Results of our research confirm The adult form has clinical signs similar to the juvenile form but residual that mutations in the MFN2 gene are the cause of CMT2A. The majority enzyme activity is higher and miopathy has a slower progression, of the mutations were in exon four, related to the GTPase domain. generally without cardiac involvement. This work was support in part by President's RF grant MD- The GAA gene localizes to human chromosome 17q23; the enzyme is 2456.2004.4 synthesized as an inactive precursor of 110 kDa which is transported to the lysosomal compartment where it is processed into the fully P0897. Molecular consequences of MTM1 mutations in X-linked active forms of 76 and 70 kDa. More than 120 mutations in the GAA myotubular myopathy muscle gene have been described up to date (http://www.eur.nl/FGG/CH1/ D. Sanoudou1,2, A. Buj-Bello3, C. R. Pierson2, K. T. Tomczak2, T. I. Burleson2, J. pompe/). Laporte3, J. Mandel3, A. H. Beggs2; We analyzed the GAA gene in 27 unrelated patients affected of 1Foundation of Biomedical Research, Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, juvenile-adult GSDII. Twelve novel mutant alleles were identified 2Genomics Program, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, due to 13 novel mutations, two being in-cis, on a complex allele. As United States, 3Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, expected, the IVS1 (-13 T/G) was the most frequent mutation among Illkirch Cedex, France. this group. X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM), caused by MTM1 mutations, Functional characterization of the missense mutations was performed is one of the more severe congenital myopathies. Clinically, patientsMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 275 present at birth with generalized weakness and hypotonia leading mutations S73I and P230L were inherited from the father. The proving to respiratory distress, major feeding difficulties, and often death in their functional consequence on heparan-N-sulfatase activity must be infancy or early childhood. Pathologically, myofibers are hypotrophied studied. The polymorphisms R456H, ins5 c->t+17 and G198G in the and a high proportion has central nuclei. MTM1 codes for a lipid heparan-N-sulfatase gene were also detected. Successful prenatal phosphatase called myotubularin, but the molecular impact of its loss diagnostics for different types of MPS and carrier detection for MPSII in XLMTM pathogenesis remains unknown. was performed using DNA-analysis results. Using Affymetrix whole genome arrays, skeletal muscle samples from 7 XLMTM patients (with MTM1 mutations) versus 7 age-matched P0900. MLPA technology: low cost, high throughput substitute unaffected individuals, and 5 Mtm1 knockout (KO) mice versus 5 wild for multiFISH technology in routine screening of telomeric type mice were analyzed. Data were processed by a combination of rearrangements bioinformatic approaches including Significance Analysis of Microarrays S. Drunat, O. Dupuy, A. Aboura, C. Baumann, J. Elion, A. Verloes; (thresholds: fold>2 and <5% false discovery rate) and geometric fold AP-HP, Paris, France. change analysis. Cryptic telomeric rearrangements (CTR) are found in 5 % of patients The molecular consequences of MTM1 mutations were mostly with idiopathic mental retardation (MR) or Multiple Congenital consistent across both species and involved over-expression of Anomalies/MR syndromes, and apparently normal karyotype. Despite genes related to cell surface receptor linked- and intracellular- its clinical relevance, multiFISH screening remains difficult to apply signalling, cell proliferation, muscle development, transcription and widely, because kits are expensive and methodology extremely phosphate metabolism. Collectively, these data support alterations in time consuming. Clinical preselection criteria as De Vries scale are extracellular signalling potentially affecting muscle function, a highly unsatisfying. active transcriptional response and ongoing muscle regeneration. The Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) is a highly numerous alterations observed at the protein synthesis, modification sensitive and rapid alternative to multiFISH. It can be used on any and more importantly at the vesicle transport level will enable a better DNA source (blood, amniocytes, CVS, paraffin-embedded tissue…) characterization of the MTM1 role in intracellular events such as We used 2 commercial sets of probes, the SALSA P019 combined endosome trafficking. to P020 and the P036 human telomere MLPA kits (MRC-Holland, These data shed light on the molecular pathways involved in XLMTM Amsterdam, Netherlands) to assay retrospectively patients with known pathogenesis and further validate the Mtm1-KO mouse as a disease dup/del syndromes, and to test a group of more than 100 systematically model for future molecular and therapeutic target studies. collected patients referred for evaluation of MR or autism. In parallel, we performed multiFISH “à-la-carte” in those with evocative phenotype or P0898. Mitochondrial disease in infant: clinical course and familial history, in order to evaluate how often a CTR would have been differential diagnostics. Case report. missed using a non systematic, clinically driven practice. In all cases K. Joost1, H. Põder1, R. Zordania1, K. Korjus1, A. Piirsoo2, T. Laht3, K. Õunap4; with abnormal/dubious MLPA, confirmatory FISHing was performed. 1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia, Preliminary results are extremely convincing. Detailed results of this 3Tallinn Technical University, Tallinn, Estonia, 4Tartu University Children`s Clinic, ongoing study will be presented. Tartu, Estonia. Conclusion: subtelomeric MLPA screening can be done without Girl at the age of 1 month was hospitalized due to the respiratory preselection, and appears to be cost-effective, time saving, and distress, failure to thrive and muscular hypotonia. After the birth clinically rewarding, as some of the positive patients would not have persistant ketotic hypoglycaemia was reported during 1st week of been selected on clinical grounds for multiFISH. Moreover, the drastic life. Clinically she presented: respiratory distress, severe hypotonia, reduction in FISH-based screening demand allows buzy diagnostic slightly dysmorphic phenotype with myopathic face. Biochemical laboratories to re-affect time to refining the cytogenetics/molecular analyses revealed progressive lactic acidosis (up to 9,1 mmol/l). In definition of “positive” cases. differential diagnoses several metabolic and genetic conditions were considered: galactosaemia, fatty acid oxidation defects, spinal muscular P0901. Molecular genetic analysis of X-linked severe combined dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, Prader-Willi syndrome, congenital immunodeficiency in two Russian families hypopituitarism. Due to the clinical problems and progressive lactic I. Sermyagina1, I. Kondratenko2, S. Tverskaya1, A. Polyakov1; acidosis mitochondrial myopathy was suspected and the diagnoses 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian was confirmed by muscle biopsy. Children Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation. Paper discusses differential diagnostic difficulties and the effect of X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID) is a rare, supportive treatment to the course of mitochondrial mypopathy in life-threatening immune disorder, caused by mutations in the gene infant. encoding the gamma subunit of the interleukin-2 receptor (IL2RG). The gamma-c chain is shared by 5 interleukin receptor complexes: IL2, P0899. Mucopolysaccharidoses in Russia IL4, IL7, IL9, and IL15. This disease characterized by a block in early E. Y. Voskoboeva; T-,B-,NK-cell differentiation, agammaglobulinemia, lymphocytopenia, Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. thymus atrophy, vulnerability to different infections and early death. The mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) in Russian population are on IL2RG gene mapped to Xq13.1 contains 8 exons and 7 introns and the decrease in the next order: MPSII -> MPSI -> MPSIII ->MPSVI spans approximately 4.2 kb. ->MPSIV-> MPSVII. The DNA-diagnosis for MPSII (the iduronate-2- We have found two different IL2RG gene mutations in the two patients sulfatase gene), MPSI (the α-L-iduronidase gene) and MPSIIIA (the with X-linked combined immunodeficiency. In the first case a novel 9- heparan-N-sulfatase gene) was developed. 62 patients with MPSII were nucleotide insertion in 6 exon (823nt ins9bp) was detected by the direct investigated. Only 7% of mutant alleles detected were major structural sequencing analysis and PCR-RFLP. In the second case we found a alterations, other mutations were point mutations, small deletions and unique splice cite mutation (IVS5 as-2nt a->g) in 5 intron of IL2RG splice mutations. The known hot-spot mutations in IDS gene in codon gene. Both patient's mothers were heterozygous for found mutations. 88, codon 274, codon 468 account for 7%, 7% and 10,5%, respectively. The prenatal diagnosis of X-SCID and determination of heterozygous Twenty mutations found were novel ones. 55 patients with MPSI were carrier for proband's maternal aunt were carried out for the first family. analyzed for mutant alleles. The most frequent mutation in Russian We have worked out the direct mutation analysis for the IL2RG gene population is Q70X. The Q70X accounts for 52,7 %, that is similar with and have identified two specific mutations in the families with X-SCID results in Scandinavian population (62%). Both the W402X mutation and the Q380R mutation account for 4,6 %. Nine mutations were new ones. 13 patients with Sanfilippo type IIIA were investigated. The genotypes of six patients were fully determined. Two patients were homozygotes for C74R and two were genetic compounds C74R/ K245H. One patient was homozygote for del1135G. Three mutations were found in sixth MPSIIIA patient: S73I, P230L and T139I. The novelMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 276 P0902. Functional consequences of NSDHL mutations in CHILD P0904. Polyadenylation signal site mutation in a boy with X- syndrome linked Severe Combined Immunodeficiency L. Leveleki1, P. Rölle1, J. Riemann1, A. König2, D. Bornholdt1, M. Debus1, R. V. L. Aldridge1, K. C. Gilmour1, B. Gaspar1, A. Coffey2, G. Norbury1; Happle2, K. Grzeschik1; 1Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Genome Research 1Philipps-Universität Marburg, Zentrum für Humangenetik, Germany, 2Philipps- Limited, Hinxton, United Kingdom. Universität Marburg, Klinik für Dermatologie und Allergologie, Germany. The X-linked recessive form of Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Mutations in the gene NSDHL (NAD(P)H steroid dehydrogenase-like (X-SCID) is characterised by a complete absence of both humoral protein) encoding a 3ß-hydroxy-steroid dehydrogenase functioning and cell-mediated immunity and classically presents with no T cells or in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway are associated with CHILD natural-killer (NK) cells. X-SCID is caused by defects in the common syndrome (Congenital Hemidysplasia with Ichthyosiform Nevus and gamma chain of the interleukin -2,-4,-7,-9 and -15 receptors (IL2RG or Limb Defects), an X-linked dominant, male-lethal trait characterized IL2Rγc). The gene consists of eight coding exons and mutations are by an inflammatory nevus that usually shows striking lateralization generally family specific. with strict midline demarcation as well as ipsilateral hypoplasia of the We report on a 4 month old boy who presented with a clinical XSCID body. phenotype and abnormal gamma chain protein expression. However, The phenotype appears to be caused by loss of function because it following a sequencing screen of the eight exons and exon/intron can be associated with nonsense- and missense mutations as well boundaries no disease-causing mutation was identified. X-inactivation as with deletions eliminating several exons or the complete gene. analysis in the proband’s mother showed she was highly likely to be a Highly conserved amino acids of NSDHL located outside the predicted carrier of an IL2RG gene defect. Linkage analysis using X-inactivation domains that are essential for the enzymatic activity (co-factor binding markers showed the proband had inherited the X-chromosome found site, catalytically active site, transmembrane helix) may pinpoint to be inactive (methylated) in his mother’s T cells. These factors positions of potential functional importance. increase the likelihood that an unidentified mutation affecting the We generated by mutagenesis human NSDHL transgenes reflecting IL2RG gene was responsible for the clinical phenotype. PCR analysis missense-mutations observed in CHILD patients or having altered other showed the genomic sequence was uninterrupted and that genomic potentially functionally important sites. GFP-NSDHL fusion protein rearrangement was unlikely. Promoter and intronic sequence analysis constructs with wild type or mutated NSDHL were transiently expressed at Genome Research Limited, Hinxton, revealed a mutation in the in different cell lines. By associating the localization of GFP-NSDHL polyadenylation signal site of the IL2RG gene. This case report has with cellular compartments (identified by immunohistochemistry) we identified the limitations of exon screening in molecular diagnostics and demonstrate that the wild type protein primarily localises to the surface has highlighted a mutation affecting primary RNA transcript processing of lipid storage droplets (LDs) and to the ER. In contrast, expression which leads to a clinical phenotype. of most of the mutant NSDHL variants results in altered subcellular organisation and disturbed localization of the protein. P0905. Association of partial AZFc region deletions with Complementation analysis by transfer of mutated human NSDHL into spermatogenic impairment and male infertility the erg26ts yeast strain, which is mutated in the orthologous gene, B. Arredi, A. Ferlin, A. Tessari, E. Salata, R. Selice, C. Foresta; ERG26, suggests functional differences between mutants, which are Department of Histology, Microbiology, and Medical Biotechnologies, Padova, not reflected in the human phenotype. Italy. Complete deletions of AZFc in distal Yq represent the most frequent P0903. Investigation for intragenic rearrangements of the PLP1 molecular genetic cause of severe male infertility. They are caused gene in patients with dysmyelinating leukodystrophies using by intrachromosomal homologous recombination between amplicons - MAPH large, nearly identical repeats- and are found in 5-10% of azoospermia P. Combes; and severe oligozoospermia. Homologous recombination may also INSERM U384, Clermont-Ferrand, France. generate different deletions of part of AZFc, but their contribution to spermatogenic impairment has not been confirmed. We analysed PLP1 is known to be mutated in the X-linked myelination disorders, the prevalence and characteristics of different partial AZFc deletions Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease (PMD) and Spastic Paraplegia type and their association with spermatogenic failure. We studied 337 2 (SPG2). The most common PLP1 mutation in PMD is a large infertile men and 263 normozoospermic fertile men, by AZFc-specific duplication including the whole gene, whereas large deletions and STSs (allowing to detect partial deletions within AZFc) and DAZ- punctual mutations can be responsible for PMD or SPG2 phenotypes. specific single-nucleotide variants (allowing to detect the DAZ gene Semi quantitative PCR (only on 1 or 2 exons) is largely used to quantify copy number). We identified 18 cases of partial AZFc deletions in PLP1 gene copy number; looking only for large rearrangements. In the the infertile group (5.3%) and one case in the control group (0.4%). aim to search for small intragenic PLP1 rearrangements in patients Seventeen deletions had the “gr/gr” pattern, one the “b2/b3” pattern, presenting classical forms of PMD or SPG and not diagnosed as and one represented a novel deletion with breakpoints in b3 and PLP1 mutated, we developed the MAPH (Multiplex Amplifiable Probe b4 amplicons. Partial AZFc deletions were associated with different Hybridization) technique using 13 PLP1 probes (2 promoter, 4 intronic spermatogenic phenotype ranging from complete azoospermia to only and 7 exonic regions probes). This technique relies on the quantitative moderate oligozoospermia. Analysis of DAZ gene copy suggested recovery and amplification of nucleic probes after hybridization to that the contribution of the different deletions to male infertility varies: immobilized DNA. only partial AZFc deletions removing DAZ1/DAZ2 seem to represent In a first approach, DNAs from 66 patients and 22 carrier mothers risk factor for male infertility, whereas deletions removing DAZ3/DAZ4 already diagnosed with duplications have been used to validate the may have no or little effect on fertility. Although men with partial AZFc technique and have shown that all duplications encompass the entire deletion may naturally conceive, in vitro fertilising techniques may PLP1 gene. transmit the mutation on to the male children and the reintroduction of Then, a total of 250 patients presenting with dysmyelinating these partial deletions into the population is of concern. leukodystrophies (including PMD or SPG like phenotypes) were screened. Whereas no duplications could be detected, two partial P0906. Screening for two susceptibility-associated deletions of PLP1 were identified. One deletion involves the 5’ part polymorphisms of OCTN carnitine transporter in Crohn-desease of the gene (promoter to part of intron 1); the other one is a 3’ gene patients deletion (exon 6 to 7). V. Havasi1, J. Bene1, K. Komlósi1, B. Gasztonyi2, G. C. Talián1, V. Cserép1, B. MAPH is a powerful and cost effective tool to screen cohorts of patients Kovács1, G. Mózsik2, B. Melegh1; for small intragenic or large genomic rearrangements. 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 21st Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. Crohn-desease is a chronic inflammatory illness of the gastrointestinal tract. Previous data showed that, in addition to the well-known NODMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 277 mutations, polymorphisms of the 5q31 chromosome region can be in specific low copy repeats and a high preponderance of Alu and LTR connection with an elevated risk for the desease (Rioux et al., Nat Genet sequences, which create a recurrent deletion breakpoint that occurs in 2003;29:223). Recent studies indicated that allelic variants C1672T more than 1% of all short individuals. It also represents one of the most in the 9. exon of SLC22A4 gene and G-207C in the promoter of the frequent deletion breakpoints leading to disease. SLC22A5 gene are susceptibility factors for Crohn-desease (Peltekova et al., Nat Genet 2004;36:471). The two rare alleles show a high linkage P0909. Novel CAPN3 mutations identified in a routine diagnostic disequilibrium and make up a haplotype (TC) which was found to be setting for LGMD patients significantly more frequent in patients than in the healthy controls. C. Pécheux1, M. Krahn1, R. Bernard1, E. H. Hammouda2, A. Urtizberea2, F. With direct sequencing of these two polymorphisms we investigated Leturcq3, N. Lévy1,4, the French Network on LGMD; the prevalence of the haplotypes in a group of patients with Crohn- 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d'enfants de la Timone, Mar- desease. Furthermore, we analyzed the carnitine-ester profile in the seille, France, 2AFM et Généthon, Evry, France, 3Laboratoire de Biochimie serum samples of these persons with ESI tandem mass spectrometry. Génétique, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 4Inserm U491 : "Génétique Médicale Comparing the results of 53 patients and 50 healthy controls we found et Développement", Faculté de, Marseille, France. that the allele frequencies of the both polymorphisms significantly Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMD) constitute a genetically differ from those described in the above referenced original article and and clinically heterogeneous group of autosomal dominant (LGMD1) it was the case also for the linkage data. In the carnitine-ester profile or recessive (LGMD2) inheritance. LGMD2A is caused by mutations of patients whose small intestine was affected a shift was detectable in the gene encoding Calpain-3 (CAPN3, 15q15.1-q21.1), a muscle- in the serum level of C2, C4, C5, C5:1 and C6 acil-carnitines when specific non-lysosomal protease. compared to controls. These results indicate that the carnitine system LGMD2A is estimated to account for 10 to 30% of recessive LGMDs. can be involved in the Crohn-desease primarily or secondarily. It is the most prevalent form of LGMD and requires proper settings for diagnosis in affected patients. P0907. Prevalent mutations in the SURF1 gene of patients with As there is a high clinical variability of the phenotype, Calpain-3 Leigh Syndrome of Russian origin. protein analysis on muscle samples is performed at first instance to E. Y. Zakharova1, E. Y. Voskoboeva1, P. G. Barsukova1, E. S. Il'ina2, S. My- guide diagnosis. However, diagnosis has to be confirmed by molecular hailova2, I. V. Fedonuk2; analysis of the CAPN3 gene. The large size of the CAPN3 gene 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, (> 45kbp, 24 exons) and the increasing number of reported allelic 2Russian Child Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation. variants is technically challenging. Methods for mutation screening are Leigh syndrome (LS) is one of the most frequent forms of mitochondrial particularly adapted to this task. diseases in infancy and childhood. Typical presentations of LS are in Here, we report a study of CAPN3 mutations in a cohort of LGMD the first year of life, with failure to thrive, psychomotor regression, patients, identified using SSCP and/or DHPLC mutation screening, and ataxia, signs of brainstem dysfunction, and peripheral neuropathy. subsequent sequencing of detected variants, in our clinical setting. Etiologies of LS include both mitochondrial and nuclear DNA defects. Using this strategy, at least one constitutive deleterious mutation was Mutations in SURF1 have been shown to be an important cause of LS evidenced in 28 out of 39 included patients. A total of 45 mutations with cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency. The human SURF1 gene was identified, most of them being missense mutations (38%), or out encodes a protein localized in the inner mitochondrial membrane and of frame deletions and/or insertions with consequent frame shifting is thought to be involved in the biogenesis of the cytochrome c oxidase (31%). Among these mutations found in our series, 13 have not been complex. We found 4 different mutations in SURF1 gene in 10 of our reported before in the literature. patients with LS. All of mutations have already been described: 312_ Diagnosis of LGMD2A could be confirmed in 17 out of 39 patients, by 321del311_312insAT, InsT868, DelCT845, insCTGC588. Spectrum of identifying two constitutive pathogenic mutations. mutations in this gene is slightly different from other European patients in which mutation 312_321del311_312insAT is more common.In P0910. Functional characterization of 14 SMPD1 mutations Russian patients with LS the most frequent mutation is 845delCT identified in Italian patients affected with NPD type B (accounts for 65% of mutant alleles) that is close to the frequency of A. Dardis1, Z. Stefania1, M. Nevjyel1, R. Addobbati1, M. Filocamo2, B. Bembi1, this mutation found in Polish patients (66%). M. G. Pittis1; We found association between mutation 845delCT and SNP detected 1Unità di Malattie Metaboliche,IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Laboratorio in the middle of intron 1 of SURF1 gene (IVS1+56C>T). All patients Diagnosi Pre-Postnatale Malattie Metaboliche,IRCCS,G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy. presented both the 845delCT mutation and the IVS1+56C>T Niemann Pick disease (NPD) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal polymorphism.The SNP was absent in 50 control samples. storage disorder caused by the deficient activity of acid sphingomyelinase due to mutations in the SMPD1 gene. The disease has been divided P0908. Recombination hotspot in the vicinity of the SHOX gene into 2 different phenotypes: type A is a severe neurodegenerative defines a common genetic cause for short stature disorder while type B is a non-neuronopathic disorder. However, the K. U. Schneider1, N. Sabherwal1, K. Jantz1, N. Muncke1, W. F. Blum2, G. B. clinical course of type B NPD patients is quite heterogeneous. While Cutler Jr.3, G. Rappold1; some mildly affected patients can present a normal life-span several 1University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Lilly Research Laboratories, patients present with an intermediate phenotype characterized by mild Giessen, Germany, 3Lilly Research Laboratories, Indianapolis, IN, United neurological involvement. In the present study we characterized by States. transient expression in COS-1 cells three novel mutations, p.V130A, Aside from the influence exerted by environmental and internal factors, p.V557fsX18 and p.D563Y found in two NP type B patients and other growth is orchestrated by a large number of different genes. One of 11 SMPD1 mutations previously reported: p.M1_W32del, p.W32X, them, SHOX, is believed to play a major role since defects in this p.G34fsX42, pL103P, p.P189fsX1, p.P192fsX14, p.L225P, p.W244C, homeobox-containing short stature gene on the sex chromosomes lead p.A281T, p.R600H, p.R600P. Eight ASM mutants, p.W32X, p.G34fsX42, to syndromal (Léri-Weill, Langer and Turner syndrome) or idiopathic p.P189fsX1, p.P192fs14, p.L225P, p.W244C, p.A281T, p.P557fsX18 short stature. We have analysed 118 independent patients with Léri- had no significant enzyme activity. In contrast, mutations p.M1_ Weill dyschondrosteosis and 1,500 patients with idiopathic short W32del, pL103P, p.V130A, p.D563Y, p.R600H, p.R600P expressed stature for deletions encompassing SHOX. Deletions were detected ASM enzymes with activities that range from 4.14 % to 28.4% of those in 34% of the patients with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and 2% of obtained with wild type. Western blot analysis showed that p.L103P, the patients with idiopathic short stature. For 27 patients with Léri- p.V130A, p.L225P, p.W244C, p.A281T, p.D563Y, p.R600H and Weill dyschondrosteosis and 6 with idiopathic short stature, detailed p.R600P mutants express ASM protein at levels comparable to that deletion mapping was carried out. Analysis was performed by PCR found in wild-type transfected cells. No immunoreactive protein was using pseudoautosomal polymorphic markers and fluorescence in situ detected in cells transfected with p.M1_W32del, p.W32X, p.G34fsX42, hybridisation using cosmid clones. Here we show that the identified p.P189fsX1 and p.P192fs14 mutants. A smaller band was detected in deletions vary in size, yet the vast majority of patients share a distinct cells transfected with p.V557fsX18 mutant, consistent with a presence deletion breakpoint. This breakpoint region is characterised by locus- of a premature termination codon. These findings provided valuableMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 278 insights into the molecular basis of the NPB phenotype variability. P0913. Peculiarities of the primary structure of fibrillogenic proteins P0911. Dominant LMNA or recessive ZMPSTE24 mutations V. V. Egorov, K. V. Solovyov; lead to Restrictive Dermopathy, and nuclear accumulation of Institute for Experimental Medicine, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. truncated or normal lamin A precursors One of the proteins which can cause primary amyloidosis is transthyretin C. L. Navarro1, J. Cadianos2, A. De Sandre-Giovannoli3, S. Courrier4, A. Boy- (TTR). Deposition of TTR fibrills in tissues leads to diferrent pathological er3, I. Boccaccio1, R. C. M. Hennekam5, P. Cau1, R. Bernard3, C. López Otin2, C. conditions such as familial polyneuropathy, cardiomiopathy and Badens3,4, N. Lévy1,3; senile systemic amyloidosis. This work is devoted to the elucidation 1Inserm U491, Faculté de Médecine de Marseille, Marseille, France, 2Departa- of the common principles of protein fibrillogenesis and to identifying mento de Bioquimica y Biologia Molecular, Instituto Universitario de Oncologia, the TTR molecular regions which are responsible for fibril formation. Universidad de Oviedo, Spain, 3Département de génétique médicale, Hôpital We analysed the primary structure of some fibrillogenic proteins and d'enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 4Centre d'Enseignement et de peptides: TTR, phage T4 lysozyme peptide (T4LP), peptide from Recherches en Génétique Médicale, Faculté de médecine, Marseille, France, Aβ (AP), human α lactalbumin (ALH) and ovalysozyme (LYZ) with 5Department of Pediatrics and Clinical genetics, Academic Medical Center, a number of computer methods. We found that T4LP and AP have Amsterdam, The Netherlands. identical and similar aminoacid residues at an equal distance from one Restrictive Dermopathy (RD) is characterized by intrauterine growth residue in both directions. Similar symmetry was also discovered on retardation, tight and rigid skin with prominent superficial vessels, the C- terminus of the TTR sequence and in β-domains of LYZ and bone mineralization defects, dysplastic clavicles, arthrogryposis and LAH. X-ray structure analysis of these proteins showed that residues early neonatal death. In two patients affected with RD, we recently before the symmetry center form β-sheet hydrogen bonds, however reported two different heterozygous splicing mutations in the LMNA symmetrical residues don’t take part in the β-sheet interaction, but gene, leading to the complete or, as commonly reported in Progeria, are sterically able to form intermolecular hydrogen bonds. The most partial loss of exon 11. In other patients, a c.1085_1086insT insertion amyloidogenic recombinant mutant human TTR (L55P) was obtained leading to a premature termination codon was identified in a T stretch from a bacterial system. We found that TTR variant which was purified in ZMPSTE24 encoding an endoprotease essential for Lamin A without protease inhibitors does not support fibrillogenesis. We show maturation. Known autosomal recessive inheritance of RD suggested that there was proteolysis of the terminal part of every TTR subunit. a 2nd molecular defect was missing. We have explored ten RD By contrast, TTR purified in the presence of protease inhibitors formed patients; 8 of them are either homozygous or compound heterozygous fibrills over several hours. We suppose that the “restricted” protein can’t for ZMPSTE24 mutations. All carry the c.1085_1086insT insertion as form fibrills under any conditions because of loss of the symmetrical a common mutation, seven of them being homozygous for this defect part. although some were previously interpreted as heterozygous due to a sequence instability within the T stretch, leading to a pseudo-frameshift P0914. Screening for genetic alterations in PRNP gene of six aspect. A large genomic deletion covering exons 3, 4 and 5, was also different populations with determination of codon 129 genotype found as 2nd mutation in one case. Proteic studies showed complete - a multicentre study loss of ZMPSTE24 and Lamin A expression, together with prelamin A M. Stražišar1, S. Smerkolj1, H. Brauch2, G. Evfremov3, M. Macek jr.4, I. Medica5, expression and accumulation in all patients, including those for which R. Terzić6, D. Glavač1; the second ZMPSTE24 mutation is not yet identified. Thus, RD is a 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Medical Faculty, primary or secondary laminopathy, due to dominant de novo LMNA Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharma- mutations or recessive ZMPSTE24 mutations most of them lying in a cology, Stuttgart, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Center, Skopje, hotspot. The accumulation of truncated or normal length prelamin A is, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 4Cystic Fibrosis Center, Institute however a common pathophysiological mechanism. of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University Prague-2 School of Medi- cine, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Outpatient Paediatric Clinic Pula, Pula, Croatia, P0912. Cytochrome P450 CYP2C9 polymorphism in Turkish 6Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical School Tuzla, Tuzla, Bosnia and epileptic patients Herzegovina. A. E. Özkaynakci1, A. I. Guney2, C. Ozkara3, D. Sevinc4, A. Kocer5, R. Aker6, F. The codon 129 genotype of PRNP gene is known to be a susceptibility Onat1, H. Ozyurt Bayraktar5; factor for sCJD. Comparison of codon 129 genotypes reveals 1Marmara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pharmacology, Istan- heterogeneity among different populations and can give some bul, Turkey, 2Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical information concerning population patterns. We show data for six Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medi- European populations. cine, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Maltepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of DNA was extracted from blood of six groups: Germans, Slovenians, Medical Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Kartal State Hospital, Depart- Czechs, Croatians, Macedonians and Bosnians and amplified PRNP ment of Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, coding region with PCR. Screening was performed with single stranded Department of Pharmacology, Istanbul, Turkey. conformation analysis (SSCA). Samples, which formed SSCA patterns Cytochrome P450 CYP2C9 is a major enzyme that metabolize differently from majority, were sequenced. different clinically important drugs which include the anticonvulsant We determined the proportion of alternative genotypes in each phenytoin. In this study the frequency of CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 population. allelic variants associated with phenytoin clearance were examined Tested populations M % M/V % V % in Turkish epileptic patients who had received chronic phenytoin Macedonian 55,2 35,8 9,0 treatment. The patient group was selected according to the abnormal German 48,7 43,2 8,1 clinical response at usual dosage regimens and the allelic variants were studied by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment Slovenian 46,8 41,1 12,1 length polymorphism. The frequencies of CYP2C9 genotypes in the Czech 43,2 51,6 5,3 study group were 78.78%, 12.12%, 6.06%, 3.03% for CYP2C9*1/1, Bosnian 40,5 48,6 10,8 CYP2C9*1/2, CYP2C9*1/3 and CYP2C9*2/3 respectively. Although it Croatian 38,5 47,7 13,8 is not statistically significant, all allelic variants found to be associated with reduced catalytic activity compared to wild-type with respect Table: Percent of codon 129 genotypes in screened populations to mean phenytoin serum concentrations at 12h after dosage. The We discovered 6 different SNPs and a 24 bp R3-4 type deletion. results show that there is a strong correlation between CYP2C9 Our results of codon 129 genotyping are not in accordance with already genotypes and phenytoin dose requirement. It is suggested that the established east-west gradient. Croatian have lower and German CYP2C9 genotyping can be used routinely to obtain efficient phenytoin higher proportion of M/M genotype than expected. Populations therapy and to lower the risk of concentration dependent intoxications from former Yugoslavia differ in M/M more than in V/V genotype. of phenytoin in mutated carriers. Macedonian population differs from other screened populations from former Yugoslavia. Geographical distance, migrations concerningMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 279 work and former war in the Balkans caused mixing of populations to P0917. Search for mitochondrial DNA T4,291C mutation in different extent. All cases of sCJD confirmed in our laboratory were Hungarian metabolic syndrome patients methionine homozygote, suggesting high risk for population with high K. Z. Horvatovich1, L. Magyari1, A. Maász1, G. C. Talián1, M. Tamaskó2, B. genotype M/M frequency. Laczy2, I. Wittmann2, B. Melegh1; 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, P0915. The molecular genetic cause of osteopetrosis in Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pécs, Pécs, Chuvashia Hungary. E. Bliznetz1, S. Tverskaya1, R. Zinchenko1, A. Kirillov2, E. Ginter1, A. Polyakov1; Metabolic syndrome affects a very great percentage of the human 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Chil- population and is characterized by hypertension, diabetes, dren Republican Hospital, Cheboksari, Russian Federation. insulin resistance, hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, Infantile malignant osteopetrosis is a rare autosomal recessive hypomagnesemia, and obesity. In a recent study (Wilson et al, congenital disease characterised by failure of osteoclasts to resorb Science 2004;306:1190) hypercholesterinemia, hypomagnesemia and bones during their growth and development. The main features hypertension were shown to be transmitted on the maternal lineage are severe anemia beginning in early infancy or in fetal life, in a large family. Homoplastic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) T4,291C hepatosplenomegaly, progressive blindness and deafness. Autosomal transition was detected which ultimately led to the Ile-tRNA gene recessive osteopetrosis is genetically heterogeneous. All known mutation characterized by replacing the uridine by cytidine immediately genes are necessary for normal functioning of osteoclasts. One of the at the 5’ position neighboring to the anticodon sequence. No data have known genes is TCIRG1, which maps to 11q13.4-13.5. It encodes an been presented in the literature on the prevalence rate of this mutation. osteoclast specific subunit of the vacuolar H+-ATPase proton pump. Using a simple PCR/RFLP assay developed for detection of the Our group investigated autosomal recessive osteopetrosis in 8 families mtDNA variant coding for this mutation we genotyped 246 Hungarian from Chuvashia where the frequency of this disease is unusually high patients with metabolic syndrome. We could not detect the pathologic (1 affected per 3900 newborns by date of epidemiological study), mtDNA variant in any of our patients suggesting that this variant is not probably due to a founder effect. frequent in the Hungarian metabolic syndrome population, and routine We have mapped this disease to the TCIRG1 gene region (the most screening is not recommended. probable candidate gene) by analysing 4 polymorphic markers in this region. All affected probands are homozygous for all 4 markers and P0918. A second frame-shift mutation confirms the involvement have an identical haplotype. All their healthy parents are heterozygous of MECP2 exon 1 in Rett syndrome carriers for this haplotype; any other healthy relatives are not I. Moix1, A. Bottani1, J. P. Rathgeb2, C. Hinard1, M. A. Morris1; homozygous for this haplotype. 1Service of Medical Genetics, Dept. of Gynecology-Obstetrics, Geneva Uni- We then identified a new splice site mutation in TCIRG1 by direct DNA versity Hospitals, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland, 2Pediatric Practice, Geneva, sequencing of PCR-amplified exons and exon-intron junctions: all Switzerland. probands were homozygous and all parents were heterozygous. Rett syndrome (RS) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder By RFLP analysis we investigated the presence of the mutation in 327 affecting almost exclusively females and classically characterized healthy Chuvashians. The frequency of heterozygous carriers of the by progressive loss of intellectual functioning, motor skills and mutation was 3.4%. language with development of stereotypic hand movements. RS is This work was support in part by RHF grant 04-01-00262a and RFBR now recognized as one of the most common causes of severe mental grant 04-04-48077 retardation in females. In our diagnostic laboratory we have analysed a consecutive series P0916. Tracking the roots of human mental retardation: of 86 patients with clinical suspicion of RS by PCR-SSCA of MECP2 cognitive impairments in Gdi1 knockout mice are associated exons 2, 3 and 4. Mutations were detected in 13/86 (15%). with anomalous synaptic vesicles. Recently a new MECP2 transcript comprising exons 1, 3 and 4 P. D'Adamo1, F. Cardone1, A. Sirri1, V. Meskenaite2, H. Lipp3, D. Toniolo1; (MECP2B) was discovered (Mnatzakanian et al. 2004). The authors 1DIBIT-HSR, Milano, Italy, 2University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3University identified two exon 1 mutations in 19 typical RS patients with no known of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. mutations in exons 2-4. X-linked non-specific mental retardation (XLMR) is a common genetic We reanalysed the 73 patients in whom no mutation had been identified disorder characterized by mental handicap as the only clinical in exons 2, 3 and 4, by direct sequence analysis of exon 1 and its symptom. Among the genes identified is GDI1, which encodes one flanking sequences. A single mutation was identified. of the proteins controlling the activity of the small GTPases of the The patient, a 12-year old girl with RS, was heterozygous for an 8 Rab family, involved in intracellular trafficking. A Gdi1 KO mice was base-pair deletion leading to a predicted premature stop codon at investigated. Lack of Gdi1 altered availability and brain subcellular position 38; the mutation is coded MECP2B c.52_59delGAGGAGAG distribution of a subset of Rab GTPases (Rab3C, 4, 5 and 11) and (p.Glu18_Arg20delfsX38). The mutation was de novo. caused hippocampus dependent deficits in short term memory This mutation confirms the clinical significance of MECP2 exon 1. formation. Electrophysiological analysis suggested depletion of the We suggest that complete MECP2 genetic diagnostic work-up must SV pool. Learning deficit due to impaired ability in CS-US pairing include exon 1 in both mutation and deletion screening. association in the trace fear conditioning test, was present when the inter trial intervals (ITI) between each pairing were short. By increasing P0919. Polymorphisms in the IL-4 and IL-4 receptor alpha chain the ITI, mutants were able to associate CS-US, further suggesting that genes and atopic bronchial asthma in North-West of Russia mass training may eventually cause depletion of the SV pool, and that S. V. Mogilina1, E. M. Ugleva2, N. V. Kelembet2, T. E. Ivaschenko1, V. S. Ba- during a longer ITI, the KO mice could restore the SV pool for efficient ranov1; memory formation and processing. Finally, EM analysis confirmed 1Ott's Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Fed- that the SV reserve pool was reduced in the KO, and showed that the eration, 2Institute of Pulmonology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. defect was detectable at P10. In conclusion, our data demonstrated Background: Interleukin-4, a pleiotropic cytokine with that lack of Gdi1 is responsible for alterations of synaptic vesicle immunomodulator functions, is involved in the upregulation of IgE biogenesis and for a number of direct and indirect changes in the production characteristic of atopic bronchial asthma (ABA). IL-4 by hippocampus important for cognitive functions. Expression profiles of binding to its receptor (IL-4R) is essential for the development of adult hippocampus of KO and WT mice were analyzed and a number airway inflamation present in asthma. of variations associated with the mutation and possibly involved in the Objective: To investigate the role of two polimorphisms C-590T (IL-4) cognitive impairments are under investigation. and Q576R (IL-4Rα) conferring susceptibility to the development of ABA. Methods: The genetic polymorphisms of IL-4 and IL-4Rα chain genes were studied by PCR-RFLP analysis in two groups of Russian women: pregnant women with ABA (102 individuals) and healthy females (69).Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 280 Results: The distribution of genotypes and alleles of the Q576R DNA extraction, it provides a rapid and convenient method to detect polymorphism in the IL-4Rα gene were not significantly different known mutations, dramatically reducing the total hands-on time. between two studied groups. In contrast, we have found significant different between patients and the control group in the distribution of P0922. Geno- and phenotype studies of myotonic dystrophy genotypes for C-590T polymorphism of the IL-4 gene. The frequency (DM1) in Hungarian patients of carriers - 590 T allele of IL-4 gene was significantly higher in asthma H. Pikó1, H. Merkli2, R. Horváth3, Á. Herczegfalvi4, A. Tóth5, V. Karcagi1; patients compared to control group (47% and 31% accordingly, p<0,05; 1Fodor József National Center of Public Health, Budapest, Hungary, 2Medi- OR=1,9; 95% CI=1,0-3,6). cal Uni. of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 3Jahn Ferenc Hospital, Budapest, Hungary, Conclusion: The results suggest, that polymorphism in the IL-4 might 4Bethesda Childrens Hospital, Budapest, Hungary, 5Natl. Center of Medical play a role conferring to susceptibility of asthma, and that IL-4Rα Care, Inst. of Obstr. and Gynecology, Budapest, Hungary. polymorphism is not associated with ABA in Russian population. Dystrophia myotonica type 1 (DM1 is a diffuse systemic disorder in which the most prominent features, i. e. myotonia and muscular P0920. The results of molecular genetic analysis in Russian atrophy may be accompanied by cataracta, gonadal atrophy, endocrine azoospermic and oligozoospermic men abnormalities, heart conduction defects and mental deficit. It is T. Beskorovainaya, A. Chukhrova, V. Chernykh, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov; inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with a variable penetrance. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. An unstable expansion of (CTG) repeats in the 3’ untranslated region n Many genetic factors had found to lead to male infertility. Besides encoding a member of the protein kinase family in 19q13.3 is the chromosome aberrations major genetic causes of azoospermia and causative mutation for myotonic dystrophy. Healthy individuals harbour severe oligozoospermia are microdeletions of the Y chromosome 5-37 CTG repeats, whereas in affected individuals repeat expansion (regions AZFa, AZFb, and AZFc) and CFTR gene mutations. We have varies between 37 and 4000. To examine the correlation between examined 290 men with azoospermia and oligozoospermia diagnosed clinical expression and CTG trinucleotide repeat length, radioactive by sperm analysis. Molecular investigation was carried out on leucocyte PCR as well as Southern blot analyses using probe p5B1.4 were DNA by analyzing SRYand ZFX/ZFY gene fragments and seven Yq- carried out in families clinically diagnosed with myotonic dystrophy. specific STSs: sY84, sY86, sY615, sY127, sY134, sY254, sY255 in So far, 28 patients from 14 families were analysed and in 11 cases the multiplex PCR. Samples without deletions were analyzed for partial mutation in DMPK gene was confirmed. The expanded CTG repeats deletions of the AZFc region in another multiplex PCR, which included were transmitted maternally as well as paternally. In the maternally 6 STSs: sY1192, sY1197, sY1125, sY1206, sY1291, sY142. The transmitted cases the expanded fragment lengths were always larger group was also tested for 11 CFTR gene mutations (del21kb, delF508, than in the paternally transmitted ones. Moreover, a clear correlation delI507, 1677delTA, 2143delT, 2184insA, 394delTT, 3821DelT, G542X, was established between phenotype severity and the length of the W1282X, N1303K) and IVS8 poly (T) variants. CTG expansion. Longer expansions resulted in earlier onset of the AZF deletions have been found in 33 cases: 2 deletions in AZFa, 6 in symptoms. Phenotypes varied between congenital onset, classical AZFb+c, and 25 in the AZFc region. Five partial deletions of the AZFc forms and mild symptoms even within the same family corresponding region (del sY1192- 4 cases, del sY1197 - 1 case) have also been found to the size of the expansion. in a group of 50 men without complete AZF deletions. The frequencies of Y-microdeletions in azoospermic and severe oligozoospermic men P0923. The X chromosome critical region for premature were about 12% and 8%, respectively. Six CFTR gene mutations in ovarian failure: alteration of chromatin organization around the heterozygous state (del21kb/- - 3, delF508/- -2 and W1282X/- -1 case) translocations breakpoints. were found in 73 men examined. Two infertile men were homozygous F. Rizzolio1, S. Alboresi1, S. Gilli1, C. Sala1, S. Bione2, T. Pramparo3, M. Goegan1, for the IVS8 5T variant and eight were heterozygous. In one case we O. Zuffardi3, D. Toniolo1; identified a complete AZFc deletion and heterozygous IVS8 5T variant 1DIBIT-HSR, Milano, Italy, 2IGM-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 3University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. co-existing. Monosomies and rearrangements of the X chromosome are often associated to premature ovarian failure (POF) and several independent P0921. Simultaneous detection of the factor V Leiden, the studies have mapped a “critical region” for POF between Xq21 and prothrombin G20210A, the MTHFR C677T and the factor XIII Xq26. We have analyzed 25 X;autosome balanced translocations Val34Leu variants by real-time PCR in Xq: 23 in patients and two in normal women. Considering all the P. Ernault1, M. Olivi1, T. Gaillon1, K. Arar2, J. M. Costa1; breakpoints studied by us and by others we can exclude an effect of 1American Hospital of Paris, Neuilly, France, 2Proligo, Paris, France. the chromosomal rearrangements per se and we tentatively exclude Real-time PCR melting curve-based genotype determination has haploinsufficiency for Xq genes. The analysis suggested a position become available for the determination of single nucleotide alterations. effect of the breakpoint on gene(s), X linked or autosomal, in the vicinity However, the growing variety of genetic alterations requires multiplexing of the breakpoints. To investigate the hypothesis we have studied a of genotyping assays. region of 3 Mb in Xq21, where 8 breakpoints in patients and one in a Here we report the simultaneous detection of the factor V Leiden, normal woman were clustered and we we mapped the X chromosome the prothrombin G20210A, the MTHFR C677T and the factor XIII and two of the autosomal breakpoints. We studied the pattern of Val34Leu variants by real-time PCR using a single tube four-color expression and the organization of the chromatin at the promoters and detection system. in flanking regions of the genes around the breakpoints. The chromatin One hundred and twenty six samples (including 24 quality controls) organization appeared altered in breakpoint regions associated with were blind-tested with this new assay and the results were compared a POF phenotype while it was unchanged in the normal woman. In to those obtained with a multiplex allele-specific PCR procedure situ hybridization analysis of the genes around the breakpoints in usually performed in our laboratory. adult mouse showed that 5 genes in two autosomal breakpoints were Genomic DNA was extracted from 200µl EDTA-blood using an specifically expressed at high levels in granulosa cells and/or oocytes. automatic procedure (MagNA Pure Compact) and eluted with 50μl Alteration of the expression of these genes may be responsible of the of elution buffer of which 5µl were used per PCR reaction. Multiplex POF phenotype in the patients. PCR reactions were set up in a final volume of 20 µl containing the four primers and hybridization probe sets. Simultaneous mutation P0924. Hereditary spastic paraplegia type 4 in Russian families detection was achieved by analysis of the melting curves measured G. Rudenskaya1, I. Sermyagina1, S. Illarioshkin2, I. Ivanova-Smolenskaya2, A. for each of the four sensor probes labeled with the LCRed 610, LCRed Polyakov1; 640, LCRed 670 and LCRed705 fluorophores, specific for the MTHFR 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re- C677T, the factor V Leiden, the prothrombin G20210A and the factor search Institute of Neurology, Moscow, Russian Federation. XIII Val34Leu variants respectively. Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) type 4, or SPG4, caused by The results were in perfect concordance with those previously obtained various mutations of spastin gene (locus 2p22) is the most common thus demonstrating the efficiency of the method for the simultaneous form in a heterogeneous group of autosomal dominant HSP's. In a detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms. Combined with automatic recently begun molecular genetic study of HSP's in Russia, we haveMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 281 so far detected three SPG4 families. Spastin mutation was found in P0927. Evaluation of a multiplex assay for cystic fibrosis using one family with 4 patients in two generations. This frame-shift mutation the Luminex platform 839-840delAG in exon 5 was previously described in a German family T. Yeomans, T. McDevitt, C. King, B. O'hIci, D. E. Barton; [Sauter et al., 2002]. Two unrelated families, one with 10 patients in five National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland. generations and another with 12 patients in four generations, showed Plans for newborn screening for cystic fibrosis (CF) and issues of linkage to SPG 4 locus, lod scores 1.66 and 1.51 correspondingly with sensitivity and efficiency with our current “home-brew” CF assay recombination fraction equal to zero. Search of spastin mutation in led us to look for a multiplexed CF assay which could be adapted to these two and in a set of other HSP families is currently underway. As the mutation spectrum of the Irish population. We have an excellent to clinical characteristics of the disease in three families, all patients knowledge of the Irish mutation spectrum, as all patients with mutations (apart from one severe case presenting a mixture of HSP and hemolytic not detected by our ARMS assay are screened by DHPLC of the entire disease of the newborn) fall into relatively late-onset and slowly CFTR gene at the laboratory of Professor Claude Ferec in Brest, progressing "uncomplicated" HSP which is typical for SPG4; several France. We evaluated the CF Multicode Plx(TM) assay from EraGen persons, even elderly ones, have only subclinical signs of the disease. Biosciences. MultiCode uses an additional base pair constructed from This work was support in part by President's RF grant MD- the synthetic complementary bases isoguanosine (isoG) and 5’-Me- 2456.2004.4 isocytosine (isoC). Base pairing of isoG to isoC is highly specific. These additional bases are used in each step of the MultiCode process: PCR, P0925. CFTR-opathies extension labelling, and liquid decoding on a Luminex instrument. All P. F. Pignatti; steps are carried out in the same micro plate well without transfers or Biology and Genetics, Mother Child Biology Genetics, University of Verona, washings. Verona, Italy. We have taken the assay designed by EraGen and designed target- In the workshop "Lessons from CF", the importance of CFTR-opathies specific extension primers for 10 additional mutations which occur will be remembered. This importance has led to the latest international at a frequency of 0.15% or greater in the Irish population. We have classification of CF together with its related diseases, when at least one evaluated the core 29-target assay and the extended assay on a large CFTR gene mutation has been identified: CAVD,chronic pancreatitis, cohort of samples of known genotype, to examine their sensitivity and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, disseminated bronchiectasis, specificity. We are also evaluating a second Luminex-based assay, disseminated panbronchiolitis, sclerosing cholangitis, and neonatal Signature CF(TM) from Ambion. Results of these studies, as well as hypertripsinemia. Still other diseases have been reported to have an analysis of cost and efficiency, will be presented. an increased frequency of CFTR gene mutations. In the case two mutations have been identified in an individual, generally at most one P0928. Characterization of Caenorhabditis elegans mutant strain may be deemed causative of CF, while the other produces only a mild RB839 functional impairment and is nor deemed to be causing CF disease. E. Zouharova, M. Kostrouchova, J. Krijt, V. Kozich; CFTR gene expression, including haplotypes and quantitative Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Prague, Czech Republic. approaches to transcript analysis in different tissues, and modifier C. elegans is a widely used model organism. The aim of our ongoing genes and environmental factors, modulate phenotypic expression in study is to examine whether the genetically modifed C. elegans different CFTR-opathies. CFTR-related diseases may be thought of as strains may be suitable models for studying disorders of homocysteine extreme phenotypes of CF involving only one organ, or the result of metabolism. As deficiency of cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) modulation of gene expression in different tissues which may involve is the main cause of homocystinuria in humans, we first started to several organs even if in a minor degree. CFTR mutation screening characterize C. elegans strain RB839, in which a part of the F54A3.4 is generally suggested for CBAVD and infertile couples before in vitro gene- an ortholog of human CBS- has been deleted. fertilization, while it is considered only in special cases (e.g.familiarity) Sequencing of genomic DNA obtained from RB839 revealed deletion for CFTR-related pulmonary or pancreatic diseases. between nucleotides 857 and 1548, which predicts an in-frame deletion of 231 amino acids in the putative active core of the enzyme. P0926. Model systems to study methylmalonic acidemia (MMA). Subsequently we characterized the phenotype of RB839 nematodes. R. J. Chandler, C. Venditti; The body morfology, behaviour, lifespan and egg-laying of RB839 National Institute of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute, hermaphrodites did not differ from the wild-type N2 nematodes. Bethesda, MD, United States. We also determined the CBS activity in RB839 strain, which did not The hereditary of methymalonic acidemias are a devastating group significantly differ from the control strain N2, suggesting that F54A3.4 of autosomal recessive metabolic disorders caused by defective gene does not serve as cystathionine beta-synthase in C.elegans. isomerization of L-methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA. In an attempt This notion is also supported by the lack of difference in concentration to develop tractable experimental systems to study this group of of homocysteine and other aminothiols in crude extracts of RB839 and conditions, we have developed and characterized nematode and wild type N2 strains. murine models. Genomic and biochemical characterization of the These preliminary data show that the strain RB839 with deleted part of propionate to succinate conversion pathway in C elegans was F54A3.4 gene- an ortholog of human CBS- may not be a proper model undertaken. Homologues of PCCA, PCCB, MMAA, MMAB, MMCM, for studying human CBS deficiency. However, our study suggests that and MMCR were identified in C. elegans and cloned for functional the F54A3.4 gene may confer other functions in nematode sulphur studies. Tracer experiments using C14-propionic acid and H3- metabolism. phenylalanine revealed incorporation ratios similar to that seen in This study was supported by The Wellcome Trust Senior Fellowship mammalian cells. The pathway could be stimulated by glucose and to V. K.. OH-cobalamin. Loading of C. elegans with propionic acid caused the animals to produce methylmalonic acid and accrete propionylcanitine. P0929. Two novel heterozygous TGFBR2 mutations in Marfan A variable biochemical response to RNAi was seen. We also have syndrome created two new null alleles at the murine methylmalonyl-CoA mutase E. Disabella, M. Grasso, S. Ansaldi, A. Pisani, S. Mauro, C. Lucchelli, E. Por- locus; one has exon 3 deleted and the 5’ coding exon flanked by loxP cu, A. Pilotto, C. Malattia, M. Diegoli, N. Marziliano, L. Tavazzi, E. Arbustini; sites, the other has a single loxP site in place of the 5’ coding exon IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. and both exons deleted. Both alleles should be useful for genomic Marfan syndrome (MFS, MIM 154700) is an autosomal dominant manipulations such as Cre-mediated cassette exchange and Cre- disorder of connective tissue with cardiovascular, skeletal and ocular mediated insertion. The mice display many features seen in the human abnormalities, due to mutations in the FBN1 gene (15q21.1). A condition, including massive elevation of MMA in body fluids, and second type of the MFS (MIM 154705) is associated with a second perish shortly after birth. These diverse model organism systems will locus, MFS2, at 3p25-p24.2. Identification of a 3p24.1 chromosomal allow the human condition to be studied using modern genomic and breakpoint disrupting the TGFBR2 gene in a Japanese individual with genetic methods, and should facilitate the development and testing of MFS led to consider TGFBR2 as a gene underlying association with new therapies for MMA. MFS at the MFS2 locus. Overall, four mutations of the TGFR2 geneMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 282 have been identified to date in MFS with prominent cardiovascular polymorphic dinucleotide repeat at the IVS17b(TA)n locus is implicated phenotype (Mizuguchi T, et al, 2004). in the generation of this deletion, which leads to the loss of the exons The TGFBR2 encodes the human transforming growth factor beta type 17a and 17b in two unrelated German cystic fibrosis patients in the II receptor (70/80 kDa). It belongs to the serine-threonine kinase family heterozygous state. We conclude that MLPA is a sensitive and robust of cell surface receptors, which regulate many cellular processes method for the rapid deletion scanning of the CFTR gene in cystic including proliferation, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, differentiation and fibrosis samples with hitherto incomplete mutation detection. formation of extracellular matrix. We identified two novel heterozygous mutations (M425V, P525R) in P0932. Mutations in the DYSF gene: the importance of analysing two unrelated patients with MFS, who were proven not to be carriers DNA and RNA of FBN1 gene mutations. A. Freixas1, E. Gallardo1, C. Márquez2, L. Alías1, N. de Luna1, E. del Río1, M. The M425V mutation was identified in a 27-year-old male patient whose Calaf1, I. Illa1, M. Baiget1, P. Gallano1; father died suddenly at the age of 40 of an unknown cardiovascular 1Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Valme, Sevilla, Spain. cause. He had major cardiovascular (aortic dilatation) and skeletal Mutations in the dysferlin gene (DYSF) cause different muscular signs plus a minor cardiac and ocular signs. The P525R was identified dystrophy phenotypes including Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy 2B, in 17-year-old girl. Her phenotype was characterised by aortic dilatation Miyoshi Myopathy and Distal Anterior Compartment Myopathy. These (she recently underwent preventive cardiac surgery), major skeletal disorders are characterized by autosomal recessive inheritance, adult signs, retinal degeneration. onset and elevated levels of serum CK. The DYSF gene maps to Both mutations were absent in 50 healthy controls.We confirm TGFBR2 chromosome 2p13, has 55 exons and encodes a protein of about 237 gene as associated with MFS with major cardiovascular involvement kDa that is located in the sarcolemma. We have studied 32 patients from 20 families clinically diagnosed as P0930. Mucopolysaccharidosis type I: Molecular studies of IDUA MM, LGMD2B and DAT through: 1) analysis of dysferlin expression by gene in Czech and Slovak populations immunohistochemistry in muscle biopsies and by Western blotting in L. Dvorakova, A. Vazna, L. Berna, L. Stolnaja, M. Bouckova, J. Zeman, H. CD14+ peripheral blood monocytes and, 2) screening for mutations in Poupetova, M. Hrebicek; the DYSF gene by sequencing cDNA from monocytes, amplifying 14 Inst.Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine and General Fac- fragments that cover the 55 exons. Finally, genomic DNA was studied ulty Hospital, Praha 2, Czech Republic. to check mutations found in monocyte RNA. During the last 25 years the diagnosis of mucopolysaccharidosis Seventeen different mutations were identified: 7 missense, 6 frameshift (MPS) was proved enzymatically in 89 patients from Czech and Slovak and 4 nonsense. One of the mutations consist in a G>A transition at populations (15 mil.), including 18 mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS position 1924 of the genomic DNA, causing a G519R change in the I) patients. Fourteen of the patients had the severe form of the disease polypeptide chain. RNA analysis revealed that this apparent missense (Hurler syndrome), two had the mild form (Scheie syndrome) and two mutation causes a deletion of 34 nucleotides in exon 18 causing a had intermediate Hurler/Scheie phenotype. frameshift that produces a stop codon in exon 19. The deletion was All forms of MPS I are caused by the deficiency of a lysosomal probably induced by the activation of a cryptic splice site. hydrolase, alpha-L-iduronidase (IDUA, EC 3.2.1.76). The disease is We consider that when considering a new mutation it is necessary to inherited in autosomal recessive manner. We have analyzed the entire perform the analysis of both genomic DNA and RNA, including the IDUA gene coding region sequence, exon-intron boundaries and a part analysis of normal controls to prove the pathogenicity of the mutation. of 5’ and 3‘ UTR in 15 Czech and Slovak MPS I patients. Up to now we identified 19 mutated alleles: W402X (9/19), Q70X (7/19), c.1614delG P0933. The use of real time PCR for detection of proteolipid (1/19), R628X (1/19) and c.1917-1926del (1/19). Two patients with protein-1 gene (PLP1) copy number in Palizaeus-Merzbacher severe phenotype were homozygous for the prevalent mutations, patients. W402X and Q70X, respectively. Two patients with Scheie syndrome E. Mikesova, I. Sakmaryova, L. Barankova, P. Seeman; were compound heterozygotes for one of the prevalent mutations Charles University, 2nd School of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. combined with a mutation in exon 14 (W402X/c.1917-1926del and Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is an X-linked recessive disorder Q70X/R628X). of CNS myelination. More frequent classic form presents shortly after We observed six known polymorphisms (A8, A20, Q33H, L118, A314, birth by nystagmus, psychomotor delay and hypotonia and later by A361T). The Q33H, A8 and L118 were polymorphic in approximately 1/3 spasticity and cerebellar ataxia. Rarer connatal type of PMD shows of the patient as well as control alleles. Preliminary results of haplotype rapid progression and is fatal in infancy. analysis based on polymorphisms A8, A20 and Q33H showed that the PMD is caused most frequently by duplication of the PLP1 gene located alleles containing the mutation Q70X shared the same haplotype, on Xq22, less frequently by PLP1 point mutations and very rarely by suggesting a founder effect and a common ancestral origin. PLP1 deletion. Carrier women show usually no clinical signs. This work was supported by grants GA UK 154/2004/C/PrF and Our aim was to distinguish samples with 1, 2 and 3 PLP1 copies using partially by VZ MSM CR 0021620806 and IGA-MZ 1A/8239-3. real time PCR and to define non-overlapping diagnostic ranges of ΔΔCt values for these groups. We tested 40 gDNA samples which were P0931. Deletion scanning of the CFTR gene using multiplex previously analyzed by microsatellite markers analysis: healthy men ligation-dependent probe amplification (n=10) (1 PLP1 copy), PMD patients (n=9) (2 PLP1 copies), control T. Dörk1, D. Gläser2, C. Aulehla-Scholz3, A. Nygren4, J. Schouten4; group of healthy women (n=7) (2 PLP1 copies), carrier women (n=14) 1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Gregor Mendel Laboratories, Neu-Ulm, (3 PLP1 copies). Samples were run on ABI 7900 in multiplex reaction Germany, 3Institute for Clinical Genetics, Stuttgart, Germany, 4MRC Holland, using primers and TaqMan probes for exon 3 of PLP1 and exon 12 of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. albumin gene, which was used as endogenous control. Results were Large genomic deletions in the CFTR gene (also called ABCC7) may processed using the relative quantitative comparative threshold cycle account for several unidentified mutant alleles in cystic fibrosis and method (ΔΔCt). other CFTR-related disorders. We have employed multiplex ligation- The ranges of ΔΔCt values are: < 1,3 for healthy men, 1,7 - 2,3 for dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to screen for the presence PMD patients and healthy women, > 2,5 for carrier women. of genomic CFTR deletions in 24 patients who had cystic fibrosis Non overlapping ranges of ΔΔCt values were detected for selected or obstructive azoospermia with only one mutation identified after groups. Real time PCR can be employed in PMD testing. sequencing of the whole coding region. In control samples, four out Supported by the Grant Agency of Charles University (GAUK). of five known genomic deletions were readily detected by MLPA. The mutation 134del120ins300 (also called CFTRdele1) was missed by this method because the probe is located upstream of the deleted exon. Our subsequent MLPA screening uncovered a new deletion, CFTRdele17(2.5kb), that had previously escaped detection by routine sequencing. Examination of the breakpoints showed that a highlyMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 283 P0934. A novel mutation in the SCO2 gene in a patient with P0936. Presence of cell free fetal DNA in peripherial blood of cytochrome c oxidase deficiency and a Werdnig-Hoffmann patients with ectopic pregnancy disease phenotype L. Lazar, B. Nagy, Z. Ban, G. R. Nagy, E. Toth-Pal, C. Papp, Z. Papp; K. Vesela1, H. Hansikova1, M. Elleder1, P. Martasek1, J. C. Salerno2, J. Zeman1; Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. 1Center of Integrated Genomic, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Rensselaer Poly- Presence of cell free fetal DNA in peripherial blood of pregnant womans technic Institute, Troy, NY, United States. is a well known phenomenon. The quantity of DNA is changing during Disturbances of respiratory chain complexes, especially cytochrome the pregnancy, and seems to be different in normal and pathological c oxidase (COX) deficiency, represent a group of inherited disorders pregnancies. The possible applications by detection, quantification with clinical, biochemical and molecular heterogenity, which usually and analysis of cell free fetal DNA in non-invasive prenatal diagnosis manifest in early childhood and affects tissues with high energetic is the focus of the research. The aim of our study was to detect and demand (brain, muscle, heart). Targeted treatment is not available and to measure the quantity of fetal origin DNA in the peripherial blood of the prognosis for patients is unfavourable. For genetic counseling it patients with ectopic pregnancy, and to compare with blood samples of is crucial to find the molecular background of the disease. In a group women with normal pregnancies. Blood samples of the patients were of 69 children with COX deficiency, mutations in SCO2 were found in collected before operative laparoscopy from ten patients with suspect 8 children. We present a 3-months old girl with a Werdnig-Hoffman ultrasound finding, positive pregnancy test and elevated serum hCG phenotype but negative on mutation screening of the SMN gene. A level. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis of the SRY region of Y mitochondrial etiology of the disease was suspected after detection chromosome was performed in order to detect and to measure the of hypertrophy of the interventricular septum. Biochemical analysis quantity of cell free fetal DNA. The diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy revealed increased levels of lactate in blood and CSF and analysis of was verified by hystological examination. SRY region was detected respiratory chain complexes in isolated muscle mitochondria showed in eight hystologicaly prooven ectopic pregnancy cases. The mean markedly decreased activity of COX. Mutation analysis of mtDNA gestational age was 9 weeks. Relative quantity of cell free fetal DNA was negative but sequencing of SCO2 revealed heterozygosity was between 1.067E-04 and 3.986E-02. The results of our study for the common mutation 1541G>A and a novel deletion 1518delA, suggest that cell free fetal DNA in the maternal circulation is detectable which results in a frameshift and production of a truncated protein. in cases of ectopic pregnancies. Comparison of the relative quantity of To illustrate the possible effect of 1541G>A on the Sco2 protein, we cell free fetal DNA, gestational week and hCG levels between ectopic present here a computer model of Sco2. and normal pregnancies might have importance in early diagnosis of Conclusion: SCO2 mutations should be considered in patients with ectopic pregnancy. the phenotype of Werdnig-Hoffmann disease. Clarification of the molecular background of mitochondrial diseases may help in genetic P0937. Mutational screening of the RPGR gene in Spanish XLRP counseling in affected families and it also enables prenatal diagnosis families in families at risk with nuclear encoded defects. M. Garcia-Hoyos, D. Cantalapiedra, R. Riveiro-Alvarez, E. Vallespin, M. Tru- Supported by: GAUK 18/2004/C, GACR 303/03/D132 and GACR jillo, I. Lorda-Sanchez, C. Ramos, C. Ayuso; 303/03/H065. Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a degenerative disease of the retina, P0935. Respiratory and bioaminergic alterations in Mecp2- characterized by night blindness and visual field constriction. X- linked deficient mice, an experimental model for Rett syndrome form of RP (XLRP; MIM # 268000) is the most severe type of RP L. Villard1, J. Viemari2, J. Roux1, A. K. Tryba2, V. Saywell1, H. Burnet3, F. Pena4, because of its early onset and the rapid progression. Five XLRP loci S. Zanella3, M. Bévengut3, M. Barthélémy-Requin3, L. B. Herzing5, A. Moncla1, have been mapped: RP2, RP3, RP6, RP23 and RP24. The RP3 locus J. Mancini6, J. Ramirez2, G. Hilaire3; on Xp21.1 accounts for 60-90% of XLRP. 1INSERM U491, Marseille, France, 2Department of Organismal Biology and We have analyzed the RPGR gene (RP3 locus) in 34 unrelated Anatomy - University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 3CNRS FRE2722 Spanish XLRP families. We have performed haplotype analyses to - GERM - 280 boulevard de Sainte-Marguerite, Marseille, France, 4Departa- assign the locus responsible of the pathology in each family, in order mento de Farmacobiología - IPN, Mexico, Mexico, 5Northwestern University to determine if the disease is linked to RP3 region. In those families in Feinberg School of Medicine - CMIER, Chicago, IL, United States, 6Dpt of Pedi- which the disease segregates with the RP3 locus we have carried out atric Neurology - Timone Children's Hospital, Marseille, France. mutational screening of the RPGR gene. We have analyzed the first Rett syndrome is a severe X-linked neurological disorder, in which 15 exons of RPGR at mRNA level and the ORF 14 and ORF 15 exons most patients carry a mutation in the gene encoding methyl-CpG at DNA level by SSCP-PCR and automatic sequence. binding protein 2 (MECP2). The clinical course of the disease consists After haplotype analysis, we were able to rule out the RP3 locus in 5 of normal in utero and neonatal development followed by a period XLRP families (14,7%). In the rest, we have identified 15/29 RPGR of regression showing signs of neurodevelopmental defects (arrest mutated families, 8 of them were novel and affected individual families. of brain development, loss of acquisitions such as speech and walk, The 2 previously described mutations g.ORF15 481-482 Del AG and apparition of behavioural troubles). g.ORF15 652-653 Del AG have been identified in 4 and 3 families Twenty six percent of deaths in Rett girls occur with sudden respiratory respectively. We confirmed that exon ORF 15 is a mutational hot spot arrhythmia. Yet, the breathing irregularity has puzzled clinicians because 86,7% of the mutations found in our XLRP families were because of its state-dependency. Breathing is regular during sleep and located in that region. can switch from highly irregular to regular even during wakefulness. Because breathing can be regular many clinicians believe that P0938. Evidence from autoimmune thyroiditis of skewed breathing problems are a consequence of disturbed neocortical rather X-chromosome inactivation in female predisposition to than brainstem mechanisms. autoimmunity To date, little is known when it comes to cellular explanations for any S. Bagislar1, A. Gursoy2, S. Gullu2, E. Uz1, C. Mustafa1, T. Özçelik1; symptom of Rett Syndrome. We performed experiments on wild-type 1Bilkent University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and and Mecp2-deficient mice to understand the role of the Mecp2 gene Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara University Medical School, Department of in respiration and bioaminergic systems. We show that adult mice Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Ankara, Turkey. deficient for the Mecp2 gene have erratic breathing with highly variable The etiologic factors in the development of autoimmune thyroiditis is not respiratory rhythm and frequent apneas, reduced norepinephrine fully understood. The disease is approximately fifty times more frequent content and a drastic reduction of tyrosine-hydroxylase expressing in women than in men. The role of X-chromosome inactivation has neurons in the medulla. Severe respiratory disturbances are also been questioned in female predisposition to autoimmunity. Until now evident in the isolated medullary respiratory rhythm generating network this has not been illustrated experimentally. We tested the hypothesis of Mecp2-/y deficient mice. We propose that breathing irregularities in that disturbances in X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) mosaicism Rett patients are due to a disturbed aminergic control of the medullary may be involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune thyroid diseases respiratory network. (AITDs) Hashimoto thyroiditis and Graves disease. One hundred and nine female autoimmune thyroiditis patients and 160 female controlsMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 284 were analyzed for the androgen receptor locus by the HpaII/polymerase patients (34.2 percent), and in 10 of 124 informative controls (8 chain reaction assay to assess XCI patterns in DNA extracted from percent, p<0.0001; χ2 test). Extremeley skewed XCI, defined as >90% peripheral-blood cells. Furthermore, thyroid biopsy samples were inactivation of one allele was observed in eight (21 percent) patients obtained from five patients whose blood revealed an extremely skewed and three controls (2.4 percent, p<0.0001). These results raise the pattern of XCI, and the analysis repeated. Skewed XCI was observed possibility that extremely skewed X-inactivation may have a role in the in DNA from peripheral-blood cells in 27 of 82 informative patients (33 pathogenesis of preeclampsia. percent) as compared with 10 of 124 informative controls (8 percent, Supported by grants from the Scientific and Technical Research P<0.0001). Extreme skewing was present in 21 patients (26 percent), Council of Turkey - TUBITAK-SBAG 2513, and International Center for and only in three controls (2.4 percent, P<0.0001). However, XCI was Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology - ICGEB-CRP/TUR04-01. random in all thyroid biopsy samples. Skewed XCI mosaicism may play a significant role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune thyroid diseases. P0941. Molecular characterization of hemophilia A in the Supported by grants from the Scientific and Technical Research Republic of Macedonia Council of Turkey - TUBITAK-SBAG 2513, and International Center for E. Sukarova Stefanovska1, O. Muratovska2, S. Kostova3, G. D. Efremov1; Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology - ICGEB-CRP/TUR04-01. 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic En- gineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Mace- P0939. Allelic series of arrhythmic disorders caused by different donia, 2Pediartic Clinic, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic mutations in SCN5A gene. of Macedonia, 3Institute of Transfusiology, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former E. Zaklyazminskaya1, I. Pronicheva2, A. Revishvili2, S. Chuprova3, M. Shkol- Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. nikova3, A. Chapurnykh4, M. Kharlap5, A. Pevzner5, S. Golitsyn5, A. Polyakov1; Hemophilia A is a common X-linked bleeding disorder affecting 1 1Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federa- in 5,000 males worldwide. The most common molecular defect is tion, 2Bakoulev Scientific Center for Cardiovascular Surgery, Moscow, Russian intron 22 inversion, which participates with 45% of all mutations in Federation, 3Federal Center of Children's Arrhythmias, Moscow, Russian Fed- the factor VIII gene. The rest of the mutations are caused by single eration, 4Kirov State Medical Academy, Kirov, Russian Federation, 5Cardiology nucleotide substitutions in different parts of the gene. The knowledge Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation. of the causative gene defect has become an important instrument in Molecular medicine seeks to explain why a particular mutation causes hemophilia care with respect to prediction of the patients' clinical course a particular clinical phenotype. The SCN5A gene has been implicated and safe genetic counseling of relatives. The aim of this study was to in a wide spectrum of inherited arrhythmic disorders. To date, at least determine the molecular defects underlying hemophilia A patients from six human diseases have been linked to mutations in the SCN5A the Republic of Macedonia. The molecular characterization of fVIII gene gene: long QT syndrome type3 (LQT3), Brugada syndrome (BS), was performed in 50 unrelated hemophilia A patients. Southern blot sick sinus syndrome (SSS), cardiac conduction defect (CCD), sudden analysis was used for detection of inversions in intron 22, while PCR infant death syndrome (SIDS), and idiopathic ventricular fibrillation followed by SSCP or DGGE were performed for mutation screening. (IVF). Here we present the results of genetic screening of the SCN5A The molecular defect was found in 34, or 68%, of analyzed patients. gene. We screened 22 unrelated families with ventricular arrhythmias: The most frequent molecular defect was inversion in intron 22, found 14 probands had LQTS, 6 had BS and 2 had IVF. All patients and in 38% of all studied patients, or in 67.7% severely affected patients. their relatives had a detailed clinical checkup. Genomic DNA was Nucleotide substitutions were found in 15 (30%) patients. With the isolated from EDTA venous blood by standard methods. For mutation exception of C->T change in codon 2159 found in 4 (8%) of unrelated screening, original intronic primers were developed that encompassed patients, the other nucleotide substitutions were private. Two of the the complete coding sequence, the splice sites, and the adjacent mutations were nonsense (Cd272G→T, and Cd1696C→T) while eight areas. We found five SCN5A mutations in six probands: A572D and were missense of which four were found for the first time (Cd-19Met→ Q1033R in LQTS patients, 848delI and IVS17DS-5A/G in a BS patient, Arg; Cd78Ala→Pro; Cd2174Cys→Gly; Cd2256Tyr→Asp). Six prenatal P2005A in an IVF patient, compound mutations A572D and S1431R in diagnosis were successfully performed during this study. a patient with a mixed phenotype (BS + SSS). Different SCN5A mutations can produce different clinical phenotypes P0942. Analysis of mutations in the ABCB4 (MDR3) gene in due to specific alterations of the inward I current. Interestingly, the Czech patients with cholestatic liver disease Na mutation A572D caused different clinical phenotypes in two unrelated M. Hrebicek1, M. Bouckova1, L. Dvorakova1, J. Horák2, J. Sperl3, M. Jirsa3; patients: LQTS and BS. We suggest that this is due to the influence of 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Praha 2, Czech Republic, 21st other modifiers in SCN5A or other relevant genes (for example, these Department of Internal Medicine, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, patients has differences in the SNPs distribution in SCN5A). Praha, Czech Republic, 3Institute for Clinical AND Experimental Medicine (IKEM), Praha, Czech Republic. P0940. Extremely skewed X-chromosome inactivation is The ABCB4 (MDR3) is a phospholipid export pump located increased in preeclampsia predominantly at the biliary pole of the hepatocyte. Mutations in the E. Uz1, I. Dölen2, S. Bagislar1, A. R. Al2, T. Özçelik1; ABCB4 gene were found in homozygosisty or heterozygosity in patients 1Bilkent University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and with progressive familial intrahepatic cholestatis (PFIC), cholesterol Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ministry of Health, Etlik Maternity and Women’s gallstones and intrahepatic cholestatis of pregnancy (ICP). Health Teaching Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. The ABCB4 gene is located at chromosome 7q21.11 and spans more Preeclampsia is a disorder that affects about 5% of the pregnancies than 75 kb. in Europe and US. Major diagnostic criteria include gestational We have analysed 27 protein-encoding exons of ABCB4 gene in blood pressure increase without a history of hypertension before 6 Czech families with cholestatic disease, familiar occurence of pregnancy and proteinuria. We tested the hypothesis that skewed X cholesterol gallstones and recurrent contraceptive pill-induced chromosome inactivation (XCI) could be involved in the pathogenesis cholestasis. In three of the families the probands carried on one of of preeclampsia. Peripheral blood DNA was obtained from 55 the alleles a mutation - c.3608C>G (S1203X), c.1501G>T (E501X), preeclampsia patients and 131 age matched control women. Age, and c.1954A>G (R652G), respectively, and wild type sequence on pregnancy history, blood pressure, and disease information were the other. The fourth proband carried mutations c.523A>G (T175A) a collected for clinical characterization of the patients. The androgen c.1371del G (G457X). receptor locus was analyzed by the HpaII/polymerase chain reaction In two of the families no apparently pathogenic mutations were found. (PCR) assay to asses XCI patterns in the DNA samples. Male DNA The family 5 proband was heterozygous for 3 synonymous mutations with cytogenetically verified 46, XY karyotype was used as control for (c.175C>T, L59L; c.504T>C, N168N;c.711A>T, I237I) and the sixth complete digestion. PCR products were run on 10%PAGE and stained proband carried on one of the alleles the IVS28-16C>T, that is likely with ethidium bromide. XCI patterns were also quantitated by use of not pathogenic. radioactive (α-[33P] - dCTP (NEN) PCR. Densitometric analysis of the Our findings confirm that mutation analysis of ABCB4 should be alleles was performed using the Multi-Analyst software version 1.1 (Bio- considered in the broadening spectrum of liver diseases including Rad Laboratories). Skewed XCI was observed in 13 of 38 informative contraceptive pill-induced cholestasis and early onset familialMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 285 gallstones. were analysed by RT-PCR with vector specific primers. The results Supported by grant IGA MZ CR NM/7510-3. clearly showed that the pseudoexon is recognized and inserted into mRNA only in the presence of the intronic mutation. P0943. Heterozygosity of eight STR markers studied by QF-PCR In conclusion, the in silico and functional analyses confirmed that in spanish population the mutation in intron 6 causes aberrant splicing of MTRR transcript. A. Bustamante Aragones, M. Lazaro, M. Garcia-Hoyos, D. Diego-Alvarez, R. Our study demonstrates that knowledge of general mechanisms of Cardero, M. Trujillo, C. Ayuso, C. Ramos; ESE action may contribute to the understanding of human genetic Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain. diseases. QF-PCR is a recent method for rapid detection of chromosome dosage This study was supported by grant No. 30/2004 from the Grant Agency based on the analysis of highly polymorphic STR markers. These of Charles University, Czech Republic. markers must have a large number of alleles with a low frequency to give enough information to discriminate the presence of aneuploidies. P0945. Novel germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis The application of this technique in the prenatal diagnosis field had coli gene in Polish FAP patients permitted the diagnosis of the most common aneuploidies in less than A. Plawski, D. Lipinski, R. Slomski; 24 hours, reducing parental anxiety. However it is important to asses Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland. the heterozygosity of these markers for a reliable diagnosis. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant In this study we have used eight markers for chromosomes 13, 18, 21 predisposition to initiate numerous polyps in the colon and rectum X and Y that have been previously described as highly polymorphic which develop to the carcinoma if left untreated. FAP is caused by (see Table). inherited or germ line mutations in the APC gene. Early recognition We have analysed a total of 172 samples. PIC (Polymorphism of the mutation carriers is very important for the medical treatment of Information Content) has been calculated to ascertain if the markers persons from the high-risk group. It is estimated that few hundreds were as informative in our population as previously described for other of Polish FAP families will be subjected to genetic testing. The DNA populations. bank for Polish FAP patients at the Institute of Human Genetics at The results obtained show that these markers are very polymorphic Poznan was established in 1997. FAP diagnoses were established (PIC > 0,7) although we found slight differences in the heterozygosity in the cooperating health centers. 554 DNA samples from persons values previously described. belonging to 220 FAP families were collected. 248 patients were CONCLUSION: The markers previously described are polymorphic diagnosed with FAP, 16 with attenuated FAP and 10 with the Gardner enough in our population, so they can be used for the study of the syndrome. 215 persons belong to risk group and 67 persons do not most common aneuploidies. belong to risk group. The entire APC gene coding sequence was screened for mutations in 195 families. Forty-five types of mutations were identified in 74 Polish FAP families. Twenty-nine of them have not Number Marker Chromosome Number of Allele of PIC been described before. Seven mutations types recurred two ore more location Homozygotes Range Alleles times. The recurrent mutations were detected in 52% of diagnosed families. From diagnostic point of view it was possible to diagnose 188- D13S631 13q32.2 33/150 212 7 0.76 almost all FAP cases on molecular level. 462- 13q14.13 30/114 9 0.8 P0946. Identification of a deletion in chromosome 1, including D13S634 496 the ABCA4 gene region, resulting in a Stargardt disease 127- 18q12.3 42/172 7 0.76 phenotype. D18S535 151 R. Riveiro-Alvarez1, D. Valverde2, I. Lorda1, D. Cantalapiedra1, M. Garcia- 318- 18q22.1-22.2 9/111 21 0.91 Hoyos1, A. Queipo1, M. Rodriguez de Alba1, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1, C. Ramos1, D18S386 402 C. Ayuso1; 21q21.1 38/156 326- 11 0.82 1FUNDACION JIMENEZ DIAZ, Madrid, Spain, 2Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, D21S1414 366 Spain. 21q22.3 25/150 267- 13 0.88 INTRODUCTION: Stargardt disease (STGD) is the most common D21S1411 315 juvenile macular dystrophy, characterised by central visual impairment. 196- All recessively inherited cases are thought to be due to mutations in Xq28/Yqter 17/131 12 0.82 X22 244 the ABCA4 gene, mapped to 1p21-p13. 273- PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 85 STGD families were studied. Xq26.1 18/154 7 0.72 XHPRT 297 DNA from the patient and relatives was analysed for variants in all 50 exons of the ABCA4 gene by screening on the ABCR400 microarray; P0944. Activated exonic splicing enhancer as a cause of the results were confirmed by direct sequencing. Haplotype analyses homocystinuria and a HR karyotype were also performed. K. Betincova, P. Zavadakova, V. Kozich; RESULTS: In one family segregating STGD, we found a patient Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Prague, Czech Republic. with hemizygosity for a paternal missense mutation. By haplotype Exonic splicing enhancers (ESE) are elements that interact with SR analyses, a maternal non-contribution with apparent segregation of a proteins and promote utilization of splice sites. Alteration of their motifs null allele was identified. Microsatellite markers spanning over 12 Mb by mutations results in aberrant splicing. The aberrant splicing is also could identify a microdeletion, of at least 7.5 Mb, involving the ABCA4 one of the causes of homocystinuria due to the methionine synthase gene region. The cytogenetic study using high resolution techniques reductase (MTRR) deficiency. In this case an intronic substitution T>C (800-900 bands) did not reveal this rearrangement. (IVS6+469T>C) of the MTRR gene putatively leads to activation of CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that genomic alterations ESE and induces an insertion of 140 bp pseudoexon between exon contribute to only a small fraction of disease-associated alleles of 6 and 7. The aim of our study was to test the pathogenicity of this ABCA4. For those cases where a homozygous mutation is found, is mutation. recommendable to perform haplotype analyses in order to discard a The in silico analysis of the pseudoexon strongly suggests the possible situation of hemizygosity due to deletions. proposal mechanism of action of the intronic mutation. The T>C substitution forms a new ESE motif for binding of the SR protein SF2/ ASF. This ESE may provide recognition of the cryptic sites delimiting the pseudoexon. Aberrant splicing was functionally studied in vivo using exon trapping technique. COS-7 cells were transfected with pSPL3 constructs carrying either the wild type or mutant pseudoexon. Splicing productsMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 286 P0947. Familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy (FJHN), P0949. Use of multiplex SNaPshot reaction for the detection molecular analysis of 23 families, identification and functional of five prevalent mutations in GJB2 gene in Czech prelingual consequences of 6 uromodulin mutations deafness patients. M. Kublová1, P. Vyleťal1, K. Hodaňová1, M. Kalbáčová1, J. Sikora1, H. Hůlková1, I. Sakmaryova, P. Seeman; J. Živný2, J. Majewski3, A. Marinaki4, A. Simmonds4, J. Fryns5, G. Venkat-Ra- Charles University, 2nd School of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. man6, S. Kmoch1; Summary: Bialellic pathogenic mutations in GJB2 gene are detectable 1Center for Applied Genomics, Praha, Czech Republic, 2Department of Patho- in 39,2% Czech patients with prelingual deafness. The 3 most physiology, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Praha, Czech Repub- common mutations (35delG, W24X, 313del14) represent 96,2% lic, 3Laboratory of Statistical Genetics, Rockefeller Univerzity, New York, NY, of all pathogenic mutations detected in the coding region of GJB2. United States, 4Purine Research Unit, GKT, Guy´s Hospital, London, United Testing for mutation in intron1 of GJB2 rises the detection rate of GJB2 Kingdom, 5Center for Human genetics, Univerzity of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, mutations. So far GJB2 mutations are tested by direct sequencing 6Renal Unit, Saint Marry´s Hospital, Portsmouth, United Kingdom. of the entire coding region at the exon2 and noncoding exon1. In FJHN is an autosomal dominant renal disease characterized by 51,9% patients no mutation is found by sequencing. We evaluated a juvenile onset of hyperuricemia, gouty arthritis, and progressive renal new method for simultaneous detection of the 5 most common GJB2 failure at an early age. In our study of 23 families we found linkage mutations (35delG, W24X, 313del14, delE120, IVS 1+1 G in A), which of FJHN to chromosome 16 (CH16) in 8 families. Mutations in the could make the DNA testing of GJB2 in hearing impairment patients uromodulin (UMOD) gene (16p11.2) were recently proved to be a faster and more simple. SnaPshot reaction represents a single-base cause of FJHN. Analyzing UMOD coding sequence including exon/ extension reaction using only dye-terminator nucleotides. Products are intron boundaries in all families, we found FJHN causing mutations analyzed on capillary electrophoresis analyzer ABI310. (Cys32Tyr, Cys126Arg, Met229Arg, Pro236Leu, Val 273Phe and Method: We tested 50 DNA samples from Czech patients with prelingual Cys317Tyr) only in 6 families. deafness which were previously tested by direct sequencing. 2 PCR To characterize pathogenic effect, we cloned identified mutations fragments including both the coding exon2 and the noncoding exon1 into eucaryotic expression vector and expressed them in AtT20 of the GJB2 gene were tested in 2 SNaPshot reactions. The products cells (not expressing UMOD). We investigated UMOD localisation of both reactions were analyzed simultaneously. (immunocytochemistry), post-translational modification (Western blot) Results: Genotypes of all patients tested with SNaPshot were in and dynamics of plasma membrane exposition (flow cytometry). correlation with the results of previous direct sequencing analysis. Colocalization immunocytochemical studies proved storage of mutant Conclusion: Correct genotype of the GJB2 gene was detected in all proteins in endoplasmic reticulum. Western blot analyses revealed 50 cases by multiplex SnaPshot. This method is suitable for further that mutant proteins varied in the extent of glycosylation and also in the diagnostic procedure. relative distribution of the glycoforms. Flow cytometry showed lower Supported by Czech ministry of health grant No: IGA NM 7417-3. level of exposed UMOD on plasma membrane in mutant proteins then in the wild type. P0950. Clinical Performance Validation Of A Diagnostic Kit For The results suggest two different mechanisms of uromodulin dynamics Common European Cystic Fibrosis Mutations impairment in FJHN - retention in ER and impairment of protein E. Schreiber1, S. Koepf1, R. Rico1, L. Christenson1, M. Jama2, E. Lyon2, L. W. exposition on plasma membrane. Thompson3, K. Friedman3, A. Stafford4, A. Kellogg4; 1Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA, United States, 2ARUP Institute for Clinical P0948. Experience of molecular diagnostics for genetic and Experimental Research, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 3Labcorp, Re- disorders in Latvia search Triangle Park, NC, United States, 4Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, N. Pronina, R. Lugovska, Z. Muceniece, O. Olhovaya, Z. Krumina, B. Lace, I. MD, United States. Balode; Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis Latvian State Medical Genetics centre; State Children`s Hospital "Gailezers", transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. We have recently Riga, Latvia. launched a new diagnostic device (kit) for genotyping mutations in the The clinical application of genetic investigation started in Latvia in CF gene that meets the CE mark requirements of the European In the Riga Medicine Institute, Mother and Children Protection Scientific Vitro Diagnostics Directive (IVDD). The kit is based on multiplex PCR Research Department in 1972. The Latvian State Medical Genetics amplification and subsequent probing of the various alleles by the Centre was organized as the only state medical genetics service in the oligonucleotide ligation assay (OLA). The assay detects the mutant Latvia in 1986. and normal alleles for 33 common multi-ethnic mutations in a core DNA diagnostics started in 1997 with the most common autosomal panel. In addition, reflex reagents are provided for the genotyping of recessive metabolic disorder as phenylketonuria. polymorphisms 5T, 7T, and 9T in intron 8 as well as for I506V, I507V Today DNA testing is available for 9 different genetic disorders: and F508C in exon 10. Samples are automatically electrophoresed phenylketonuria, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), X-linked Duchenne on the Applied Biosystems ABI PRISM® 3100 Genetic Analyzer. The muscular dystrophy (DMD), medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase resulting data are analyzed in an automated fashion using Applied deficiency, long chain hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, Biosystems GeneMapper™ software and a template that has been nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss, Charcot-Marie-Tooth configured for the CF assay. We demonstrated the clinical performance disease (CMT), Fragile X, and Y chromosome AZF deletions. of the kit reagents and the CF-specific analysis system in a formal The following methods are used for DNA testing: PCR, multiplex PCR, clinical trial using 3 external test sites and one internal site. Three restriction enzyme digestion, denaturing gel gradient electrophoresis, lots of reagents were tested with a double-blinded panel of samples fluorescent PCR and PCR fragment analysis on ABI Prism 310, direct that contained all mutations to be detected by the assay. All samples DNA sequencing. were genotyped correctly by all four test sites demonstrating 100 % Characterization of the molecular basis of PKU in Latvia has been specificity and 100 % sensitivity. accomplished through the analysis of 110 unrelated chromosomes from 56 Latvian PKU patients. The most frequent mutation, R408W, P0951. Prenatal diagnosis in a spanish family affected with accounts for 78 % of Latvian PKU alleles, and six mutations (R408W, CMT1-A disease E280K, R158Q, A104D, R261Q and P281L) represent about 93 % of M. Trujillo-Tiebas, J. Gallego-Merlo, A. Giménez-Pardo, D. Cantalapiedra, M. PKU chromosomes. Rodriguez de Alba, I. Lorda, C. Ramos, C. Ayuso; Fifty patients suspected of having spinal muscular atrophy were Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain. analysed. Fourteen patients (28%) are homozygous for the SMN1 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is the most frequent inherited peripheral deletion. Three patients have a confirmed diagnosis of DMD. Eight neuropathy. A microduplication of 1.5 Mb containing the gene for patients from 13 referred for molecular diagnostic have a confirmed peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22) on chromosome 17p11.2 is diagnosis of CMT. responsible for the 75% of cases of demyelinating form (CMT1A). This year we are going to start DNA testing for Huntington disease and Diagnosis in our laboratory is performed with STR markers located BCR-ABL gene transcript detection. inside the microduplication, according to the European Guidelines ofMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 287 EMQN. The results are compatible with the diagnosis of CMT type 1 and correlated to HPE. disease if we detect three alleles or if we detect dosage effect in at We used a bioinformatic analysis and annotation, a high-resolution least two markers. expression analyses by mRNA in situ hybridization, together with a Prenatal diagnosis requires some special considerations: The mutation gene array expression experiments in both Neural Stem Cells and of the affected parent should be known, and it is also recommended Neuro2A cells, to identify several "unknown function" genes expressed to know the phase of the markers for both parents to facilitate the during the neural differentiation processes. Of the cDNA collection analysis. we studied 832 cDNA, of which 323 (39%) correspond to novel rare We present the first prenatal diagnosis of CMT1A disease performed transcripts, and includes 48 (14%) new putative MicroRNAs. Because in our laboratory. this selected enriched cDNA source contains genes expressed Two sets of PCRs with 8 STR markers were performed to construct the in telencephalon (between E.7.5 to E.14.5), we think this source is haplotypes of a family with an affected pregnant patient, her affected enriched for genes involved in telencephalon development, which may sister and her husband. be responsible for HPE in humans. On the basis of their homology Four markers were informative (D17S839; D17S955; D17S1357; and map positions near human holoprosencephaly candidate regions, D17S921). We predicted the four possible embryonic haplotypes (two twenty-three human TESS homologues (two hypothetical pre- affected and two healthy). Peak patterns of the STR markers and the miRNA and twenty-one novel transcripts) were selected for further dosage effect was also estimated previous to the prenatal analysis, characterization. We will present results on their expression at early which ultimately showed that the fetus inherited the haplotype with the stages of mouse development (E. 7.5) by Real Time PCR. Then we associated microduplication. will attempt to select the best candidates for mutational analyses in Conclusions: the DNA of patients affected with HPE. Additionally, two pre-miRNAs 1st The prenatal diagnosis of this pathology requires a molecular study will be presented to identify and validate their targets as potentially of the couple previous to the prenatal study. involved in HPE. 2nd Experience in STR genotyping methods for the detection of dosage effect is highly recommended. P0954. Nine novel mutations in EYA1 and one novel mutation in SIX1 in a BOR patient cohort P0952. Detection of two independent deletions of the SMN1 gene A. F. Baas1, K. van der Donk1, J. Schoots1, C. W. Cremers2, N. V. Knoers1, H. in the same SMA family branch: a word of caution for carrier Scheffer1, L. H. Hoefsloot1; diagnosis. 1Dept Human Genetics, St Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The E. F. Tizzano, M. Barcelo, L. Caselles, M. Cornet, M. Baena, M. Baiget; Netherlands, 2Dept Otorhinolaryngology, St Radboud University Medical Cen- Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. tre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common autosomal recessive Branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene. Relatives of affected disorder, affecting both the internal and external ears, the branchial patients usually request genetic counselling resulting in a high demand structures and the kidneys. It is estimated that in 50% of BOR patients, for carrier testing. A number of reliable quantitative methods for carrier the genetic defect lies within the Eya1 gene. Recently, Six1 mutations detection have been implemented with a risk of approximately 5% for were shown to account for a subset of Eya1 positive BOR patients. false negative results owing to the presence of two copies of SMN1 Eya1 and Six1 physically interact and form an active transcritional in the same chromosome. DNA markers linked to the SMN locus can complex witin the Eya-Six-Pax-Dachshund genetic network. be used to exclude carrier status and to complement the quantitative Over the last 5 years, we collected 55 BOR patients. In those patients, results. we identified three described and nine novel Eya1 mutations. Ten We present a family with a SMA patient with homozygous deletion mutations were identified in patients with a positive in the SMN1 gene in which 33 members of the paternal branch were Family history, 2 additional mutations in sporadic cases. In addition, analysed. Following Real-Time quantitative analysis, several first and we tested six clearly diagnosed BOR patients for Six1 mutations, and second degree branch relatives showed one copy of the SMN1 gene identified one novel missense mutation within the Six-domain. and were diagnosed as carriers. Marker analysis in some members with In a substantial part of our BOR patient cohort, no causative mutation one copy demonstrated discordance, being carriers of a deletion on a was found. Completion of Six1 analysis may lead to the identification different chromosomal background. We concluded that two deletions of additional causative alterations. Furthermore, gross deletions of of different origins exist in this branch of the family. Marker analysis the Eya1 and Six1 genes may be present in patients with no reported allowed us also to identify carriers with two SMN1 copies in the same mutation. Another possibility is that several of our patients were chromosome and one of the deletions in the remaining chromosome. misdiagnosed. However, it appears equally likely that mutations in In the light of the finding of two independent deletions in the same novel BOR genes are responsible for the onset of disease. branch of the family carrier testing in SMA should be performed employing both, quantitative and marker analysis in order to avoid P0955. Suspected triallelism in Leber Congenital Amaurosis pitfalls in carrier identification and to allow a more accurate genetic detected using a genotyping microarray counselling. E. Vallespin, D. Cantalapiedra, C. Villaverde, M. Garcia-Hoyos, R. Riveiro-Al- Supported by FIS 02-1275 and Red Inergen C03/05. varez, M. Trujillo-Tiebas, C. Ramos, C. Ayuso; Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain. P0953. Tess (Telencephalic Embryonic Subtractive Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is the earliest and most severe Sequences): a sub-collection of genes potentially involved with form of all genetic retinal dystrophy causing blindness. Non syndromic Holoprosencephaly LCA has been associated with mutations in eight genes: AIPL1, CRB1, P. Carotenuto1, A. Bulfone2, A. Veruska1, A. Bello1, L. Garzia1, A. Faedo2, N. CRX, GUCY2D, MERTK, LRAT, RPE65 and RPGRIP1. These genes Marino1, C. Roma1, V. Maffia1, J. Rubenstein3, A. Iolascon1, E. Roessler4, M. are involved in different physiologic pathways of the retina. Muenke4, M. Zollo1; We report a mutational analysis of all eight genes in 111 unrelated 1CEINGE, Naples, Italy, 2SCRI - HSR, Istituto Scientifico San Raffaele, Milan, families. Mutational analysis was performed in 24 families diagnosed Italy, 3Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, University of with LCA, 53 with early onset Retinitis Pigmentosa and 34 not-early- California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 4Medical Genet- onset Retinitis Pigmentosa. Samples were studied with a microarray ics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United (Asperbio) followed by a family study and direct sequencing in the States. laboratory. One of the neurodevelopmental defects for which several genes are The respective frequencies of mutant alleles are: 23% (11/48) for LCA still unknown is Holoprosencephaly (HPE), a birth defect involving the with 7 mutated families (one carried an homozygous mutation, two are failure of the prosencephalon to cleave into the cerebral and lateral compound heterozygotes, three are single heterozygotes, and one is hemispheres. The aim of this project is the functional characterization digenic, possible triallelism), 15% (16/106) for early-onset ARRP with of new genes involved in the developing mouse telencephalon as 13 mutated families (one carried an homozygous mutation, ten are being potentially involved in human neurodevelopmental disorders single heterozygotes and two are digenic, possible triallelism) and 6%Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 288 (4/68) with 4 mutated families with ARRP not-early-onset (all four are be predicted in patients with severe CFTR mutations partially due to single heterozygotes). CRB1 is the most mutated gene in Spanish the influence of genetic modifiers. affected families. The aim of this study was to investigate whether deficient alleles of The combination of microarray and laboratory analysis is an optimal A1AT modulates the respiratory disease in cystic fibrosis patients. option for finding new disease alleles and it allows detecting cases of Sixty one cystic fibrosis patients were initially included in the study. possible triallelism. CFTR mutations and the S and Z alleles of the A1AT gene were There is a gradient in mutation frequencies with respect to onset genotyped. In order to minimise the role of the CFTR genotype, patients and severity of retinal disease, so correct classification of families is with mild mutations were excluded of the study. Data corresponding fundamental. to the basal forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1), Crispin-Norman The relative percentage of mutations found with the microarray score and forced vital capacity (FVC) under 15 years of life were suggests that more LCA-associated genes remain to be discovered. retrospectively recorded Twenty patients carried at least one copy of the deficient variant type P0956. Rapid identification of female haemophilia A carriers with S. No patients bearing the Z allele were found.. FEV1 values were deletions in the F8 gene by quantitative Real-Time PCR analysis. higher in patients bearing the S allele. FVC values and Crispin-Norman M. J. Barcelo, E. F. Tizzano, M. Baena, M. Cornet, A. Vencesla, J. Mateo, J. scoring showed a trend to better results within this group. Fontcuberta, M. Baiget; S allele is associated with better pulmonary function in cystic fibrosis Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. patients with pancreatic insufficiency under 15y of age and FEV1 is Patients with haemophilia A have a bleeding disorder caused by a the functional indicator showing the best correlation with the presence deficient function of the coagulation factor VIII. The identification of of the S allele. carriers of the disease is an essential part of genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis. The present approach to carrier diagnosis of HA P0959. Rapid screening of Beta-thalassaemia mutations by depends on the type of mutation involved in the family. Large deletions heteroduplex analysis with capillary array electrophoresis (HA- of the F8 gene account for approximately 5% of severe HA patients. CAE) in the population of Castilla-Leon region (Spain) Although deletions are readily detectable in males, the identification M. J. Alonso Ramos1,2, E. Pestaña1, M. Duran3, E. Esteban3, M. Infante3, E. of heterozygosity in possible carriers of these families still constitutes Velasco3, I. Fernandez1, B. Lopez1, j. telleria1, A. Blanco1; a challenge. In order to identify a deleted allele over the background 1Dept.Pediatria(IBGM), Valladolid, Spain, 2IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 3(IBGM), of the normal allele in these carriers, we developed a rapid real-time Valladolid, Spain. quantitative PCR approach by means of LightCycler technology and We present a new method to detect mutations in the Beta-globin gene SYBR green I for monitoring product formation. The method was based in heteroduplex analysis by capillary array electrophoresis. applied to families with independent deletions (one in exon 14 and In the last years more than 150 molecular defects in the human b-globin the other in exons 23-24) of the F8 gene, thereby allowing a reliable gene have been characterized. The gene maps to human chromosome determination of carrier or non-carrier status. The method is extremely 11 and consists of three exons separated by two introns. Mutations in versatile and can be adapted to other deletions within the F8 gene the b-globin gene sequence can reduce the b-globin protein synthesis as well as to other diseases whose molecular pathology consists of (β+thalassaemia) or even to abolish it completely (β0 thalassaemia). deletions or duplications. These alterations in the β-globin chains synthesis are an important Supported by Fundació Catalana d´Hemofilia and Red Inergen health problem, specially among the Mediterranean population. C03/05. We have analysed 47 DNA samples of patients with thalassemic trait (heterozigotes) : microcitosis and anomalous HbA , and we have 2 P0957. Alpha-Thalassemia molecular determinants characterized 34 mutations (72,34%) analyzing only two exons of A. Moradmand, M. Karimipour, M. T. Akbari; the B-globin gene, showing that the most frequent mutation in this Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. population is CD 39 C-T substitution. These results are in agreement The a-thalassemias are probably the commonest monogenic condition with those obtained by the DGGE method (Denaturant Gradient Gel worldwide. However, because of the restricted distribution of their more Electrophoresis), but the mutation detection rate of this last method severe forms, they pose a less serious global health problems than the was only of the 70%. Furthermore, the posibility of use a multiplex β-thalassemias. Nevertheless, the milder alleles which reach extremely PCR for the two exons and the reproducibility of electropherograms for high frequencies in some populations are cause for concern. Because each mutation pattern is an advantage for the mutation screening in many of them result in varying degrees of hypochromic anemia they the beta -globin gene in our population. are frequently mistaken for iron deficiency. Furthermore, they may have quite profound effect on the phenotypes of different varieties of P0960. Analysis of HFE1 gene mutations in a group of steel makers and in a cohort of CF patients from Ukraine β-thalassemia. Most of the deletional types (-a or -- genes) could be determined by GAP-PCR in a mutiplex format. The point mutation alleles L. A. Livshits, V. Pampuha, M. Nechyporenko; are analyzed by ARMS-PCR. In this manuscript we describe the result Institute of Molecular Biology & Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine. of molecular screening for a-thalassemia mutations in 350 suspected Hereditary haemohromatosis is the prototype disorder of iron overload carrier individuals. Most of those individuals are from south of Iran. The due to misregulated iron homeostasis in humans. That may result in mutation for one third of the cases could not be characterized by the severe systemic disease, such as cirrhosis, liver disease, pancreatic routine PCR appraoach. Amongst those diagnosed, the most frequent insufficiency, cardiomyopathy, diabetes mellitus, etc. allele was the mild -a3.7 in both heterozygous and homozygous forms In our study we compared the prevalence of the genotype C282Y/+ in a with 65% and 17.5% respectively. This allele is also common in other group of 49 patients with pancreatic insufficiency and diabetes mellitus populations in the region. The other common mild allele, i.e. the -a4.2, and a control group (n=97). The prevalence in the patients (30.9%) was had a much less frequency of around 2%. The point mutation allele significantly increased (p=0.032). Interestingly, all the patients worked a5NT del allele was observed at 7% frequency. From the severe alleles of in conditions of exogenous iron overload (steel makers, welders). -a20.5 and -MED, each were observed at 4% frequency. Further work is In order to investigate the possible role of HFE1 gene mutations in underway to fully characterize the complete spectrum of a-thalassemia modulation of the severity of gastrointestinal insufficiency in patients mutations. with cystic fibrosis the C282Y and H63D mutations were analyzed in a cohort of 35 CF patients with severe gastrointestinal insufficiency P0958. The S allele of alpha-1-antitrypsin associates milder lung and/or liver disease. The frequency of the C282Y mutation was the disease in cystic fibrosis patients under 15 years old same in the control and CF groups. The frequency of H63D in the J. J. Telleria1, I. Fernandez1, M. J. Alonso1, C. Vazquez2, F. Baranda3, I. Diez3, control and CF groups was 17% and 30% respectively. This difference E. Arranz1, J. A. Garrote4, A. Blanco1; is statistically significant (p=0.01), and the prevalence of the genotype 1Universidad - IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital Cruces, Bilbao, Spain, 3IBGM, H63D/H63D was significantly elevated in the CF group (p=0.05). Our Valladolid, Spain, 4Hospital-Universidad, Valladolid, Spain. data may show evidence of a possible role of HFE1 gene mutations in The severity of the pulmonary disease in cystic fibrosis patients cannot the pathogenesis of CF.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 289 P0961. Epigenetic regulations of the FMR1 gene: the role of the common mutations C282Y and H63D, and is associated with a milder histone code. form of the disease. The population frequency of the mutation S65C R. Pietrobono1, E. Tabolacci1, F. Zalfa2,3, I. Zito1, A. Terracciano1, U. Moscato4, varies between populations. The frequency of HH mutations C282Y C. Bagni2,3, B. A. Oostra5, P. Chiurazzi1, G. Neri1; and H63D in healthy Latvian population has been reported earlier 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Roma, Italy, 2Di- and is 3.5% and 12.1% respectively. Objectives. To establish the partimento di Biologia, Università di Roma ‘Tor Vergata’, Roma, Italy, 3Istituto di mutation S65C frequency in population of Latvia, and to analyze Farmacologia, Fondazione Santa Lucia IRCCS, Roma, Italy, 4Istituto di Igiene, DNA of patients with iron overload for mutations C282Y, H63D and Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Roma, Italy, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, S65C. Materials and methods. The DNA analysis was performed in Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. a group of 155 healthy residents of Latvia and in 48 patients with iron The fragile X syndrome is caused by a >200 CGG repeat expansion overload. The DNA was extracted from whole blood, PCR, restriction within the FMR1 gene promoter, with consequent DNA hypermethylation enzyme digestion and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was used and inactivation of its expression. To clarify the mechanisms that for mutation analysis. Results. Of 310 chromosomes of general suppress the activity of the mutant gene, we investigated the acetylation population examined, 3 carried the mutation S65C. The resulting and methylation status of histones in three regions of the FMR1 gene mutation frequency is 0.0097, with a heterozygous carrier frequency (promoter, exon 1 and exon 16) in fragile X cell lines, using chromatin of 1.9% or ≈ 1:50. Of 48 patients with iron overload, 5 were confirmed immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with real-time PCR. Basal levels to have hereditary hemochromatosis, the detected genotypes were: of histone acetylation and H3-K4 methylation were much higher in C282Y/C282Y - 2 patients, C282Y/H63D - 2 patients, H63D/S65C - 1 transcriptionally active controls than in fragile X cells. Treatment of patient. 2 of the rest were heterozygous for mutation C282Y, 11 - for fragile X cells with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine induced a decrease of H3-K9 mutation H63D, and 1 - for mutation S65C. The resulting frequency of methylation, an increase of H3 and H4 acetylation and an increase of mutation S65C among patients with iron overload is 0.021. H3-K4 methylation. On the other hand, treatment with acetyl-L-carnitine, which does not reactivate the FMR1 gene, resulted in increased P0964. Expression studies of Sall4 and its interaction with Sall1 histone acetylation, in spite of persisting DNA methylation and low L. Malinouskaya1, J. Kohlhase2, A. U. Mannan1, W. Engel1; H3-K4 methylation. Finally, the analysis of a cell line (5106), derived 1Institute for Human Genetics, Goettingen, Germany, 2Institute for Human Ge- from a rare individual of normal intelligence with an unmethylated full netics and Anthropology, Freiburg, Germany. mutation, revealed that this cell line expresses normal mRNA levels Sall4 belongs to the spalt (sal) family of proteins, which are and reduced levels of FMRP protein (-30%). The epigenotype of line characterized by their unique multiple double zinc fingers motifs. 5106 is surprising, with H3-K4 methylation comparable to controls, but Sall proteins act as transcriptional repressor factors and have been deacetylated histones and methylated H3-K9, like fragile X cells, in implicated in development and disease. Four members of Sall family both the promoter and exon 1. Our experiments indicate that H3-K4 have been identified in mouse and human. Mutations in SALL4 are methylation and DNA demethylation are the main epigenetic switches associated with Okihiro syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder activating the expression of the FMR1 gene, with histone acetylation characterised by forelimb defects and Duane anomaly. SALL1 and H3-K9 methylation playing an ancillary role. mutations cause Townes-Brocks syndrome which has an overlapping phenotype with Okihiro syndrome. Our investigation is focused on the P0962. Molecular and methylation analysis of the FMR1 gene characterization of Sall4 expression in mouse and its interaction with promotor and repeat region in twelve fragile X Spanish families Sall1. In the previous studies strong expression of Sall4 was found in B. López, I. Fernández, M. J. Alonso, E. Velasco, J. Tellería, A. Blanco; the developing neural tube and limbs. In present study we report new Universidad de Valladolid-IBGM, Valladolid, Spain. alternative splicing variants of Sall4, transcripts which we named Sall4 Fragile X syndrome (FRAXA) is the most common cause known of major and Sall4 minor. Sall4 minor variant contains a unique exon inherited mental retardation. Although no treatment is yet available the instead of exon 1 of Sall4 major, which we named exon 1a. Exon 1a diagnosis of this syndrome in a child is essential in order to provide the encodes for a translation initiation site which differ from Sall4 major family with genetic counselling. Because of this, molecular screening only in amino acids (1-40). Expression during embryonic development programs in mentally retarded individuals have been performed in for both transcripts was detectable as early as E7.5 and gradually several regions of Spain. Its variable phenotypic expression makes decreases until E17.5. Real-time RT-PCR analysis revealed lower the clinical suspicion and genetic diagnostics difficult, especially for expression level of Sall4 minor variant in compare with Sall4 major. To premutation and intermediate alleles. New techniques in DNA analysis study the interaction of Sall4 with Sall1 we use biochemical approach. like methylation-sensitive PCR (MSP), novel approaches in DNA and Epitope tagged Sall4, Sall1 and truncated Sall1 (dominant negative bisulphite sequencing allow both affected individuals and carriers to be fragment) were transfected into NIH 3T3 cells and interaction were tested in a more precise way from a simple blood sample, and assist studied by co-immunoprecipitation and co-localization experiments. esearch about the molecular mechanisms involved. We have recently The results will be presented in the poster. applied these techniques in 12 families with fragile X syndrome in order to improved fragile X diagnostics and do a retrospective study P0965. Molecular analysis of Czech and Slovak patients with of the transmission of intermediate, premutation and full mutation Methylmalonic aciduria alelles, to reach a better understanding of trinucleotide CGG repeat L. Mrazova, E. Pospisilova, O. Martincova, J. Zeman; expansion. By means of repeat region sequencing we haved analyzed Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Fac- the absence of intervening AGG interruptions associated with instability ulty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. of intermediate and premutation alleles. Methylation-sensitive PCR Methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) is an autosomal recesive disorder and bisulphite sequencing allow us to study the methylation status caused by a functional defect in the nuclear encoded mitochondrial of the FMR1 gene promotor and CpG island repeat in these patients enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MCM, EC 5.4.99.2, gene MUT) to attempt to understand the epigenetic mechanisms implicated in which catalyzes the isomeration of L-methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl- FMR1 gene regulation in order to acquire a better understanding of CoA. MMA can also result from the defects in the synthesis of MCM the molecular basis of FRAXA. cofactor adenosylcobalamin: cblA is caused by the defect in the mitochondrial Cbl transport (gene MMAA) and cblB is caused by the P0963. Hereditary hemochromatosis mutation S65C prevalence defect in the cob(I)alamin adenosyltransferase (EC 2.5.1.17, gene in general population of Latvia and patients with iron overload MMAB). I. Micule1, J. Keish1, V. Sondore2, N. Pronina1, B. Rozentale2, A. Krumina1; We have examined eight patients with MMA. Enzyme assay revealed 1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2Infectology center of Latvia, Riga, Lat- five patients with mut MMA and three with defect of cblA/B. Subsequently via. we detected 16 mutated alleles. On the basis of molecular studies we Background. The hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is an inborn were able to distinguish between the cblA (one patient) and cblB (two disorder characterized by iron overload of parenchymal organs. The patients). disease is caused by mutations of gene HFE. The mutation S65C Four novel mutations were found in the MUT gene - two novel missense is found on 7.8% of patients' chromosomes that lack the two most mutations (c.1881T>A and c.1105C>T), one nonsense (c.2179C>T)Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 290 and one splicing mutation. The splicing mutation is caused by unknown P0968. A new splicing isoform of LOX-1 is protective against intronic mutation. It leads to two mRNAs of different length caused by acute myocardial infarction deletion of exon 4 in the first transcript and deletion of exon 4 and R. Mango1, F. Clementi2, F. Del Vecchio1, F. Amati1, S. Grelli3, A. Filareto1, P. part of the exon 3 in the second transcript. One novel indel mutation Spitalieri1, I. Filesi4, C. Favalli3, S. Biocca4, F. Sangiuolo1, J. L. Mehta5, F. Ro- (c.558_559delGGinsC) was found in the MMAB gene and one novel meo2,5, G. Novelli1,5; insertion (c.551insG) was found in the MMAA gene. 1Dept of Biopathology Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of Internal The results of molecular analyses have been already used in the Medicine Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 3Dept of Microbiology Tor Vergata prenatal diagnoses in two affected families. University, Rome, Italy, 4Dept of Neuroscience Tor Vergata University, Rome, This study is supported by IGA MZ CR 7617-3 and partially by VZ Italy, 5University for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States. MSM CR 0021620806. Lectin like oxidized LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) is a scavenger receptor formerly identified as a membrane receptor for oxidized LDL (OxLDL). P0966. Molecular diagnostics of pathogenic fungi in patients LOX-1 activation is associated with endothelial and monocyte/ treated with hormonal replacement therapy. macrophage apoptosis and adhesion of monocytes to activated S. A. Wisniewski, M. Koralewska-Kordel, K. Jurzyk, Z. Przybylski; endothelial cells. Independent association genetic studies have University of Medical Sciences, Department of Forensic Medicine, Poznan, demonstrated the implication of LOX-1 gene variants in myocardial Poland. infarction susceptibility (MI). Since single nucleotide polymorphisms Fungal infections of oral cavity are very common in general population (SNPs) linked to MI are located in intronic sequences of the gene, it (30-40% occurrence) especially in patients with dental wears. Medical remains unclear as to how they determine their biological effects. We treatment, especially immunosuppression, could be additional risk show that intronic SNPs associated with MI regulate the expression of factor of fungal infection. Hormonal replacement therapy could result a new functional splicing isoform of the LOX-1 gene (LOXIN) lacking in nonspecific immunomodulation probably caused by leukocyte exon5. Using quantitative Real-Time PCR and minigene approach, we activation dependent on estrogen receptor polymorphism. Molecular demonstrate that subjects, carrying the disease susceptible haplotype methods of identification of pathogenic fungi are universally applicable at LOX-1 gene, show a decreased expression of LOXIN mRNA and in contrast to limitations of morphological characteristics. Our aim an increase in the expression of LOX-1. The hypothesized protective of study was recognition of pathogenic fungi by molecular analyses effect of LOXIN was investigated by analysis of the macrophage and correlation between the presence of fungi and estrogen receptor apoptosis induced by OxLDL. Flow cytometric analysis showed a 24% polymorphism known as a PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms in control reduction in apoptotic cells number in subjects carrying the “no risk group and group of patients treated with hormonal replacement haplotype”. These data confirm that the increase of LOXIN mRNA therapy. DNA was isolated from vaginal and oral swabs. A panel of protects cells from apoptosis supporting the protective role of LOXIN 100 DNA derived from normal individuals was used to establish overexpression against MI. To investigate the cellular localization of allele frequencies for control population. Universal primes, targeting LOX-1 and LOXIN, we tagged both cDNA sequence with that of the the conserved regions of ITS1 and ITS2 respectively, were used for green fluorescent protein (GFP) showing an impaired intracellular amplification. DNA pattern from known fungal strains was established traffic to the plasma membrane of the LOXIN-GFP fusion protein. for comparison with clinical samples. PCR products were analyzed with Our findings provide evidence for a direct link between the LOX-1 real-time PCR using Lightcycler System. Results show the presence expression and the pathogenesis of MI. of Candida albicans with or without Candida Glabrata in almost all clinical samples. In several cases analyses revealed infection with P0969. 10 years of DNA diagnostic services in Estonia more than two fungal species. The allele frequencies for the PvuII and E. Raukas1,2, T. Kahre1,3, K. Õunap4,5, A. Metspalu1,6; XbaI RFLPs in our control population were found as follows: P allele 1Molecular Diagnostic Center, Tartu University Clinics United Laboratory, Tartu, 0.48; p allele 0.52; X allele 0.37; x allele 0.63. In group of patients Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 3Children's Clinic and Women's frequencies were similar, but frequency of infection with more than one Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 4Molecular Diagnostic Center and fungal species was higher. Medical Genetic Center, Tartu University Clinics United Laboratory, Tartu, Esto- nia, 5Children's Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 6Estonian Biocen- P0967. Analysis of gene expression in Pax3 null mouse embryos tre and Department of Biotechnology, Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia. using Affymetrix microarrays Molecular Diagnostic Center was established in 1996 for DNA testing K. R. Prescott1, D. Henderson2, M. Hubank1, P. Scambler1; and newborn screening for phenylketonuria and hypothyroidism for 1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Human Genet- whole Estonia. Since 2001 it belongs to the United Laboratories of ics, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. Tartu University Clinics. Introducing the DNA diagnostics was started Pax3 is a paired box containing transcription factor expressed in the from cystic fibrosis. Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy and region of the dorsal neural tube that gives rise to migrating neural Fragile X syndrome were next obvious choices. By 2005, the number crest populations. Mutations in Pax3 result in neural crest defects in of tested disorders has increased to 28 (www.dnatest.med.ee). The mouse and man. Heterozygous mutations in human PAX3 give rise to most recent DNA tests are Stargardt disease, Usher syndrome, Waardenburg syndrome which comprises of deafness and pigmentary retinitis pigmentosa, CF, deafness, Leber congenital amaurosis where defects of the hair, skin and iris. Pax3 null mouse embryos exhibit several hundred mutations are analysed using APEX (arrayed primer conotruncal heart defects and abnormalities of the thymus, thyroid and extension) microarrays (collaboration with Asper Biotech). parathyroids. They also suffer from defects of neural tube closure such The Estonian population is 1,35 million with 14 053 newborn in as spina bifida and exencephaly and have abnormal development 2004. More than 3000 patients have been tested up to now. The of their dorsal root ganglia, sympathetic ganglia and somitic tissues. most frequent test is one for cystic fibrosis and/or CBAVD. Two most To understand the genetic aetiology of the defects seen in the Pax3 common mutations in CF gene are F508del and 394delTT accounting null mouse, RNA was extracted from the branchial arch region of 3 for 54% and 14 % of all CF chromosomes. Another big group of e10.5 embryos and hybridised to Affymetrix microarray chips (wild patients are tested for Fragile X syndrome. Altogether 13 patients were type n=3, Pax3 null n=3). The expression profiles of the chips were found. Interestingly, from four spinocerebellar ataxias 11 patients were analysed statistically to arrive at a list of significantly changed genes. diagnosed as SCA2, and only one as SCA1. The largest number of Several genes involved in outflow tract formation, neural tube closure, tests performed last year was factor V Leiden and prothrombin gene neurogenesis and somite development were found to be significantly G20210A mutations as risk factors for thrombophilia, both introduced up or downregulated in Pax3 null mouse embryos. Some of these in 2004. 22 patients out of 95 were factor V Leiden heterozygous, genes changes were verified by RTQPCR. This study contributes to 6 out of 75 were prothrombin G20210A heterozygous. We will give the understanding of defects in mammalian neural crest migration and comprehensive data about the DNA testing in Estonia for all tests and provides candidate genes for potential Pax3 targets. their dynamics over the 10 years.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 291 P0970. Altered patterns of Edar and Xedar expression in Mus P0972. Molecular analysis of CX26, D(GJB6-D13S1830) and musculus and Rattus norvegicus A1555G mitochondrial point mutation in Italian deaf population A. Kujawa1, S. A. Wisniewski2, W. H. Trzeciak1; and occasional findings of CX26 mutations in partners of deaf or 1University of Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular carrier subjects. Biology, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, Department of Fo- P. Primignani1, P. Castorina1, F. Sironi1, U. Ambrosetti2, L. Garavelli3, D. Cuda3, rensic Medicine, Poznan, Poland. F. Lalatta1, M. Travi1, D. A. Coviello1; Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia results from a defect in the 1Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 2IRCSS Ospedale Policlinico di differentiation of skin appendages during embryonic development. Milano, Milan, Italy, 3Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy. Affected individuals may exhibit symptoms of anodontia or oligodontia, More than 100 different mutations of Connexin 26 are described in non- hyperthermia and hypotrichosis (sparse hair). Several animal models syndromic recessive deafness but one is particularly common in our have been described that exhibit symptoms similar to those seen in population, the 35delG that accounts for up to 60% of mutated GJB2 affected patients. Results support the hypothesis that the Edar and alleles. We analysed 448 NSRD patients and identified mutations in Xedar genes encode proteins involved in pathways transducing 288/896 chromosomes; 32,1% (191/896) showed 35delG, while the signals from ectoderm to mesenchyme, which initiate formation of remainder showed many different mutations: -3170GÆA, 31del14, skin appendages. Recently we have developed comparative analysis G12V, 35insG, W24X, M34T, V37I, A40G, E47X, W77R, V84M, of mouse and rat models of Edar and Xedar gene expression during L90P, V95M, H100L, 167delT, 290insA, 310del14, delE120, W133X, embryonic development. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens E147K, C174R, D179N, R184P and R184W. 35delG was present in of Mus musculus (8-16 day embryos) and Rattus norvegicus (10-18 about 66% (191/288) of all Cx26 mutations identified. We investigated day embryos) were obtained from Novagen. The tissues were chosen also the del(GJB6-D13S1830), a 342 kb deletion in 13q12, including to show different development of hairs or scales in the same parts exon 1 of GJB6 coding Connexin 30. We have found two compound of the body like the tail. Total RNA was isolated from epidermal cells heterozygotes both carrying del(GJB6-D13S1830) in association with microdissected from embryonic tails according to standard laboratory the 35delG and the 167delT GJB2 mutations, respectively. Our results procedures. RNA was used as a template for real-time RT-PCR with a show that GJB2 mutations account for less than 50% of recessive non Lightcycler System. Results after normalization with β-actin expression syndromic hearing loss cases and confirm that the 35delG mutation is (detected in all samples) were placed in an Excel spreadsheet. Analysis the most frequent one, but many other mutations are also present such revealed almost the same expression profile of Edar in both mouse as M34T, E47X, L90P and delE120. Moreover 12 affected subjects and rat epidermis. Profiles of Xedar gene expression were different: in were compound heterozygous for recessive GJB2 allele not including the mouse epidermis the level of expression is almost constant during 35delG and 4 were carrying the D179N dominant mutation, indicating all analyzed days of embryogenesis, in the rat the level of expression that the complete sequence of the gene is needed for an appropriate increases significantly during embryogenesis. Our results suggest molecular diagnosis. We found 3 affected subjects carrying the A1555G strong correlations between timing of expression and development of and the subsequently family analysis performed in each case has led skin appendages. to the pre-symptomatic identification of this mutation in 5 relatives. P0971. Mosaic dup(17)p11.2 CMT1A: not as rare as previously P0973. Mutation analysis of LEMD3 in osteopoikilosis, Buschke- thought? Ollendorff syndrome and melorheostosis patients C. Hinard1, I. Bouchardy1, M. Chofflon2, M. Estade3, P. Burkhard2, S. Fokstuen1, J. Hellemans1, P. Debeer2, P. Verdonk3, W. Van Hul4, M. Wright5, A. De Paepe1, D. Genoud4, I. Moix1, M. Sinnreich2, M. A. Morris1; P. Coucke1, G. R. Mortier1; 1Service of Medical Genetics, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Neurology Department, 1Dept Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Center for Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Neurology Practice, Ge- Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Dept of Orthopedic neva, Switzerland, 4Neurology Practice, Martigny, Switzerland. Surgery, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4Dept Medical Genetics, CMT1 is a genetically heterogeneous peripheral neuropathy, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Institute of Human Genetics, New- characterized by muscle weakness and atrophy and sensory loss. castle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom. CMT1A represents about 70% of cases and is commonly caused by a Osteopoikilosis is an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia duplication of a 1.5 Mb region including PMP22, generated by unequal characterized by multiple hyperostotic areas in different parts of the crossing-over. Cases of mosaic duplications have been very rarely skeleton. Osteopoikilosis can occur either as an isolated anomaly or described and it is suggested but currently unproven that they may in association with other abnormalities of skin and bone. Buschke- arise as mitotic reversion events (Liehr et al. 1996). Ollendorff syndrome (BOS) refers to the association of osteopoikilosis We have selected interphase FISH of cultured lymphocytes followed with connective tissue nevi. Osteopoikilosis can also be associated by analysis of >100 nuclei as the diagnostic method of choice, to with melorheostosis. The latter disorder is characterized by a “flowing” allow detection of such mosaics. The duplication was identified in hyperostosis of the cortex of tubular bones. After a genome wide 9/51 individuals (18%), 4 of whom exhibited somatic mosaicism. linkage analysis in three families, we were able to identify LEMD3 as The patients were aged 72, 51, 22 and 19 years of age, with 47%, the causal gene for this group of disorders. In each family, affected 52%, 33% (two independent samples) and 81% of duplicated nuclei individuals had osteopoikilosis with or without manifestations of respectively. Patient 1 was mildly affected and had a more severely melorheostosis or BOS. LEMD3 codes for an integral protein of the affected son whose test revealed no mosaicism (100% duplicated). inner nuclear membrane. We showed that LEMD3 has the capability of Patient 2 had a mother with “polyneuritis” who could not be tested. antagonizing both BMP and TGFβ signaling in human fibroblasts. Patient 3 has a mother with a clinical diagnosis of CMT but who has We present the results of mutation analysis of the LEMD3 gene in not been genetically tested. Patient 4 has a negative family history. a series of 13 patients. In 9 patients manifestations of BOS were Such a high incidence of mosaicism is surprising. It may be due to present, 3 patients had melorheostosis and 1 patient had both signs of chance, to a selection bias (testing of less-affected patients), or to our osteopoikilosis and melorheostosis. In 11 patients, a LEMD3 mutation analytical approach. Liehr et al. found that rapidly-dividing cells had a was identified. All mutations were predicted to result in haploinsufficiency lower frequency of duplications; our use of cell culture and analysis of of the protein. In 3 patients (2 patients with melorheostosis and 1 patient a large number of nuclei may reveal mosaicism that would otherwise with BOS) no mutation was found in the coding sequence of LEMD3. be missed. We are currently sequencing in these patients the non-coding parts of the LEMD3 gene. We are also investigating the possibility of a somatic LEMD3 mutation in osteoblasts from one patient with melorheostosis.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 292 P0974. Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Expression Studies of the majority of cases of hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). Native MCPH1 spastin is detected mainly in the nucleus, and two basic amino acid I. Gavvovidis1, M. Trimborn2, D. Schindler1, H. Neitzel2; stretches from within the protein have recently been shown by us to 1Department of Human Genetics, Biozentrum, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerz- act as nuclear localisation signals (NLSs); over-expressed spastin, burg, Germany, 2Department of Human Genetics; Charité, Humboldt University, however, is restricted to the cytoplasm. Actual protein function in either Berlin, Germany. compartment as well as the mechanism(s) underlying pathogenicity of Primary microcephaly can be due to gene defects at any one mutations remain to be elucidated. To investigate the role of nuclear of six recently reported microcephalin loci, MCPH1 to MCPH6.. spastin, we set out to direct over-expressed protein to the nucleus by Corresponding patients show reduction of their cerebral cortex adding yet another strong NLS; we observed that full length constructs volume and mental retardation. In addition, defects of the MCPH1 still fail to localise to the nucleus. We identified an N-terminal region gene, located on chromosome 8p22, result in premature chromosome conferring this effect and subsequently showed that it contains a condensation in the G2 phase (PCC syndrome). The MCPH1 gene functional, exportin 1-dependent nuclear export signal (NES). Based encodes a polypeptide encompassing 835 aa. The MCPH1 protein on these findings, we applied site-directed mutagenesis of a single contains one N-terminal und two C-terminal BRCT domains linking its critical leucine residue from within the NES to generate constructs function to DNA checkpoint control and/or DNA repair. We cloned two finally directing over-expressed protein to the nucleus. Our study adds ORFs of MCPH1 cDNA, 1-2508 and 286-2508, into the bacterial vector, to understanding the intra-cellular distribution of spastin and prepares pIVEX1.3, for prokaryotic protein expression in the cell-free E.coli the ground for further studies into its physiological role. It may therefore lysate system. Expression of the large ORF gave rise to two translation help to, eventually, fully link SPG4 mutations to HSP pathology. products of 93 and 80.5 kDa. The latter variant corresponded to the translation product of the shorter MCPH1 ORF. This finding suggests P0977. Point mutation in the STS gene in a severe affected that the internal ATG at 286 may be used as a translation initiation site, patient with X-linked ichthyosis although the shorter product was present when the large MCPH1 ORF L. M. Gonzalez, O. M. Messina, J. Toral, R. M. Rivera, S. H. Kofman, S. A. was cloned into the pIVEX vectors for cell-free eukaryotic expression in Cuevas; wheat germ extract and rabbit reticulocyte lysate. We also cloned the Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D,.F., Mexico. large and small variants of MCPH1 as bi-cistronic constructs with the X-linked ichthyosis (XLI), an inherited disorder characterized by scaly neomycin resistance gene into a retroviral vector. Studies are underway skin, is due to steroid sulfatase (STS; EC3.1.6.2) deficiency and to show if one or both species are able to complement MCPH1 -/- occurs 1 in 2000 or 6000 males. Onset is at birth or during the first human cell lines. With tools for expression at hand interactions and cell months of life with the presence of dark, regular, adherent scales of cycle effects, may be studied in MCPH1 proficient vs. deficient states skin. XLI diagnosis can be established through the STS assay. STS of the same cell line. gene is located on Xp22.3. Most XLI patients harbor complete deletion of the entire STS locus and flanking markers. In some cases, abnormal P0975. Molecular and demographic analysis of the cystic paring of the low-copy-number repeats G1.3 and CRI-S232, on either fibrosis population in Estonia. side of the STS gene, seems to be responsible of these interstitial T. Kahre1,2, M. Vasar3, M. Panov3, M. Pärlist4, A. Metspalu1,5; deletions. Only a few patients have been reported with partial deletions 1Molecular Diagnostics Center, United Laboratories,Tartu University Clinics, or point mutations in the STS gene. In the present study we analyzed Tartu, Estonia, 2Women´s Clinic, Children´s Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, a severe affected XLI patient with a missense mutation in exon 8 that Tartu, Estonia, 3Children´s Clinic,Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 4Tallinn seems to be a critical region in the presence of point mutations in XLI. Children´s Clinic, Tallinn, Estonia, 5Dept. of Biotechnology, Estonian Biocentre, Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia. P0978. MDR3 gene analysis in children with Progressive Familial Our aim was to analyze the molecular and demographic data of the Intrahepatic Cholestasis type 3 (PFIC3) phenotype CF population in Estonia in terms of age, gender, age at diagnosis, D. Degiorgio1, C. Colombo2, M. Seia1, L. Porcaro1, M. Marchi1, M. Travi1, V. ethnicity, survival and mortality rates during last decades and to Bennato2, G. Maggiore3, G. Torre4, D. A. Coviello1; investigate the clinical manifestation of CF patients in relation to their 1Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 2Clinica Pediatrica, Università di genotype. We aimed to include all CF patients (n=80) in Estonia born Milano, Milan, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Medicina della Procreazione e della Età between 1974-2004, but clinical and molecular data was available for Evolutiva, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 4Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo, UO di 45 patients from 40 families. Pediatria, Bergamo, Italy. The incidence of CF in Estonia by archival data is 1:7750 and Human MDR3 gene encodes the class III multidrug resistance P- according to the Hardy-Weinberg calculations 1:7450 live-births. glycoprotein that mediates the translocation of phospholipids across Several common CFTR mutations were detected: F508del (54% of the canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte, a process that is of all chromosomes), 394delTT (14%), 3659delC (2%), 1716G>A (2%). crucial importance in protecting cholangiocyte membranes from high Additionally, 14 mutations were found only in one allele. Altogether, concentrations of detergent bile acids. MDR3 mutations are cause 87,5% of all mutated CF chromosomes were identified. New methods of Progressive Familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis type 3 (PFIC3), like arrayed primer extension (APEX) allowing parallel detection of characterized by early onset of cholestasis that progresses to numerous mutations should be introduced to reach mutation detection cirrhosis and liver failure before adulthood, with high serum gamma- rate close to 100%. glutamyltransferase (gGT) activity; the liver histology shows ductular In 2003 the mean age of the living patients known by us was 12 years proliferation and infiammatory infiltrate in the early stage despite 3 months (95% CI 113-182 months) and 29% of our patients were patency of intra and extrahepatic bile ducts. over 18 years old. The mean age of establishing CF diagnosis was We analysed 33 children with a PFIC3 phenotype by sequencing the 2 years 3 months (95% CI 18.0-36.1 months). The mortality rate of entire coding sequence of MDR3 gene and we identify 10 pathogenetic CF patients in Estonia is decreasing, being 12.2%during the period alleles and twelve mutations in six children. Eleven are single different 1983-1987 and dropping to 0.7% in the period 1997-2002. Although, mutation and all are unpublished. In particular, in two patients only one there is a tendency of ageing of our CF population, more effort should mutation was identified, and in other two children we identify three be made to diagnose CF in earlier age and to give better treatment in mutations, two of which on the same allele. specialized centrums. Four mutations imply the synthesis of a truncated protein. In particular we identify 9 missense mutations (Arg159X, Ala250Pro, P0976. Functional identification of a classical nuclear export Glu558Lys, Met 630Val, Leu701Pro, Thr715Ile, Gly723Glu, Glu888X signal in spastin (SPG4) and generation of constructs targeting e Ala1186Thr) and 2 insertions (1167insAA and 2200insG). Exon over-expressed protein to the nucleus 17 could be identified as a hot-spot since it holds four of the eleven C. Beetz, J. Schickel, T. Deufel; mutation identified (36.4%). Institut für Klinische Chemie und Laboratoriumsdiagnostik, FSU Jena, Jena, None of the eleven mutation is present in 100 alleles of the control Germany. population. The low detection rate of MDR3 mutation in our patients Mutations in SPG4, the gene encoding spastin, are responsible for (about 18%) could be due both to genetic and clinical heterogeneity.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 293 P0979. Molecular and biochemical basis of alcohol-induced Table-1: IDL in different A1587G genotypes (females); P=0.016 oxidative stress in rat’s lungs Genotype Number IDL(mg/dL) Log ( ± SD)Mean K. Kordel1, A. P. Jurczyk2, S. A. Wisniewski1, M. Barzdo2, B. Jankowska2, E. 11 (GG) 43 12.60 1.10 ( ± 0.22) Meissner2, A. Prośniak2, S. Szram2; 12 (GA) 36 14.81 1.18 ( ± 0.18) 1University of Medical Sciences, Department of Forensic Medicine, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, Department of Forensic Medicine, 22 (AA) 3 23.33 1.44 ( ± 0.31) Lodz, Poland. In forensic practice intoxications with alcohols are very common. Table-2: IDL in different G219A genotypes (females); P=0.013 Recently authors evaluated rat model of intoxication to establish Genotype Number HDL2(mg/dL) Log ( ± SD)Mean biochemical basis of alcohol poisoning. Our aim was investigation of 11 (GG) 27 17.70 1.27 ( ± 0.16) the influence of methanol, ethanol, and ethylene glycol on oxidative 12 (GA) 21 12.05 1.07 ( ± 0.23) stress in rat’s lungs and evaluation of the tissue expression of catalase 22 (AA) 4 13.25 1.11 ( ± 0.23) and superoxide dismutase. Male Lewis rats had been administered 1M methyl alcohol or 1M ethyl alcohol or 0,25M ethylene glycol for 4, 8 and P0981. CRYGD gene mutation in a new family with congenital 12 weeks. In rat’s lungs we measured the concentrations of hydrogen hereditary aculeiform cataract peroxide, lipid peroxidation products (TBAR) and antioxidant system J. Zenteno1, M. Morales1, V. Moran-Barroso2, A. Sanchez-Navarro3; components (SH-groups). Results are represented in count per milligram 1Institute of Ophthalmology "Conde de Valenciana", Mexico City, Mexico, 2Pedi- of protein (Lowry’s method). Isolation of RNA from rat’s lungs has atric Hospital "Federico Gomez", Mexico City, Mexico, 3Institute of Ophthalmol- been made according to the laboratory procedures. RNA was used as ogy, Mexico City, Mexico. template for real-time RT-PCR. Results after normalization with β-actin Autosomal dominant congenital acueliform cataract is one of the expression have been analyzed with Excel spreadsheet. Our results rarest types of inherited cataract and is characterized by fiberglass- suggest that ethanol, methanol and ethylene glycol generate oxidative like or needle-like crystals projecting in different directions, through stress in rat organs and may influence on antioxidative enzyme activity or close to the axial region of the lens. Previously, crystallin Gamma causing lipid peroxidation and protein damage, and increase hydrogen D gene (CRYGD) mutations were demonstrated in 3 families (two peroxide production. These parameters were changing especially from Switzerland and the other one from Macedonia) with aculeiform in erythrocytes, liver, kidney, brain, lung. The alcohol generating the cataract; interestingly, the same Arg-58 to Hys mutation was identified in oxidative stress in all examined organs most significantly, was ethylene these three unrelated pedigrees. Here, we report the results of CRYGD glycol. Examination of catalase and superoxide dismutase expression molecular analyses in a large Mexican family with aculeiform cataract. profiles revealed significant differences in analyzed groups of rats due The propositus is a female aged 23 years who asked for medical advice to intoxication with different alcohols. because of “low visual acuity” from childhood; familial history disclosed Results that several relatives were previously diagnosed as having congenital cataracts; on eye biomicroscopy, a white central opacity resembling Methanol Ethyl alcohol Ethylene glycol glass, originating from the fetal nucleus and radially projecting needle- 4 weeks 8 weeks 12 weeks 4 weeks 8 weeks 12 weeks 4 weeks 8 weeks 12 weeks like crystals, was observed in both lenses. Fourteen relatives were clinically examined and 7 of them were identified as suffering from the SH 89,4166357,0063351,31375167,459748,3625550,3162444,9155120,6802132,74381 same type of bilateral cataract. statistic p<0,001 ns ns p<0,01 ns ns ns p<0,01 ns Molecular analyses on genomic DNA from the propositus and from 5 affected relatives demonstrated a G to A heterozygous missense TBAR 4,6541193,5075082,5294954,0068543,7962952,5515264,6116289,269838 7,61818 mutation in position 411 in exon 2 of CRYGD, which originates a Arg- 58 to Hys substitution in the protein. The Arg-58 to Hys substitution statistic p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 identified in this family is identical to that previously demonstrated in Hydrogen three unrelated familes with aculeiform cataract. These data suggests 88,83909142,9098129,3559 145,955 127,356975,2162960,9776486,50598761,8356 peroxide that there is a strict genotype-phenotype correlation in this type of congenital hereditary cataract. statistic ns ns p<0,05 p<0,05 p<0,05 ns ns ns p<0,01 P0982. Evidence for a New Locus for Bardet Biedl Syndrome P0980. ABCA1 gene polymorphism and lipid profile in a Scottish population N. Smaoui1,2, M. Chaabouni1, H. Kallel3, F. Maazoul1, R. M'rad1, H. Chaabouni1, J. F. Hejtmancik4; A. Pasdar, A. Cumming, D. St. Clair, M. J. MacLeod; 1hopital Charles Nicolle, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Func- University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom. tion Branch- National Eye Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Service de The ATP Binding Cassette Transporter (ABCA1) is a protein involved pédiatrie hopital, Ras Jbel, Tunisia, 4National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, in lipid metabolism. Common polymorphisms in this gene could United States. affect High Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol (HDL-C), triglyceride and Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder Apolipoprotein A1 (apoA1) levels and thus the risk of atherosclerotic characterized by obesity, retinopathy, polydactyly, renal and cardiac diseases. The purpose of this study was to assess the effects of malformations, learning disabilities, and hypogenitalism. Eight BBS loci different ABCA1 genotypes on lipid profile. A cohort of 181 healthy have been mapped, and eight genes have been identified. We investigate Scottish individuals with complete lipid profile data (adjusted for age, linkage and haplotype analysis in two consanguineous Tunisian families. sex, BMI and smoking, drinking habits) was recruited. We studied four METHODS. Haplotype and linkage analysis of two consanguineous common polymorphisms in ABCA1 gene at different positions, G158A families diagnosed BBS was scored with more than 24 polymorphic markers (Leu/Leu), G219A (Arg/Lys), G316A (Gly/Gly) and A1587G (Lys/Arg). neighboring and surrounding the eight known BBS genes. Two-point lod Genotyping assays were based on Dynamic Allele Specific scores were calculated. DNA from affected individuals from both families Hybridisation (DASH). was amplified with primers specific for BBS1, BBS2, BBS4, BBS6, BBS7 Results: and BBS8 genes and then sequenced by direct automated sequencing. No differences were found in VLDL/TG, VLDL/Cholesterol, LDL, RESULTS. The combined haplotype analysis and linkage analysis in two HDL2 and HDL3 concentrations in females or males between different Tunisian consanguineous families with BBS have excluded any linkage genotypes. However, in females with different A1587G genotypes IDL to any of the eight known BBS loci. Sequence analysis of BBS1, BBS2, was higher in “AA” genotype (table1). It was also higher in females with BBS4, BBS6, BBS7 and BBS8 genes revealed no sequence alterations G219A “GG” genotype (table2). Males with G316A “GA” genotype also in their coding sequence.CONCLUSIONS. These results describe had a higher level of HDL (Mean HDL: “GG”, 53.27; “GA”, 63: p=0.032). evidence for at least one new locus for BBS confirming the extreme In conclusion, only A1587G “AA” and G219A “GG” genotypes may genetic heterogeneity for this disease. The absence of alterations in six influence IDL in females. G219A “GG” genotype might have an effect of the eight known BBS genes demonstrates that a new BBS locus is not on total HDL in males only. involved in triallelic inheritance with these known genes.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 294 P0983. Technical and ethical considerations in the use of MLPA MTHFR gene combined with reduced dietary intake of folates has technology. been associated with increased risk of having a pregnancy affected by P. J. Bridge, C. Clark, S. Bleoo, L. M. Graham, D. Fletcher, L. M. Yunker, A. NTD. Other studies suggested that abnormal folate metabolism and Innes, R. Lowry, J. S. Parboosingh, INHERIT BRCAs; the C677T mutation may be maternal risk factors for DS. However, it Alberta Children's Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada. was reported that the frequency of this polymorphism differs between MLPA technology is a very valuable addition for molecular diagnostics different ethnic populations. In our study the frequency of C677T however we have encountered several interesting problems. substitution was evaluated in DNA samples from 38 women with Single exon deletions. We found an apparent deletion of one copy NTD affected pregnancy, 26 women with DS affected pregnancy and of exon 25 of the BRCA1 gene, but sequence analysis demonstrated control group of 96 Bulgarian women without NTD or DS pregnancy. that this patient was heterozygous for a mutation (R3128X) in that Differences in allele and genotype frequencies among investigated exon. The nonsense mutation is present in one of the MLPA primer groups of NTD mothers and controls were found. The CC genotype binding sites and caused a false-positive result on MLPA. Any similar was observed in 40% of NTD mothers, 42% of DS mothers and in 37% base-pair substitution in a binding site could cause an apparent false- of control women; C/T genotype - in 50%, 42% and 45% respectively; positive result so apparent single-exon deletions should be verified by and T/T genotype - in 10%, 16% and 18%, respectively. We suggest an alternate method. that NTD incidence is affected by a multifunctional interaction, including Incidental findings. MLPA kits also contain control fragments or exons maternal folate metabolism, MTHFR genotype, and other loci. A study from other genes. We screened a patient with the MLPA kit for Rett of the frequency of a second MTHFR polymorphism - A1298C is now syndrome and found a 50% reduction of a control peak. This control in progress. amplicon is from the proteolipid protein (PLP) gene that is normally Bulgarian Ministry of Science and Education supported this study - involved in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease and spastic paraplegia 2. Grant No. MUL-1201. Although this has been useful, we note that there might have been an issue surrounding lack of informed consent. We have already P0986. Contribution of GJB6 (connexin 30) mutations to encountered two similar instances: a deletion of the Fanconi D control nonsyndromic deafness in the Portuguese population probe in a patient with a VHL deletion indicating that the deletion was H. Teixeira1, O. Dias2, M. Andrea2, C. Correia1, G. Fialho1, H. Caria1,3; fairly large and involved a second gene that might have significance in 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of tumour formation and a deletion of the CHL1 control probe but not any Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Center of ORL, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lis- VHL exon in a patient with a cytogenetically-detected 3p deletion. bon, Lisbon, Portugal, 3College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, Remembering these, or similar, difficulties will allow us to make better Setúbal, Portugal. use of this excellent technique. Mutations at the GJB2 gene, encoding connexin 26, account for up to 50% of the nonsyndromic recessive deafness cases. Nevertheless, P0984. Familial hypercholesterolemia in St.-Petersburg: the many heterozygotes for recessive mutations are deaf, which may known and novel mutations found in the low density lipoprotein suggest the implication of another connexin gene eventually related to receptor gene in Russia the formation of heteromeric connexons. F. M. Zakharova1, D. Damgaard2, M. Y. Mandelshtam1, V. I. Golubkov1, P. H. The GJB6 gene, encoding connexin 30 protein, is located in the same Nissen2, V. B. Vasilyev1, O. Faergeman2; gene cluster as GJB2. Moreover, connexins 26 and 30 exhibit 77% 1Institute of Experimental Medicine, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Aar- identity and are expressed in the mouse cochlea. As such, GJB6 hus Sygehus, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark. arouse as a candidate for the mutations which would cause deafness Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is one of the most common in individuals with a single GJB2 mutation. However, some previous monogenic human diseases. FH is inherited as an autosomal-dominant screening studies suggest that GJB6 point mutations are rare, trait with the prevalence of the heterozygous form in most populations especially when comparing with the high frequency of GJB2 mutations 1:500. The main purpose of current research is to create the mutation worldwide. Screening for GJB6 mutations in other populations should map of the LDL receptor gene in St.-Petersburg FH patients. As a help to elucidate this puzzling situation. result, 32 sequence variants besides common polymorphisms were In this study, we sought the contribution of the GJB6 gene for the identified. Among 32 mutations, 17 were new and 27 were disease- aetiology of familial or sporadic deafness in the Portuguese population. causing mutations. All these mutations alter the reading frame of the The GJB6 gene was thus screened in hearing impaired individuals receptor mRNA, affect splicing of mRNA or lead to changes in the presenting monoallelic mutations or no mutations in GJB2 amino acid sequence of the mature receptor. Rapid test methods were developed for most of the mutations. We analyzed the inheritance of P0987. V84M variant in GJB2 gene associated with the mutations in probands’ families by rapid test methods. Totalizing nonsyndromic autosomal dominant deafness our data, only 27 out of 66 relatives of probands were found to carry T. Matos1, H. Caria1,2, A. O'Neil3, C. Correia1, G. Fialho1; the mutations. Our results allowed to conclude that predominating 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University mutations are absent in FH patients in St.-Petersburg. In the current of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 2College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of study only five mutations (C139G, c.313+1G>A, c.651-653del3, c.652- Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal, 3ORL Service, Hospital Egas Moniz, Lisbon, Portu- 654 delGGT è C308Y) were found to be recurrent, i.e. were found gal. in two unrelated families each. Other 22 mutations were found in Most pathogenic mutations in GJB2, which encodes the gap junction unique family each. Many of mutations found in St.-Petersburg were protein connexin 26, are recessive alleles associated with nonsyndromic previously identified in other ethnic groups, for example in Denmark, prelingual hearing loss. Yet, a few alleles are described in the literature Finland, Norway and Sweden. Most probably these mutations share as being implicated in dominant forms of nonsyndromic deafness. the common ancestor in all Baltic countries. Current research was The present report describes a novel GJB2 variant, V84M, acting as a supported by Russian Fund for Basic Research (05-04-48235), putative dominant allele. This variant was detected in two deaf patients, Program “Leading Russian Scientific Schools” and by the President of mother and daughter, both heterozygous for V84M. Identification Russian Federation (MK-899.2003.04). was performed by SSCP followed by bidirectional sequencing and enzymatic restriction. P0985. Maternal MTHFR genotype and incidence of Neural Tube Variant V84M substitutes a valine for a methionine in the second Defects (NTD) and Down syndrome transmembrane domain of the protein. The four transmembrane S. Andonova1, V. Dimitrova2, R. Vazharova3, R. Tincheva4, I. Kremensky1; domains of connexins are highly conserved. Moreover, the valine at 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Fetal Medi- position 84 of connexin 26 is invariant across the connexins, thus cine, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3De- enabling us to admit that its substitution probably leads to loss of partment of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Section of function. So, V84M variant acting in a dominant negative manner might Clinical genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. be the cause of deafness in this family. Another evidence that accounts Down syndrome (DS) and Neural tube defects (NTD) are common for V84M being a putative dominant variant is the fact that the two malformations among newborns. The C677T polymorphism in the carriers present a different degree of deafness, which is common inMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 295 cases of dominant deafness. Africa, Greece and Turkey. In agreement with this hypothesis, common These data thus suggest that V84M might be a novel GJB2 mutation haplotypes with flanking markers segregated in these families. implicated in nonsyndromic autosomal dominant deafness. The genetic subtypes of AR-CMT linked to 5q32 locus account for 43% of our series. P0988. Genetic testing in Czech patients with idiopathic and hereditary chronic pancreatitis. P0990. Hereditary thrombophilia risk factors are not significantly M. Koudova1, J. Spicak2, R. Keil3, J. Nevoral4, E. Michkova4, I. Anguelova1, M. associated with an increased risk of stillbirth in Czech patients Kouda5, M. Macek Sr.1, V. Vavrova4, M. Macek Jr.1; E. Rausova1, I. Hadacova2, I. Spalova3, M. Macek Jr.1; 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University Prague, Czech 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University and UH Motol, Republic, 2Clinic of Hepatogastroenterology, IKEM Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Clinical Hematology and Blood Bank, 3Clinic of Internal Medicine, Charles University Prague, Czech Republic, 4Pe- UH Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, diatric Clinic, Charles University Prague, Czech Republic, 5Clinic of Surgery, Charles University and UH Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. Charles University Prague, Czech Republic. The aim of this study was to asses the influence of inherited We have analyzed the entire CFTR gene coding region and screened thrombophilia risk factors FV-Leiden (FV-L), FII 20210G->A (FII), for common PRSS 1 (R122H, N29I), SPINK 1 (N34S) mutations in a MTHFR 677C->T (MTHFR) and PAI-1 4G/5G on the risk of stillbirth in representative cohort of 65 Czech chronic pancreatitis (CP) patients the Czech population. In total, 52 cases with stillbirth (defined as a baby comprising: idiopathic CP-iCP cases (inclusion criteria: N Engl J Med born with no signs of life after 24 weeks of gestation) and 102 healthy 1998, 339: 653) - 22 children / 32 adults and hereditary CP- hCP controls were genotyped. Only in FV-L there was a trend towards an (EUROPAC inclusaion criteria: Med Clin North Am 2000, 84: 575) - 7 increased risk of stillbirth in studied patients (p=0.08; odds ratio, 2.3). children / 4 adults. Hundred random controls (50F, 50M; age range One of the patients was homozygous for FV-L (ns, odds ratio, 3.96). 18-45 years) were analyzed in parallel. In iCP the frequency of CFTR The frequencies of prothrombin FII and MTHFR mutations, including mutations F508del, R117H, L997F was increased only in adults the PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism were similar in patients versus controls (p=0.01) and was associated with an increase of the IVS8-9T /10 TG (FII /2% vs. 2%/, for MTHFR /37% vs. 38%/ and PAI-1 4G/5G /56% vs. haplotype (p=0.001) and of the 125G/C variant (p=0.01), compared to 58%/). Moreover, frequencies of combined genotypes of heterozygous controls. The frequency of R122H and N29I PRSS 1 mutations was FV-L mutation together with PAI-1 4G/4G hypofibrinolytic genotype significantly increased in both children/adults (3/22) with hCP (p < in the same patient and heterozygous FII mutation with PAI-1 4G/4G 0.01), but not in iCP cases (2/108) compared to controls. However, the allele were not statistically different from controls. We conclude that SPINK 1 N34S mutation was found at a considerable frequency also hereditary thrombophilia does not significantly influence the risk of in controls (4/200 chromosomes). Our data indicate that mutations stillbirth, even in combination of studied factors. Interestingly, despite in CFTR, PRSS 1 genes are associated with iCP / hCP, with PRSS pathogenetic heterogeneity of the sample under investigation FV- 1 alleles being more often common in “early onset” CP. SPINK1 L was associated with a positive trend. Pregnant women could thus mutations may have a modifier role in the development of CP. In benefit from FV-L mutation screening and patients from anticoagulant positive cases genetic counseling and long-term monitoring of eventual therapy in subsequent pregnancies. Nevertheless, further larger scale development of other cystic fibrosis-related symptoms (in iCP) and the studies are necessary. Supported by VZFNM 00000064203. adenocarcinoma of pancreas (in hCP) should be provided. Supported by MZCR: 000000064203. P0991. Identification of a novel splice variant produced by the Hermansky Pudlak Syndrome Type 1 Gene (HPS1) P0989. Eight new mutations of the KIAA1985 gene associated C. Carmona-Rivera, I. Rivera-Lugo, C. L. Cadilla; with severe form of demyelinating autosomal recessive Charcot- University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences, San Juan, PR, United States. Marie-Tooth disease (CMT4C) in 11 families and founder effects Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS)[MIM#203300] is a rare, autosomal in families North African and European origin recessive disorder characterized by a triad of clinical features such H. Azzedine1, N. Ravisé1, M. Tazir2, A. Gabreels-Festens3, M. Lammens4, O. as, oculocutaneous albinism, bleeding tendency caused by storage Dubourg1, J. Senderek5, C. Verny1, A. Brice1, D. Grid6, N. Birouk7, E. Le guern1; pool deficiency platelets, and a ceroid-like storage disorder. HPS 1INSERM U 679 (ex U289), Paris, France, 2Hôpital Mustapha Bacha Depart- exhibits locus heterogeneity, seven HPS-causing genes have been ment of Neurology, Algiers, Algeria, 3University Medical Center Nijmegen De- identified in humans. Patients with HPS type 1 are frequently found partments of Pathology and Neurology, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4University in the Northwest region of the island of Puerto Rico. Two major HPS1 Medical Center Nijmegen Departments of Pathology and Neurology, Nijme- mRNA variants result from alternative splicing of exon 9, encoding the gen, The Netherlands, 5Institut f. Humangenetik Klinikum d. RWTH Aachen, major and minor protein isoforms of 79.3 and 75.9kDa, respectively. To Aachen, Germany, 6Généthon-BTR, Paris-Evry, France, 7Hôpital des spécialités date, four different splice HPS1 gene variants have been reported in Département de Neuro-physiologie, Rabat, Morocco. GenBank. These splice variants were found to be expressed in human CMT is a pathologically and genetically heterogeneous group of lymphoblasts by RT-PCR. The four mRNAHPS1 were detected in hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies characterized by slowly cells derived from a patient with HPS-1 and other tissues. Sequencing progressive weakness and atrophy, primarily in peroneal and analysis of PCR amplification of the normal coding sequence (CDS) of distal leg muscles. Two major types have been distinguished on the HPS1 mRNA showed an unexpected splice variant lacking exon anatomopathological and electrophysiological grounds: demyelinating 5. These studies show that the HPS1 gene expresses more than one and axonal CMT. Up to now, 8 different loci have been reported and 7 transcript variant in human lymphoblasts. Further studies of these genes have been identified in demyelinating autosomal recessive forms variants are necessary to better understand the role of each transcript of the disease. Recently, the KIAA1985 gene has been implicated in a in the pathways affected in HPS. Grants from NIGMS S06GM08224 severe demyelinating form of CMT associated with kyphoscoliosis. and R25GM61838 and NCRRG12RR03051 supported this study. We selected 38 consanguineous families with demyelinating ARCMT in whom 72 subjects were affected in a total of 178 individuals. These P0992. Common Mutations In The Alpha-1-Antitrypsin Gene families were screened for 8 microsatellite markers covering the Are Not Frequently Found In Patients With Hermansky Pudlak CMT4C locus. Assignment of the families to CMT4C was established Syndrome Complicated With Pulmonary Fibrosis by homozygosity mapping and confirmed by linkage analysis. The L. E. Riviera, P. J. Santiago Borrero, C. L. Cadilla; KIAA1985 gene was sequenced in all families with putative linkage University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine, Departments of Pediatrics, He- to CMT4C. matology and Oncology Section, Biochemistry, San Juan, PR, United States. We identified 11 families with linkage to the 5q32 locus. In 10 of them, The Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS) [MIM #203300] is an eight new different mutations were identified. We also identified 2 autosomal recessive disorder characterized by oculocutaneous mutations previously reported (Senderek et al., 2004), one of which was albinism, a bleeding tendency, and a ceroid-lipofuscin-like lysosomal found in 5 of our 10 families. Together, both studies strongly suggest storage disease (Witkop et al. 1990). Frequent medical problems seen a common ancestor of these families. Indeed, this mutation was found in HPS patients include prolonged bleeding, granulomatous colitis and in families originating from the Netherlands, Germany, Bosnia, North progressive pulmonary fibrosis (PF). PF has been associated in 30-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 296 40% of HPS cases. Deficiencies in Alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT) produce P0995. Vitamin D Receptor Gene Polymorphisms in Turkish a degenerative pulmonary disorder by a mutation in the gene of Psoriasis Patients proteinase inhibitor 1 (PI). The S and Z alleles are the most common I. Acikbas1, B. S. Erdogan2, S. Ergin2, S. Aktan3, E. Tepeli1, H. Bagci1; in persons manifesting AAT, while the M allele is the most common 1Pamukkale University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, Denizli, one in normal persons. The Z allele consists of a G->A in exon 5 (Lys Turkey, 2Pamukkale University, Medical Faculty, Department of Dermatology, 342->Glu), whereas the S allele is an A->T change in exon 3 of the Denizli, Turkey, 3Dokuz Eylül University, Medical Faculty, Department of Derma- AAT gene (Val 284->Glu). We utilized PCR combined with restriction tology, Izmir, Turkey. digestion with TAQ a1 enzyme and DNA sequencing to screen for these Psoriasis is an inflamatory disease characterized with increased AAT gene variants in PR HPS patients. Eighteen samples of HPS-1 squamous cell proliferation and impaired differentiation. Altough, and HPS-3 patients were examined for the exon 3 and exon 5 alleles of vitamin D, Calcitriol, and it’s analogues are successfully used for the AAT gene, All the patients examined for the exon 5 mutations had psoriasis therapy, some psoriasis patients are resistant to Vitamin the normal M variant. Only two patients examined for exon 3 mutations D therapy. Vitamin D mediate it’s activity by intracellular receptor. had the mutation found in the S variant. One of the three patients with It’s suggested that polymorphisms in VDR gene may explain the pulmonary fibrosis turned out to be heterozygous for the mutation of differences in response to vitamin D therapy. the S variant. The other heterozygote patient for this mutation has yet In this study, 102 psoriasis patients and 102 healthy controls were to show pulmonary problems. Grants from NIGMS S06GM08224 and studied for VDR gene polymorphisms. The Fok I, Bsm I and Apa I R25GM61838 and NCRRG12RR03051 supported this study. polymorphisms were examined by PCR-RFLP and 50 subjects received vitamin D therapy to evaluate the association between VDR P0993. Sense and antisense Foxl2 transcripts in mouse gene polymorphisms and response to vitamin D therapy. J. Cocquet, M. Fellous, R. A. Veitia; There was no significant difference between demografic data and INSERM E0021 and U361, Hôpital Cochin, Pavillon Baudelocque, Paris, clinical parameters of the patients and vitamin D therapy and VDR France. polimorphisms. However, Aa and bb genotypes were significantly FOXL2 is a forkhead transcription factor involved in the eyelid higher in early onset than late onset psoriasis. The haplotype “FfBbAa” development and in the development and adult function of the ovary, was significantly higher in patients than controls. in mammals. Its mutations in man are responsible for a rare genetic In conclusion, our results indicate that VDR gene polymorphisms does disease characterized by eyelid malformation, associated or not with not affect the response to vitamin D therapy in psoriasis. However, premature ovarian failure (Blepharophimosis syndrome of type I and “FfBbAa” haplotype and Apa I, Bsm I polymorphisms are associated II, respectively. OMIM 110100). In mouse, we have identified 2 mRNA with psoriasis and early onset of the disease, respectively. isoforms of Foxl2 that result from an alternative polyadenylation. Here, we characterize in depth the structure and expression of these P0996. Plasmid profiles of multidrug resistant uropathogentic 2 variants. We also describe an antisense transcript that overlaps Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., Proteus spp. and the whole Foxl2 transcription unit. This antisense transcript, called Pseudomonas spp. isolates from Nigeria Foxl2OS (for opposite strand), yields several isoforms resulting B. A. Adeniyi, C. C. Amajoyi, S. I. Smith; from alternative splicing. No significant coding region was found in Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of the Foxl2OS sequence. Foxl2OS displays a pattern of expression Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria. very similar to that of Foxl2 in the gonads during development and Fifty-two multidrug resistant local uropathogenic Escherichia coli, at the adult age. RNA-FISH experiments show that both transcripts Klebsiella spp., Proteus spp., and Pseudomonas spp. isolates were are expressed in the same cells at the same time. We suggest that tested for susceptibility to 10 antimicrobial agents. Tetracycline (100.0%) Foxl2OS is a non-coding antisense RNA that may be involved in the and ampicillin (94.2%) showed the highest rates of resistance, and regulation of Foxl2. All in all our results provide new insights about the ciprofloxacin (50.0%) demonstrated the lowest. The majority of MDR organization of the murine Foxl2 locus. This might help understand its isolates showing concurrent resistance to all 10 agents (n=17) was a regulation and function. component of 32.7%. A total of 23 antimicrobial resistance patterns was observed. The predominant phenotype (32.7%) amongst the P0994. Automated genomic DNA extraction: performance isolates included resistance to ciprofloxacin, cefuroxime, ceftriaxone, evaluations of the Abbott m1000TM system for multiple clinical ampicillin, gentamicin, nalidixic acid, nitrofurantoin, co-trimoxazole, diagnostic applications streptomycin, and tetracycline. A 38.5% (n=10) of the isolates were J. E. Norton1, R. Mareco2, D. Ligeiro2, G. Michel1; carrying plasmids of sizes estimated above 2.1kb. After curing, most 1Abbott GmbH & Co.KG, Molecular Diagnostics, Wiesbaden-Delkenheim, of the mutant strains lost their plasmids as was corroborated by their Germany, 2Centro de Histocompatibilidade do Sul – Lusotransplante, Lisbon, improved susceptibilities. Given that uropathogens are demonstrating Portugal. increasing antimicrobial resistance, epidemiological investigation using The m1000 instrument is a fully automated DNA extraction system the molecular characterization tools is highly necessary. based on chaotropic lysis of whole blood followed by capture and washing of DNA on magnetic particles and finally elution of DNA. P0997. Performance of a DHPLC based platform for Yield and purity are suitable for a wide range of molecular diagnostic comprehensive mutation detection in a clinical molecular applications. The system, developed for medium to high throughput diagnostic setting workload, allows several different user-designed protocol options B. L. Wu1,2, J. Zhu3, D. Bennett1, G. Wu3, K. Tomaszewicz1, V. Lip1, T. Xu1, H. depending on the laboratory yield and concentration requirements. Fang1, H. Shao1, O. Platt1,2; Here, data are presented showing suitability of the genomic DNA 1Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Harvard Medical School, system as exemplified for two widely used clinical applications: Cystic Boston, MA, United States, 3Transgenomic, Omaha, NE, United States. Fibrosis (CF) testing and HLA typing. OBJECT: Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chromatography For CF testing 81 frozen blood samples were extracted and subsequent (DHPLC) is a sensitive, high throughput technique widely used CF genotyping with a PCR/OLA assay revealed the expected normal/ in research to identify hundreds of mutations. We evaluated the mutant types. effectiveness of DHPLC in a clinical molecular diagnostic setting. For HLA typing, where laboratories typically require good quality DNA METHOD: We designed 3 denaturing strategies to detect the common in sufficient quantity for normal SSP, SSOP and/or SBT testing and also types of clinically important mutations: 1) using partial denaturing to archiving, a large number of fresh and frozen blood samples (>8000) form heteroduplex for rapid screening of base-pair deletions, insertions, was extracted with successful HLA typing using this technique. and substitutions; 2) using complete denaturing to couple with primer The m1000 was shown to meet requirements for rapid extraction extension to identify multiple target mutations simultaneously; and of high quality DNA suited for genomic analysis. No sample cross- 3) using non-denaturing for straightforward quantitative detection contamination was detected and the purified DNA was free of inhibitors. of genomic deletions and duplications. We studied 518 previously These data demonstrate the potential of the system to reliably provide tested clinical samples with documented abnormalities in the following suitable DNA in the molecular diagnostic setting generally. genes: Dystrophin; SLC26A4; Factor V; Prothrombin; MTHFR; HFE;Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 297 and Mitochondrial genome. RESULTS: We correctly identified all of control and patients were compared for their ApaI and TaqI genotypes the genetic abnormalities including 37 exon/s deletions, duplications there was no relationship between VDR gene allelic polymorphisms and 53 point mutations in Dystrophin gene; 16 SLC26A4 mutations; and osteomalacia. Also no association between biochemical datas 29 homozygote, 35 double heterozygote, and 9 triple heterozygote and VDR gene polymorphisms was observed. Thus, we were unable in simultaneous detection of 3 targeted mutations associated with to find an association between the VDR gene polymorphisms and hypercoagulation (Factor V, Prothrombin, MTHFR) and 2 targeted osteomalacia. polymorphisms related to hemochromatosis, respectively; and 62 mitochondrial mutations/polymorphisms. In addition, we found 12 P1000. The role of of folates and/or cobalamine in occurrence new pathogenic mutations in these genes including point mutations, and pathogenesis of trisomy 21 genomic deletions and duplications. These approaches, either N. Emery-Fillon1, A. Chango2, R. Rivet1, C. Mircher3, B. Herbeth4, H. Bléhaut3, single or combination, have significantly saved the time and cost of D. Lambert5, M. O. Réthoré3, J. P. Nicolas1; genetic tests. CONCLUSION: DHPLC offers a unique combination of 1Faculty of Medicine, Laboratory of Medical and Pediatric Biochemistry, Van- sensitivity, accuracy, speed and cost-effectiveness in the detection of doeuvre-les-Nancy, France, 2ISAB, Laboratory of genomic nutritional, Beauvais, a variety of mutations. It is a platform that is highly suited to the clinical France, 3Institut Medical Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France, 4INSERM U525, and regulatory environment of a diagnostic laboratory. Nancy, France, 5INSERM U52, Nancy, France. Trisomy 21, the most frequent cause of mental retardation of genetic P0998. Four new mutations in the PINK1 gene in early onset origin, is the most common of the chromosomal aberrations. It causes autosomal recessive parkinsonism a characteristic syndrome of mental deficiency, malformations and P. Ibanez, S. Lesage, E. Lohmann, L. Hafid, M. Borg, D. Grid, M. Haguenau, V. neurological signs characteristic of Alzheimer disease. However these Meiniger, Y. Agid, A. Dürr, A. Brice, and the French Parkinson’s Disease Genet- disorders are also observed in the event of deficiency in folates and ics StudyGroup; cobalamines. These two vitamins play a capital part in the processes INSERM U289, Neurologie et Thérapeutique Expérimentale, Hôpital de la Pitié- of methylation, the synthesis of DNA and the development of the Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France. foetus. Moreover, two genes of folate metabolism are localised on Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a frequent disorder. A growing number of chromosome 21: CBS and RFC. Our hypothesis is that DS could be due responsible loci/genes have been identified in familial forms. Mutations to hypomethylation caused by a deficit of the enzymes implied in one in the PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) gene located within the PARK6 carbon metabolism (MTHFR, MTR, MTRR, CBS and RFC). Moreover, locus on chromosome 1p35-p36 have recently been identified in hypomethylation leads to nondisjunction of the chromosomes during autosomal recessive forms of PD. In this study we screened a large meiosis thereby playing a role in the occurrence of trisomy 21. We have series of 145 families, of diverse geographic origins, with autosomal studied the impact of these 2 vitamins in the occurrence of Trisomy 21 recessive parkinsonism and age at onset before 60 years, for PINK1 by examining various polymorphisms of genes involved in one carbon mutations. metabolism and by measuring biochemical factors (Homocysteine, B9, After excluding 50 families with mutations in the parkin gene, 3 B12). Moreover, we studied, in vitro, on trisomic fibroblasts of patients newly developed microsatellites markers flanking the PINK1 gene in culture, the state of methylation according to the senescence and were analysed in the remaining 95. Sixteen familial cases presenting quantified the form of the folate carriers (RFC and FR). haploidentity and 5 cases with consanguinity presenting homozygosity at these markers were sequenced. Five new mutations were identified in the PINK1 gene in four families. Two homozygous substitutions in exon 6, G386A and G409V, and an homozygous deletion in exon 8, P1001. Islet amyloid polypeptide (amylin) haplotypes and L519fs>522X, were identified in isolated patients with consanguinity. bone mineral density in young and elderly women in Southern We also identified a compound heterozygous mutation (K24fs>54X Sweden and C549fs>553X) in the fourth family. The mutation in exon 1 is the S. Gebre-Medhin1, P. Gerdhem2, M. Callreus2, K. Åkesson2, H. Luthman3; first found in the 34-amino acid mitochondrial targeting motif. Patients 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of had a phenotype of typical PD with early onset (range 22 to 52 years) Orthopedics, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden, 3Dept of Endocrinol- with additional signs in those carrying the homozygous mutations. ogy, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden. In conclusion, autosomal recessive mutations in PINK1 are a rare BACKGROUND AND AIM: Islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP or amylin) cause (2.8%) of young-onset Parkinson disease but might give new is a putative hormone which is secreted together with insulin by insight in the understanding of the disease. the pancreatic beta-cells. Several studies have implied a role for IAPP in bone remodelling. For example, adult mice heterozygote P0999. Polymorphisms at the ligand- binding sites of the vitamin or homozygote for a null mutation in the IAPP gene have increased D receptor gene and osteomalacia numbers of osteoclasts and develop an osteporosis-like phenotype in D. Gezen Ak1, H. Kahraman2, E. Dursun1, B. Süsleyici Duman3, N. Erensoy4, F. adulthood. We have investigated whether different IAPP haplotypes are Alagöl5, S. Yilmazer1; associated with bone mineral density (BMD) in young women at peak 1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical bone mass and elderly women at high risk of fracture. MATERIALS Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medi- AND METHODS: 1005 young women from the Malmö Peak-study (age cine, University of 19 Mayis, Samsun, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Biology, 25±0.1 yrs, BMI 23.0±3.7 kg/cm2) and 1044 elderly women (Malmö Faculty of Medicine, University of Kadir Has, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Institute for OPRA-study; age 75±0.1 yrs, BMI 26.2±4.2 kg/cm2) were recruited. Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Department of The primary phenotype was BMD assessed by DXA. Body composition Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istan- data, calcaneus ultrasound estimates and fracture data (OPRA-study) bul, Turkey. were also available. Short nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the Vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms have been suggested vicinity of the IAPP gene were retrieved from the International HapMap as possible determinants of bone mineral density (BMD) and calcium Genotype Database and genotyped by PCR using the ABI SNP metabolism. In this study, our aim was to determine if there is an genotyping assay. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Obtained data are association between VDR gene polymorphism and osteomalacia. We currently being processed and will be presented in further detail. determined ApaI and TaqI polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor gene in 24 patients with osteomalacia and 25 age-matched healthy P1002. Associations and gene-environment interactions between controls. Serum calcium, phosphorus, ALP, PTH, 25OHD levels were single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in IL4 (c-589t) and IL4 also examined. We used PCR and RFLP methods to test for an receptor (I50V and Q576R) and total specific IgG to diphtheria association between osteomalacia and polymorphisms within intron and tetanus toxoids in children at risk of atopy 8 and exon 9 of the VDR gene. After genetic analysis of the VDR G. S. Baynam1, S. Khoo1, P. D. Sly1, P. G. Holt1, J. Goldblatt2, P. N. Le Souef2; gene, allelic variations were: AA, 50%; Aa, 45.8%; aa, 4.2% and TT, 1Telethon Institute for Child Health Research, Perth, Australia, 2School of Paedi- 33.3%; Tt, 62.5%; tt, 4.2% FF in patients and AA, 28 %; Aa, 56%; aa, atrics and Child Health, University of Western Australia, Australia. 16% and TT, 36%; Tt, 52%; tt, 12% in the healthy controls. When the Rationale: There is evidence for (1) high heritability for antibody, andGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 298 a Th2 cytokine (IL-13) responses to vaccines (2) atopy influencing scan of the X-chromosome using 20 microsatellite markers (average immune system development, including delay in maturation from inter-marker spacing 10cM) in 27 multiplex families will be reported. Th2 to Th1 bias and (3) an association between smoking and Additionally, following an investigation of two cases of male-to-male impaired vaccine response. To assess the role of these multi-factorial transmission of synaesthesia raising the possibility of oligogenic influences this study investigated the effects of: SNPs in the Th2 inheritance, a whole genome screen using 400 microsatellite markers cytokine IL-4 and IL4 receptor; and parental smoking, on diphtheria was commenced. Progress to date will be reported. and tetanus vaccine response in a cohort enriched for atopy. Method: The cohort was recruited at birth on the basis of a family history of P1005. Haplotype analysis of the serotonin transporter gene in atopy. Total specific IgG to diphtheria and tetanus toxoids at 2 years Russian suicide attempters were measured by ELISA. Genotyping was performed by PCR and D. Gaysina1, A. Zaynullina1, E. Jurjev1, R. Ghabdulhakov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; restriction digestion. Results: For the three SNPs studied (IL4 c-589t, 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir IL4R I50V and IL4R Q576R) the allele previously associated with State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. atopy was associated with increased antibody levels to diphtheria (p= Genetically-mediated alterations in serotonergic transmission have 0.029, n=197 n=; p=0.062, n=191 and p=0.267, n=183, respectively), been implicated in suicidal behavior. Resent studies showed that and tetanus (p=0.685 n=196,p=0.022, n=193 and p=0.055, n=185, sex differences exist in the contribution of genetic factors to suicidal respectively) toxoids. Furthermore, for these genotypes interactions behaviour. The aim of this study was to estimate the contribution of with smoking were found with diphtheria (p=0.032, p=0.062and the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4) in suicidal behaviour for p=0.079, respectively) and tetanus (p=0.001, p=0.022, p=0.067, males and females of Russian origin. A total of 100 suicide attempters respectively) toxoid antibodies. Amongst those exposed to parental (66 females and 34 males) were included in this study. The control smoking “atopic alleles” were associated with increased vaccine group included 167 individuals (58 females and 109 males) without a responses, the converse being found amongst those without exposure personal/family history of any psychiatric disorders. Two polymorphisms to parental smoking. Conclusion: “Atopic alleles” of SNPs in IL-4 and in the SLC6A4 gene - 5-HTTLPR (in the promoter region) and IL-4 R are associated with increased antibody responses to diphtheria VNTR (in the second intron) were analyzed using PCR technique. and tetanus toxoids, which is modified by parental smoking. Maximum likelihood analysis of haplotype distribution demonstrated the presence of linkage disequilibrium between the two polymorphic in P1003. Novel autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness control subjects (females χ2= 32.25, p < .00001; males χ2 = 32.93, p < locus maps on chromosome 6p21.2-22.3 in a large Tunisian .00001), in suicide attempters (females χ2 = 15.42, p = .0004; males consanguineous family χ2 = 15.42, p = .078), in the overall samples (females χ2 = 39.24, p A. Tlili1, I. Charfedine2, M. Männikko3, I. Lahmar4, Z. Benzina5, M. Ben Amor2, < .00001; males χ2 = 26.33, p < .00001). Analysis of distribution of N. Driss4, L. Ala-Kokko3, M. Drira2, S. Masmoudi1, H. Ayadi1; the estimated haplotype frequencies revealed a significant difference 1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire Humaine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service d'O. between suicide attempters and control subjects in females only (χ2 R.L., C.H.U. H. Bourguiba de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Collagen Research Unit, = 15.52, df = 5, p = .002). The haplotype S12 had lower frequency in Biocenter and Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, female suicide group (χ2 = 6.11, df = 2, p = .014, OR = 0.49, 95%CI = University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 4Service d'O.R.L., C.H.U. de Mahdia, Mahdia, 0.28-0.87). Our findings indicate the contribution of the SLC6A4 gene Tunisia, 5Service d’Ophtalmologie, C.H.U. H. Bourguiba de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia. to susceptibility for suicidal behaviour in females only. Autosomal recessive nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness segregating in a large consanguineous Tunisian family was mapped to P1006. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) gene polymorphism as chromosome 6p21.2-22.3 defining a new locus. A maximum lod score an ischaemic stroke risk factor in Moscow population of 5.36 at θ=0 was obtained for the polymorphic microsatellite marker T. V. Tupitsina1, I. M. Shetova2, P. A. Slominsky1, V. I. Skvortsova1, S. A. Lim- IR2/IR4. Haplotype analysis defined a 14.5 cM critical region between borska1; D6S1602 (50.75 cM) and D6S1665 (36.4 cM). This interval overlap 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian State with DFNA13, DFNA21 and DFNA31 loci. The entire coding region Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. of COL11A2, responsible of the DFNA13 deafness, was analysed by Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) belong to the basic-helix-loop-helix conformation sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) and sequencing (bHLH)-PAS protein superfamily. HIF-1 is a heterodimeric transcription analysis. No mutation was observed. The genes corresponding to the factor consisting of HIF-1α and HIF-1β subunits. The expression and ESTs mapped to chromosome 6p21.2-22.3 are being screened for the level of the HIF-1α is regulated by protein stabilization under deafness-causing mutations. hypoxic and protein degradation under normoxic conditions. HIF-1α protein levels increase in cells to hypoxia. Under low O tensions, HIF- P1004. Results of a genetic scan of the X-chromosome and 1α enhance the expression of genes encoding erythro2 poietin (EPO), implications for the genetics of synaesthesia vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and some other. Thus, J. E. Asher1,2, J. A. Lamb1, E. Maestrini3, S. Rahman4, H. Waine5, S. Baron-Co- the aim of our investigation was to study the connection between hen2,5, A. P. Monaco1; IVS9-675C>A polymorphism in gene HIF-1 and atherothrombotic 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2De- ischaemic stroke. We enrolled 60 patients with atherothrombotic partment of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, ischaemic stroke from Moscow and controls group consisting of 104 3Universita di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Northwick Park Hospital, London, United healthy persons. Polymorphism of HIF-1 gene was studied by PCR Kingdom, 5Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, and restriction SmiM1. The A allele frequency was higher in controls Cambridge, United Kingdom. group (88,46%) than in patients group (80,83%) and the frequency of Synaesthesia, a neurological condition affecting approximately 0.05% C allele was higher in patients group by 7,63%. C/C genotype wasn’t of the population, is characterised by anomalous sensory perception: a found in patients group although its frequency was 3,85% in controls. stimulus in one sensory modality triggers an automatic, instantaneous, This differences was statistically significant (p = 0.0016 for genotype consistent response in another modality (e.g. sound evokes colour) frequency, 0.043 for allele frequency). Thus, the patients with C/C and or in a different aspect of the same modality (e.g. black text evokes C/A genotypes have higher rate of development of stroke than ones colour). Growing evidence links synaesthesia to cognitive dysfunction; with A/A genotype (OR = 1,99; CI [1.92; 2.03]). Also we analyzed a dyslexia, dyscalculia and cognitive interference from synaesthetic possible association between HIF-1α gene polymorphism and stroke experiences have been reported. Conversely, anecdotal and severity. But it was not found significant correlations between IVS9- experimental evidence has linked synaesthesia to enhanced recall 675C>A polymorphism of gene HIF-1 and brain infarction volume on and absolute musical pitch. 1, 3, 7, 21 days after stroke and stroke severity according to Orgogozo Family studies have shown evidence of a strong underlying genetic scale. predisposition with 48% prevalence among first-degree relatives of synaesthetes and greater risk to female than to male relatives. Pedigree analysis and evidence from previous studies suggests an X- linked dominant mode of inheritance. The results of a genetic linkageGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 299 P1007. Genetic polymorphisms in the CYP1A1, CYP2E1, EPHX1, P1009. Association of the MCP-1 promoter polymorphism with GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1 genes and their relationship to tuberculosis in the Hong Kong Chinese population chronic bronchitis and relapsing pneumonia in children. S. F. Chu1, M. W. Ng1, C. M. Tam2, K. M. Kam3, Y. Q. Song4, Y. L. Lau1, A. K. S. G. Korytina1, D. Yanbaeva2, T. Victorova1; Chiang1; 11Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Ufa, Russian 1Department of Paediatrics & Adolenscent Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Build- Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Ufa, ing, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Russian Federation. of China, 2Tuberculosis and Chest Service, Department of Health, Hong Kong Aim of this study was to investigate the possible roles of the genes Special Administrative Region of China, 3Public Health Laboratory Services functioning in xenobiotic metabolism and antioxidant pathways in the Branch, Centre for Health Protection, Department of Health, Hong Kong Spe- development of severe chronic lung disease in children. cial Administrative Region of China, 4Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Polymorphisms in the genes encoding CYP1A1, CYP2E1, EPHX1, Medicine Building, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Adminis- GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1 were investigated in Tatar children with trative Region of China. chronic lung disease (CLD): chronic bronchitis (N=129) and relapsing Hong Kong is a place of intermediate burden of tuberculosis (TB). pneumonia (N=50) and in ethnically matched healthy individuals The TB notification rate in Hong Kong was 108 per 100,000 persons (N=227) living in Ufa, Bashkortostan by PCR-RLFP method. in 2001. MCP-1 is a chemokines recruiting activated T cells to form The frequencies of *2C allele of CYP1A1 gene were significantly granuloma in mouse M. tuberculosis (MTB) infection, suggesting higher in CLD patients than in the healthy control group (χ2=15.02, MCP-1 involved in the immunopathogensis of TB. A functional P=0.0007). polymorphism (A-2518G) in the promoter region of MCP-1 was shown This allele were associated with higher risk of chronic bronchitis in to influence the transcriptional level of the gene. We hypothesize that children (OR=4.14 CI 95% 1.83-9.53). Similar results were obtained MCP-1 polymorphisms may contribute to human susceptibility to TB. in the relapsing pneumonia patients (OR =3.86 CI 95% 1.34-10.95 Genomic DNA was extracted from frozen EDTA-treated whole blood for*2C allele). The patients with CLD showed significantly elevated samples of TB patients and blood donors. A 930 base pair segment frequencies of the GSTT1 gene deletion (χ2=10.72 P =0.0019). The of the MCP-1 were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and increase of the GSTT1 gene deletion was significant only in the case the genomic variants were detected by restriction fragment length of chronic bronchitis (OR=2.44 95% CI 1.48-4.04). polymorphism (RFLP) using restriction enzyme, PvuII. We performed The distribution of the EPHX1, CYP2E1, GSTM1 and GSTP1 gene a population case-control study to test if the -2518 A/G polymorphism genotypes did not significantly differ between CLD patients and healthy of the MCP-1 gene contributes to the susceptibility to tuberculosis. A subjects. total of 941 individuals, including 447 controls and 494 TB patients, Our findings support that the polymorphisms of the CYP1A1 and was genotyped. The GG genotype and the G allele of the MCP-1 gene GSTT1 genes, which code for enzymes with dramatically altered polymorphism were significantly more common in the TB patients than activities, probably play a substantial part in susceptibility to severe in the controls (P = 0.01). This finding indicates that the -2518 A/G pulmonary inflammation in children with CLD. polymorphism of the MCP-1 gene is associated with TB in Hong Kong Chinese population. P1008. Genetic Heterogeneity of PKD1 & PKD2 Genes In Iran And Determining The Genotype/Phenotype Correlations In P1010. Variability in apo(a) gene control regions and correlation Several Families With Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney to lp(a) plasma levels Disease K. Zídková1,2, V. Kebrdlová2, L. Zlatohlávek1, R. Češka1; R. Radpour1,2, M. M. Haghighi1, M. Ohadi1, A. Hajibeigi1, H. Najmabadi1; 13rd Medical Department, the First Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching 1Genetic Research Center of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences Uni- Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and versity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Genetics and PGD, Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hospi- Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center of Royan Institute, Tehran, Islamic tal, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. Republic of Iran. High lipoprotein(a)[Lp(a)] level is an independent risk factor for Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most development of premature atherosclerosis. Apolipoprotein(a)[apo(a)] common genetic nephropathy. So far, three genetic loci have been is the main determinant of Lp(a) plasma concentration. The aim of our identified to be responsible for ADPKD. Little information is available study was to assign if particular variants of apo(a) gene control regions concerning the pattern of linkage in Iranian population. In the present (promoter, DHII, DHIII enhancers) or their combinations are correlated study the linkage analysis was performed using three pairs of to specific Lp(a) levels. polymorphic microsatellite markers including 16AC2.5-CA (D16S291), Randomly chosen individuals were sorted out into several groups SM7-CA (D16S283) and KG8-CA (intragenic marker at the 3' end of the according to Lp(a) level. The relevant control regions were scanned gene), that were closely linked to the ADPKD1 locus and three pairs for polymorphism occurrence using the DGGE method, fragmentation of selected polymorphic microsatellite markers including YUNCA9 analyses and sequencing. Population frequencies of polymorphic (D4S231), AFM155xe11 (D4S1534) and AFM224x6 (D4S423) which variants were obtained from a sample of 263 individuals by means of were closely linked to the ADPKD2 locus. In parallel, the genomic DNA the RFLP assay and the PCR amplification of specific alleles method. of 150 unrelated healthy individuals were used to determine frequency, The linkage disequilibrium was measured by RelD and Δ statistic. heterozygosity rate and PIC for each marker. Assignment of the disease The DHII enhancer is fully conserved. As we expected, the promoter gene loci was performed following phasing and haplotype construction, site revealed only a restricted variability. The most polymorphic genotype/phenotype correlations were deduced from the constructed region was shown to be the DHIII enhancer, which discloses several haplotypes. Our results showed relatively high heterozygosity rates polymorphisms as well as relatively high frequency of mutations. We and PIC values for some markers, while the most informative markers detected strong linkage disequilibrium among proximal and distal were KG8 and 16AC2.5 for PKD1 gene and AFM224x6 for PKD2 promoter regions and DHIII enhancer sites. Finally, some polymorphic gene. We report here the first molecular genetic study of ADPKD and variants have distinct frequencies among groups with a different range the existence of locus heterogeneity for ADPKD in Iranian population of Lp(a) level. by performing linkage analysis on 15 affected families. Eleven families We conclude from our study that variability in apo(a) gene control showed linkage to PKD1 and two families linked to PKD2 gene. In regions assemble complex haplotypes which could be connected with 2 families, PKD1 markers were common in all affected members but specific range of Lp(a) levels. PKD2 markers were not informative. In our study, a gene frequency of This study was supported by grant IGAMZCR NB-7392-3 and by 0.001 was assumed for PKD1 and 0.0001 for PKD2. MSM0021620807.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 300 P1011. Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD): Identification of a P1013. SPG7 in 139 patients with Hereditary Spastic Paraparesis novel locus in the Arabic population with atypical central pair N. Elleuch1, C. Depienne1, A. Benomar2, G. Besson3, X. Ferrer4, F. Santorelli5, transposition defect G. Stevanin1, A. Durr1, A. Brice1; R. Chodhari1, W. Stannard2, C. O. Callaghan2, C. Wallis3, R. Gardiner1, E. M. 1INSERM U679 and Département de Génétique, Cytogénétique et Embryolo- K. Chung1, H. Mitchison1; gie, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire de Neurogénétique, Service de Neurologie, 1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Lung Health, Hôpital des spécialités, Rabat, Morocco, 3Service de Neurologie. Centre Hos- Leicester, United Kingdom, 3Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, Lon- pitalo-Universitaire, Grenoble, France, 4Service de Neurologie. Centre Hospi- don, United Kingdom. talo-Universitaire, Bordeaux, France, 5Division of Molecular Medicine, Bambino PCD is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterised by Gesù Hospital, Rome, Italy. respiratory tract infections and subfertility. The clinical phenotype Mutations in the SPG7 gene, which encodes paraplegin, are results from dysmotility of the cilia, which is associated with a variety responsible for an autosomal recessive form of pure or complicated of structural abnormalities. The core or axoneme of cilia comprises hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). All 17 exons of SPG7 were a bundle of microtubules and associated proteins including dyneins, analyzed using DHPLC and/or direct sequencing in 139 probands with nexin links and radial spokes. About 50% of patients exhibit laterality pure or complicated HSP and autosomal recessive inheritance, 41 defects, commonly situs inversus, association known as Kartagener with consanguinity. syndrome. We have studied large consanguineous family from We found 50 different heterozygous sequence changes, 40 of which UAE. Parents are first cousins with three affected children (None of were not previously reported. Twenty-six of these variants were found whom have situs inversus) and eight unaffected individuals. They in 22 families and were absent in controls, 18 of them in coding have circular ciliary beat pattern which is consistent with atypical regions. No homozygous mutations were identified, even in the 7 ciliary transposition defect. A genomewide scan identified a region consanguineous families, but 5 out of 22 families had 2 heterozygous consistent with linkage on 6p21.2. Using GENEHUNTER, a maximum changes. multipoint LOD score of 2.9 was obtained between novel microsatellite Two families with complicated HSP with cerebellar signs and onset at C6orf197-CA and D6S282. This critical region spans approximately 6 age 27 and 28, had mutations affecting the protein sequence: 850-851 megabases of genomic DNA. Work is in progress to using comparative delTTinsC and V581del in a Moroccan family and R294H and N730D genomics approach to identify potential candidate genes. There are in a Mauritanian family. 40 known genes in this region of which two have been identified as Two other families had the same association of a missense mutation potential candidates. DNAH8, axonemal heavy dynein8, is an integral (A2T) and a synonymous mutation (L67L) located in cis. One family component of cilium. DNAH5 (protein from same gene family) knock associated 2 intronic variations and one synonymous mutation out mice exhibit phenotype similar to that of human PCD. Another of unknown effect. We also identified 17 families with only one candidate KNSL8, kinesin light chain8, is essential for intraflegellar heterozygous mutation, including 4 with highly probable pathogenic transport of ciliary components. Both genes are expressed in the lungs mutations (M1L, IVS11-1-1457 del9, Q507X, Q82del). and testes. DNAH8 and KNSL8, therefore represents an excellent In conclusion, mutations in the paraplegin gene are rare and represent candidate gene for PCD. There genomic characterisation will be < 2% (2/139) of the families studied. The frequency of rare nucleotidic undertaken before performing mutational analysis in patients. variants was high, however, complicating routine diagnosis. P1012. Association of B lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS) P1014. Association of CTLA-4 Gene Polymorphisms with Coeliac polymorphisms with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) Disease in the Maltese Population M. W. Ng, C. S. Lau, T. M. Chan, H. S. WONG, Y. L. Lau; J. Borg1, C. A. Scerri1, C. Vidal2, A. E. Felice3, A. Xuereb Anastasi1,2; The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative 1Institute of Health Care, University of Malta, Guardamangia, Malta, 2Depart- Region of China. ment of Pathology, University of Malta Medical School, Guardamangia, Malta, Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune 3Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, disease characterized by dysregulation of T and B lymphocytes, University of Malta, Msida, Malta. leading to production of autoantibodies and immune complexes (ICs). Coeliac disease (CD) has an autoimmune component in genetically Recently, a promoter polymorphism of B Lymphocyte stimulator (BLys, predisposed individuals triggered by environmental factor (gluten). also known as BAFF, TALL-1, zTNF4, TNFSF13B) was found to be The disease manifests in partial or total villous destruction of the small associated with higher anti-Sm antibody level in Japanese. BLys intestine with malabsorption and malnutrition. The main environmental promotes B cell differentiation, proliferation and survival. It is located triggering factor is a transglutaminated peptide within the gliadin in chromosome region 13q32, which is a susceptibility locus of SLE. component of gluten, found in wheat. CD has an established HLA In BLys-/- mice, number of B cells, serum IgG and IgM levels were component responsible to 35% of the genetic predisposition, rest decreased and B cell development was blocked at transitional T1 being in the non-HLA region. stage. Higher BLys level was found in SLE patients. Therefore, we 100 coeliac patients were recruited, having predominance of females hypothesized polymorphisms of BLys may affect the susceptibility and over male coeliac patients (3:1, χ2 = 25, p <0.001). The mean age at development of clinical features of SLE in our population. diagnosis for the whole group was 34 years (males 32 years, females Association of 4 promoter single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 34 years, t = -0.65, N.S.). The predominant presenting symptoms (-1283G/A, -871C/T, -514T/C, -353G/C) and 1 intronic SNP (IVS1- were gastrointestinal related. A higher proportion of males reported a 45C/G) of BLys were analyzed in 456 SLE patients and 760 healthy positive family history as compared to females (χ2 = 5.44, p = <0.02). controls, using high-throughput Sequenom Assay. Two polymorphisms found within the CTLA4 gene were studied amongst No significant association was found in the promoter SNPs with a sample of coeliac patients and cord blood DNA samples (n = 187) disease susceptibility. However, frequency of G-carrier of the intronic that acted as the control group. Polymorphisms within the CTLA4 gene SNP IVS1-45C/G was found to be higher in the controls (P = 0.03). In have been associated with other autoimmune conditions and the gene addition, -871CC was over-represented in patients with Anti-nRNP (P plays a very important role in immunoregulatory function. The coeliac = 0.0046; OR 2.38; 95% CI 1.33-4.23). individuals and cord blood samples were genotyped for the -318 C/T This suggests that the allele G of the intronic SNP IVS1-45C/G of BLys and +49 A/G SNPs. No association of the single polymorphisms or the may increase the risk for developing SLE, while -871CC is associated combined haplotypes with the coeliac condition was apparent amongst with the development of Anti-nRNP in SLE patients. the coeliac patients under study. The -318 C allele and the +49 A allele were in linkage disequilibrium amongst the cord blood samples.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 301 P1015. Molecular-genetics analyses of hepatolenticular variable phenotype that includes as cardinal charactheristics: retinal degeneration in Republic of Moldova. dystrophy, polydactily, mental delay, obesity and hipogonadism; other V. C. Sacara; characteristics are renal dysplasia, dental malformations and a specific National Centre of reproductive health and medical genetics, Chisinau, Repub- facies with wide forehead, hypoplasia malar, depressed eyes, large lic of Moldova. nose, fine uplip, everted down-lip, and retrognatia in lateral vision; Hepatolenticular degeneration also known as Wilson Disease (WD) additional features such asthma, situs inversus and diabetes mellitus is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder of copper metabolism, may also be present. Although BBS is rare in the general population characterized by excessive accumulation of copper in the liver, central there is a considerable interest in identifying the genes causing BBS nervous system, kidneys, eyes and other organs, in individuals ranging because components of the phenotype, such as obesity and diabetes, in age from 4 to over 50 years. are very common. The prevalence varies from 1/13.500 among Our 28 patients had presented with predominantly hepatic, Bedouin population to 1/160.000 in Western Europe. Until now eight neurological or psychiatric manifestations. 15 of them were children BBS loci have been described: BBS1 on 11q13, BBS2 on 16q21, BBS3 who have one of liver diseases that clinically manifests at the age of on 3p11, BBS4 on 15q22.2-q23, BBS5 on 2q31, and BBS6 on 20p12, 4-8 years. Neurological and psychiatric findings manifest in 48 % of the BBS7 on 4q27 and BBS8 on 14q32, with evidence for at least one patients. These patients are characterized by combination of tremor, more locus. Recently the theory of the segregation of this disease in an dystonia, dysarthria, dysphagia, chorea, drooling, open-mouthedness, autosomal recessive manner was eclipsed by a new one that presents parkinsonian symptoms - rigidity and bradykinesia and incoordonation. this segregation as a triallelic inheritance. This suggests that multiple Inappropriate behavior sudden changes, difficulty concentrating, alleles may act in concert to cause pathogenesis. We analyzed by deterioration of schoolwork, emotional lability was noted in about 30 PCR-SSCP the involvement of mutation in genes BBS1 and BBS6 in % of the patients. The molecular genetic analysis of the linkage loci 43patients. Several changes have been observed in both genes. Our D13S118 and D13S228 of the ATP7B gene responsible for WD among results indicated that mutation M390R in BBS1 is the most frequent the 41 and 20 patients respectively, allowed to observe a heterozygosity mutation founded appearing in 12% of the disease alleles. of 0,59 (for D13S118) and of 0,80 (for D13S228). Comparing our results with the frequencies from the GDB we established that in our P1018. Exclusion of GDAP1 and MTMR2 genes responsible population the 189 bp., 193 bp. allele are more frequent and 195 bp is for CMT4A and CMT4B1 phenotypes in autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease (AR-CMT). less frequent then in the European population for D13S118 loci. The complex clinical neurological and molecular genetic methods D. Aktas1, B. Akın2, E. Utine1, M. Alikasifoglu1, N. Akarsu2, H. Topaloglu3, E. applied in our study for WD turned out to be very efficient in establishing Tuncbilek1; a correct diagnosis and prescribe a correct treatment, if necessary. 1Department of Genetics, Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of Hematology, Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, P1016. Xenobiotics-metabolizing enzymes genes and cancer: a Turkey, 3Department of Child Neurology, Hacettepe University Medical School, link between polymorphisms and environment Ankara, Turkey. M. Freidin1,2, I. Goncharova1,2, E. Slonimskaya3, S. Kolomiets4, A. Karpov2, R. Charcot-Marie-Tooth diseases are a genetically heterogenous group Takhauov2, V. Puzyrev1; of disorders with autosomal dominant (AD), X-linked recessive and 1Medical Genetics Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Seversk autosomal recessive (AR) inheritance. AD form is the most common Biophisical Research Center, Seversk, Russian Federation, 3Cancer Research one. There is progressive muscular weakness and atrophy affecting Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 4Tomsk Regional Cancer Dispensary, the distal extremities in all types. AR-CMT is less common and clinical Tomsk, Russian Federation. manifestations are usually similar to AD-CMT; however, generally Polymorphisms of CYP2E1, CYP2C19, GSTT1, GSTM1, GSTP1 more severe and has an earlier age of onset. Electrophysiological genes were studied in 287 breast cancer (BC), 102 lung cancer (LC), classification as demyelinating or axonal is generally valid. AR-CMT’s, 72 head and neck cancers patients from Tomsk and in 96 workers are also genetically heterogeneous. More than 11 chromosomal of the largest Russian nuclear energy combine - Siberian Group of loci have been assigned so far. We hereby report two large Turkish Chemical Enterprises (SGCE) with different cancer types. For control, families originating from the same village in central Anatolia with CMT. 221 healthy people from Tomsk and 102 SGCE workers were used. Entire pedigrees structures of the first and second families consisted We found, that “slow” CYP2C19*2 allele was a risk factor for LC and BC of a total of 46 and 18 individuals (7 and 4 affected members) in Tomsk: its frequency in patients was twofold higher than in controls respectively. More than one affected members in the same generation (37.3%, 32.9% and 17.0%, respectively, in LC, BC, and controls; and highly inbred nature of the pedigrees suggested an autosomal p<0.001). Also, GSTT1 “null”-allele homozygozity was associated with recessive inheritance potentially originating from a common ancestor, LC (40.5 % and 23.1 % in LC and controls, respectively; p=0.005). Electrophysiological data of the two affected individuals confirmed In SGCE cancer cases there was an excess of the “fast” CYP2C19*1 demyelinating CMT. Genetic linkage analysis of all reported loci has allele in comparison with controls (84.9% and 65.1%, respectively; been initiated and the candidate regions on 8q13 (GDAP1) and 11q22 p=3.6E-4) and an excess of GSTM1 “null”-allele homozygotes (63.7% (MTMR2) have now been defined. The respective order of the DNA and 39.5%, respectively; p=9.7E-3). Such genetic features should, in markers and candidate genes are: D8S279-(1.26Mb)-D8S2324- theory, correspond to relatively fast accumulation and slow degradation (1.01Mb)-GDAP1-(0.4Mb)-D8S548-(1.9Mb)-D8S541 and D11S4176- of potential carcinogens. At that, there were no differences between (1.49Mb)-D11S1757-(0.87Mb)-MTMR2-(2.25MB)-D11S1390. We frequencies of these alleles and genotypes in SGCE cancer cases used an initial screening panel containing a total of 12 informative and healthy people from Tomsk, suggesting that not yet identified offspring (7 affected) from both families. Neither a common haplotype carcinogen is present at SGCE and it has more significant etiological segregating in autosomal recessive fashion nor a significant lod scores potential in carriers of adverse combination of CYP2C19 and GSTM1 was observed in both regions. Linkage analysis of the remaining loci alleles. are currently underway. Thus, the common polymorphism of CYP2C19, GSTT1, and GSTM1 genes is the risk factor for different cancer types, but its negative P1019. Spectrum of germ-line MLH1 and MSH2 mutations in Austrian Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer patients. phenotypical effects significantly depend on the environment (carcinogens and modifiers presence). B. Wolf1, S. Henglmueller1, E. Janschek1, D. Ilencikova1, C. Ludwig-Papst1, M. Bergmann2, C. Mannhalter3, F. Wrba4, J. Karner-Hanusch2; P1017. Mutational analysis of genes BBS1 and BBS6 involved in 1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Research Laboratories, Bardet-Biedl syndrome in spanish patients Vienna, Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Vienna, I. Pereiro1, C. Ayuso2, M. Baiget3, D. Valverde1; Austria, 3Medical University of Vienna, Clinical Institute of Medical and Chemi- 1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, cal Laboratory Diagnostics, Vienna, Austria, 4Medical University of Vienna, 3Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. Department of Clinical Pathology, Vienna, Austria. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, MIM209900) is a clinical and genetically Background: Germ-line mutations in mismatch repair genes are heterogeneous disorder. BBS patients manifest a complex and associated with the hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancerGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 302 syndrome. The latter is characterized by a susceptibility to cancer of P1022. Autozygosity mapping reveals deletion of MCPH1 the colon, endometrium, small bowel or urothelium at an unusually gene as cause of autosomal recessive mental retardation in young age and with a high degree of penetration in all generations. consanguineous Iranian family Material and Methods: We analyzed 109 individuals from 46 Austrian M. Garshasbi1, M. M. Motazacker1, S. S. Abedini2, S. Esmaeeli Nieh2, S. Ghas- families, who fulfilled the Amsterdam criteria (n=29) or at least one of semi Firouzabadi2, F. Behjati2, K. Kahrizi2, C. Becker3,4, F. Rueschendorf3, P. the Bethesda guidelines (n=17), for mutations in MLH1 and MSH2. Nuernberg3,4, S. Lenzner1, H. H. Ropers1, H. Najmabadi2; Microsatellite instability was determined in the tumors of the index 1Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Genetics Re- persons and affected relatives. search Center, USWR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Gene Mapping Cen- Results and Conclusion: High-grade instability was present in 60.6% ter, Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 4Cologne of the tumor samples from index patients. Twenty-three germ-line Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. DNA sequence variants in 24/46 families and 4 somatic mutations in Autozygosity mapping in 6 affected individuals (4 boys and 2 girls) 3 tumors were detected in MLH1 and MSH2. Fifteen mutations are and their healthy parents of a large Iranian family with severe mental novel. None of the newly identified germ-line variants were found in retardation (MR) and microcephaly has enabled us to map the 100 alleles of healthy control individuals. We were able to characterize underlying gene defect to the short arm of chromosome 8. Linkage two intronic variants (MLH1 c.589-10T>A; MSH2 c.367-1G>A) with analyses yielded a single peak at 8p22-p23.2, with LOD scores of 25 regard to their effect on mRNA. Both created new splice sites that and 4.2, respectively, upon non- parametric and parametric multipoint replaced the regular ones. Germ-line mutations occurred in 44.8% linkage analysis using Merlin and GeneHunter. Thorough examination of the families fulfilling the Amsterdam criteria and in 35.3% of the of the linkage data and haplotypes revealed an abnormal pattern Bethesda patients. The detection of a pathogenic mutation was highly of inheritance for several markers in the middle of this peak, and significantly correlated with microsatellite instability in the tumor DNA analysis of the raw genotyping data identified a 50-480 kb deletion (p=0.007). This study is the first comprehensive report of mismatch encompassing three SNP markers as well as part or all of the MCPH1 repair gene mutations in Austrian HNPCC patients. gene. MCPH1 is one out of only three genes for autosomal recessive MR P1020. Polymorphism of SLAM gene in RA in French population that have been identified to date, and it has been shown to play a G. Chabchoub1, E. Petit2, A. Maalej1, C. Pierlot2, F. Cornelis2, H. Ayadi1; role in chromosome condensation. So far, only two point mutations 1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire Humaine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Genhotel in this gene have been described, and thus, the deletion mutant Laboratoire de Recherche Européen pour la Polyarthrite Rhumatoïde, Evry, found in the Iranian family is the first of its kind. Cytogenetic analysis France. of these patients showed high number (10%-15%) of prophase-like Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a complex genetic disease where cells in routine preparations and poor-quality metaphase G-banding, numerous genetic factors contribute to susceptibility. CD150 signaling and clinically, the patients in this family are also indistinguishable lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM) is a cell surface glycoprotein from previously reported patients. Thus, our findings demonstrate that found on activated B cells, T cells and dendritic cells. contrary to earlier speculations, MCPH1 null mutations are not lethal. In order to investigate the role of SLAM gene in the susceptibility to High-resolution array CGH experiments are in progress to precisely RA, we have analysed three SNPs (rs 2295612, rs 1809963 and rs define the borders of this deletion. 3796504) localised in exon 1, in intron 4 and in exon 7 respectively, using PCR-RFLP technique. Statistical analysis was performed by P1023. Two large French families with late-onset focal dystonia Transmission Disequilibrium Test (TDT). not linked to the three known loci DYT6, DYT7 and DYT13 One hundred French caucasian trio families composed of one affected M. Y. Frederic1, C. Dhaenens2, C. M. Monino1, S. Schraen2, M. Claustres1, S. subject and the two parents were investigated. The mean age at Tuffery-Giraud1, B. Sablonnière2, G. Collod-Beroud1; disease onset was 39.6 years. 1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire, Montpellier, France, 2Laboratoire de Our analysis showed no significant association with RA susceptibility Biochimie et de Biologie Moleculaire, CHU de Lille, Lille, France. (p=0.3079 for rs 2295612; p=0.314 for rs 1809963 and p=0.744 for rs Focal Idiopatic Torsion Dystonia (FITD) is a group of movement 3796504). disorders which is usually autosomal dominant with reduced The lack of association of SLAM gene polymorphism in our study penetrance. Commonly described forms of FITD include cervical suggests that the SLAM gene is not a candidate gene for RA dystonia (spasmodic torticollis), blepharospasm, oromandibular predisposition. dystonia, laryngeal dystonia (spasmodic dysphonia), and limb dystonia (among which task-specific dystonias as writer’s cramp). We studied P1021. Association of VDR gene with thyroid autoimmune two large French families presenting with varied symptoms of adult- diseases in Tunisian population onset FITD: spasmodic torticollis, postural tremor, blepharospasm, A. Maalej1, G. Chabchoub1, M. Mnif2, A. Rebai1, H. Ayadi1; ”task-specific” cramp and dysphonia. The first family, DYST143, is 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service composed of 26 subjects (five definitely affected, two with unclear d'Endocrinologie, CHU Hédi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia. status). The average of onset is 43 ± 20 years. The second family, Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) including Graves’ disease (GD) DYST154, included 21 subjects (three definitely affected, two with and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT) are inherited as complex traits. In unclear status). The average of onset is 32 ± 16 years. DYST 143 and order to detect the susceptibility genes involved in the pathogenesis DYST154 were studied for the three loci known to be implicated in FITD, of these diseases, we analysed the role of vitamin D receptor (VDR) DYT6, DYT7 and DYT13, by genotyping all individuals with markers gene polymorphisms (FokI, BsmI and TaqI) localised in exon 2, intron spanning these regions: DYT6(Tel-D8S1791-D8S532-D8S587- 8 and exon 9. D8S507-D8S1178-D8S1797-D8S1775-D8S279-D8S1475-Cen), Our study concerned one hundred Tunisian patients affected with DYT7 (Tel-D18S59-D18S481-D18S54-D18S1154-D18S63-D18S452- AITDs subdivided into 55 patients affected with GD and 45 affected with D18S1163-D18S464-D18S53-Cen), DYT13 (Tel-D1S2663-D1S450- HT and one hundred unrelated healthy subjects. Molecular genotyping D1S2667-D1S228-D1S507-D1S2697-Cen). Haplotype construction was performed by PCR-RFLP technique and statistical analysis was showed no common haplotype shared among all definitely affected performed using Chi 2X2 test. family members within the 3 regions. These results were confirmed Our results showed significant association of BsmI ‘b’ allele and ‘bb’ by Lod scores < -2 for DYST 143. For DYST154, non informative genotype with autoimmune thyroid diseases (p=2 10-4 and p=7.8 10- Lod scores for DYT 7 were obtained, but the implication of this locus 6) respectively. However, no significant association of FokI and TaqI would lead to a change of status for three subjects currently aged of polymophisms was found between patients and controls (p=0.328 and more than 32 years old and scored as unaffected. Conclusion: These p=0.13) respectively. results illustrate the great genetic heterogeneity of FITD and indicate These results suggest that VDR ‘b’ allele and ‘bb’ genotype have a the existence of one or more unassigned genes for this pathology in potential effect in AITDs. the French population.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 303 P1024. The contributuion of OCTN1/2 variants within the IBD5 P1026. Association of polymorphic variants of human NRAMP1, locus to disease susceptibility and severity in Crohn's disease VDR, IL12B, IL1B and IL1RN genes with tuberculosis and clinical E. R. Nimmo, C. L. Noble, H. Drummond, N. Anderson, I. D. R. Arnott, J. Sat- traits of the disease sangi; A. Rudko1, M. Freidin1, V. Puzyrev1, E. Ondar2; Gastrointestinal Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. 1Medical Genetics Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Multiple- Recent data suggest that variants of the organic cation transport discipline Scientific Laboratory for Medical and Biological Problems, Kizil, Rus- genes OCTN1 (a missense substitution in exon 9) and OCTN2 (a sian Federation. G-C transversion in the promoter) may represent disease causing To analyze associations between genetic markers and tuberculosis mutations which account for the genetic contribution of the IBD5 locus, (TB) and its clinical traits in ethnically homogenous population, on chromosome 5q31, to the development of Crohn’s disease (CD) common polymorphisms of five TB candidate genes were studied: (Peltekova et al(2004) Nature Genetics 36;471-475). NRAMP1 (469+14G/C, D543N, 1465-85G/A, 274C/T), VDR (F/f, B/b), We have genotyped 374 CD, 305 ulcerative colitis (UC) and 294 IL12B (1188A/C), IL1B (+3953A1/A2) and IL1RN (VNTR in second healthy controls (HC) for five SNPs in the IBD5 region, including the intron) in 240 TB patients and 263 controls from Tuva Republic published OCTN1 and OCTN2 variants. Association with disease Only 1465-85G/A polymorphism of NRAMP1 gene was associated with susceptibility and phenotype was determined in CD and UC patients. TB itself and with infiltrative form of the disease (p<0.05), suggesting We have confirmed the findings of Peltekova et al, that the variants just a little impact of the investigated polymorphisms upon the TB of OCTN1 and OCTN2 are associated with CD but not with UC, and development. At the same time, several alleles of NRAMP1 were that the TC haplotype of OCTN1/OCT2 is associated with CD (25.3% associated with severity of the disease, higher percent of segmental v 16%, P=0.0035) when compared to HC. We have also shown that leukocytes and lower percent of monocytes (543N), higher percent this haplotype is associated with disease progression (P=0.049) and of eosinophils (469+14C), lower level of hemoglobin and an increase disease severity, as measured by the need for surgery in CD patients of leukocytes (274T). Polymorphisms of VDR gene were associated (P=0.004). All five SNPs were in strong linkage disequilibrium: in the mainly with rontgenological sings: both b and f alleles were associated absence of the IBD5 risk haplotype we do not see an association of with small size of cavities, whereas f alone was associated with small OCTN1/OCTN2 variants with CD. sizes of infiltrations, and b alone was associated with lung tissue Analysis was also performed to look for epistatic interactions between destruction and decrease of stab leukocytes. A2+ allele of IL1RN gene the IBD5 SNPs and Nod2 variants but no evidence of interactions were was associated with lung tissue destruction and higher erythrocyte found. sedimentation rates, decrease of lymphocytes and thymol tests. Thus, the studied genes NRAMP1, VDR, IL12B, IL1B and IL1RN in P1025. Molecular characterization of nonsyndromic Tuvinians more likely influence the TB endophenotypes (acute phase craniosynostosis reactions, size and degree of lung tissue destruction), but not the S. A. Boyadjiev1, G. X. Zhang1, R. G. Ingersoll1, D. J. Hur1, C. A. Vander Kolk2, disease itself. B. S. Carson3, J. L. Marsh4, J. Panchal5, D. Cutler1, A. F. Scott1; 1McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University P1027. Distribution of cystic fibrosis mutations and the three School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 2Department of Surgery, microsatelite loci in Croatian population Division of Plastic Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, J. Knezevic1, G. Tanackovic1, I. Barisic2, J. Pavelic1; Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins 1Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, Hospita, Baltimore, MD, United States, 4St Louis Children’s Hospital, Section of 2Children's Hospital zagreb, University of Zagreb, Medical School, Zagreb, Pediatric Plastic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Croatia. MO, United States, 5Section of Plastic Surgery, University of Oklahoma Health Cystic fibrosis is one of the most common recessive disorders in Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, United States. Caucasian affecting approximately 1 in 3 000 individuals. More than Nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (NSC) is a heterogeneous condition 1000 mutations have been identified in cystic fibrosis transmembrane of multifactorial etiology with evidence of genetic factors that are yet to conductance regulator gene (CFTR). The most frequent mutation, be identified. Hot-spot mutation analysis for FGFR1 exon IIIa, FGFR2 accounted for about 67% CF chromosomes, is ΔF508. Only four others exons IIIa and IIIc, FGFR3 exon IIIa, and TWIST1 was performed (G542X, N1303K, G551D and W1282X) have frequencies higher than on 147 patients with presumed NSC. Two TWIST1 and two FGFR3 1%; most other are rare and specific for some population subgroups. P250R mutations were identified among 21 patients with coronal The southern-east region of Europe is highly heterogenic and CF synostosis. Another FGFR3 P250R mutation was identified in a patient mutation analysis can be facilitated by association studies between with cloverleaf skull, indicating the extreme variability of Muenke intragenic polymorphic haplotypes. syndrome. Twenty patients with isolated sagittal NSC were analyzed The aim of this study was to reveal the frequency of 29 CF mutations for mutations in the entire coding sequence of FGFR1, 2, and 3, along with the distribution of three polymorphic loci (IVS 1 CA, IVS 8 CA FGFRL1, SNAIL, SLUG, TWIST1 and 2, MSX2, RUNX2, and NELL1. and IVS 17b CA) and associated haplotypes in diseased population. A These genes were selected on the basis of their biologic function and/ total of 41 unrelated CF patients from Croatia were included in this study or involvement in similar phenotypes. No obvious disease causing which revealed 6 different mutations accounted for 68,29% diseased mutations have been identified so far. Familial nonsynonymous SNPs alleles. The most frequent mutation was ΔF508 (58,74%), followed were identified in RUNX2, NELL1, and TWIST1 in several NSC families by G542X (3,66%) and N1303K (2,44%). Polymorphic loci analysis and are being evaluated as disease predisposing variants. The entire revealed high level of heterogeneity, 15 different haplotypes were TWIST2 gene was sequenced for 19 patients with coronal NSC, 17 found. The most frequent associated with CF was 21-23-13 (23,2%), patients with metopic NSC, and 9 patients with lambdoid NSC, but no followed by 21-17-13 (14,6%). ΔF508 mutation was associated with 5 mutations were found. The negative results of the sequencing analysis different haplotypes, 21-23-13 being the most frequent one (31,3%). of these candidate genes demonstrate that more efficient strategies, According to our results it can be concluded that genetic background such as association analysis, are needed for the identification of genes of cystic fibrosis in Croatian population is more complex than it was contributing to NSC. In a study of 34 trios with sagittal NSC using expected. Much more work is needed to get inside the exact population 1048 SNPs in 82 craniofacial genes we established an association to screening with available kits and association studies. chromosome 3q12, which is currently being validated with additional families. P1028. Complex diseases: spurious evidence for a second gene when the effect of the first one is incorrectly specified M. Bourgey, F. Clerget-Darpoux; INSERM U 535, Villejuif, France. Cordell and Clayton (Am J Hum Genet, 2002) proposed to use a stepwise logistic-regression procedure to evidence the effect of several variants in disease susceptibility. They applied this approach to test whether several genes of HLA are involved in the susceptibility to typeGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 304 I diabetes. They concluded that DOB has an additional effect to the CARD15 mutations in the IBD population compared to controls. Unlike one of DRB1 in the disease susceptibility. In the above study, the DRB1 previous studies, the elevated frequency of CARD15 mutations was not gene was considered as a biallelic susceptibility factor. However, such restricted to CD patients but also observed in patients with ulcerative a model was strongly rejected by Clerget-Darpoux and Babron (Genet colitis. Once recruitment and genotyping is complete it is anticipated Epidemiol,1989) who showed that at least a tri-allelic or more likely that this population-based study will provide valuable insights into the a complementation model could explain the HLA DRB1 observations role CARD15 mutations play in the development and progression of in type I diabetes families. Consequently, we study the robustness of IBD. the stepwise logistic-regression in concluding to a second locus effect when the effect of the first one is incorrectly specified. P1031. Novel variants located within the intron 1 and the We simulate, in trio families (one patient and his two parents), a tri- promoter region of the RET proto-oncogene are associated to allelic disease gene and another gene not involved in the disease but the sporadic forms of Hirschsprung disease with linkage disequilibrium between alleles of the two genes. We apply S. Borrego1, R. M. Fernández1, G. Boru2, A. Peciña1, K. Jones2, M. López- the stepwise logistic-regression to these simulated data coding the Alonso3, C. Eng2,4, G. Antiñolo1; disease gene either as tri-allelic or as bi-allelic. 1Unidad Clínica de Genética y Reproducción, Hospitales Universitarios Virgen When the disease gene is correctly coded as tri-allelic, we do not del Rocío, Seville, Spain, 2Human Cancer Genetics Program, Comprehensive conclude to an additional effect of the other gene. In contrast, Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States, coding the disease gene as bi-allelic leads to falsely conclude to the 3Servicio de Cirugía Infantil, Hospitales Universitarios Virgen del Rocío, Seville, involvement of the second gene. This emphasizes the importance of a Spain, 4Division of Human Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio correct modelling in the interpretation of a logistic regression analysis. State University, Columbus, OH, United States. Several studies have demonstrated the existence of specific haplotypes P1029. R121W polymorphism of PAX4 gene and risk of type I of the RET proto-oncogene associated with the sporadic forms of and type II diabetes in Russian North -West population. Hirschsprung disease (HSCR). Based on such studies, Linkage O. S. Romashkina1, M. A. Bogdanova1, M. U. Pavlov2, L. V. Tirtova1, V. I. Lari- Disequilibrium (LD) mapping estimates predicted the presence of a onova1; HSCR locus located at 22-50 kb upstream of codon 45 (exon 2) of 1St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Fed- RET. eration, 2St. Petersburg Pavlov State Medical University, St.Petersburg, Rus- Our aim was the identification of such a founding locus responsible for sian Federation. the majority of the HSCR cases of our series. PAX4 gene plays a crucial role in the differentiation of insulin- After a systematic mutational screening upstream of exon 2 of RET, we producing β-cells in the pancreatic islets of Langerhans. The R121W found a wide spectrum of new polymorphisms, all of them presenting mutation in the exon 3 of PAX4 has been reported to be a possible with a distribution significantly different among cases and controls susceptibility polymorphism to the Type II diabetes in Japanese, (p<0.00002). We identified a specific haplotype clearly linked to HSCR. while the investigation of this and other polymorphisms has shown no Such LD was maintained along the whole region studied until position evidence of linkage with onset of Type II Diabetes in French population -1249. We noted that the ancestral haplotype associated with HSCR and in Ashkenazi Jews. was characterised by the presence of specific SNP’s (at -200 and - In this study we examined the association of R121W mutation with 196) in proximity to the transcriptional start site. Functional modelling Type I and Type II Diabetes in Russian North-West population. using luciferase expression assays revealed a significantly depressed We investigated 121 children (62 girls, 59 boys) aged 3 to 17 with activity for the HSCR-linked haplotype at -200/-196 in comparison with Type I Diabetes and 36 grown-ups (17 women, 19 men) aged 46 to other combinations associated with controls. 95 with Type II Diabetes, complicated with the neuropathy of the lower Our results seem to discard the existence of an HSCR-causing mutation limbs. The control group included 142 healthy children. Identification as it is conceived in the traditional sense, but strengthen the concept of R121W PAX4 gene polymorphism was carried out by means of a specific combination of markers conferring susceptibility to the of polymerase chain reaction followed by restriction.(Shimajiri et. disease in a low penetrance fashion. It would be conceivable that such al.,2001) HSCR-haplotype together with other events occurring in other genes, We didn’t find mutant alleles in Type I and Type II Diabetes no in might give raise to the disease, which would be concordant with a control group. polygenic model for the disease. Thereby, the explored population seems to be homogeneous on R121W polymorphism and this mutation has no evidence of linkage with either P1032. Statistical power of the HapMap study design Type I or Type II Diabetes in the Russian North-West population. C. Zapata1, S. Rodríguez2, L. Rodríguez1, J. Hermida1, E. Sande1; 1Universidad de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2University of P1030. Interim CARD15 genotype results from a population- Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. based study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease The International Haplotype Map (‘HapMap’) Project aims to R. L. Roberts1, R. B. Gearry1, M. L. Barclay2, M. A. Kennedy1; characterize genome-wide SNP-based gametic disequilibrium (GD) 1Christchurch School of Medicine & Health Sciences, Christchurch, New Zea- patterns to facilitate the discovery of genes that influence complex land, 2Christchurch Hospital, Christchurch, New Zealand. human diseases. Here we undertook an evaluation of the statistical Three single nucleotide mutations (R702W, G908R & 1007fs) within power of the study design currently being used by The International the CARD15 gene are well recognized risk factors for the development HapMap Consortium for detecting different levels of GD between pairs of Crohn’s disease (CD) in Caucasians. However, what has not been of SNPs. The initial phase of HapMap is scheduled to genotype 270 clearly established is whether these mutations can also be used to individual samples from four widely distributed geographic regions for predict clinical parameters of CD. To date, almost all studies examining about 600,000 SNPs spaced at approximately 5-kilobase intervals and possible links between CARD15 genotype and clinical course of CD each with major allele frequency (MAF) < 0.95. Sample sizes across have used referral-based patient samples. These studies inherently populations are 45 and 90 individuals. Our observations show that the suffer selection bias as only extreme cases of CD are included. We power of this study design is highly heterogeneous, and often fairly sought to clarify the potential predictive value of CARD15 genotype low under a variety of pairwise GD scenarios. Lack of power can lead by examining all cases of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) within a to erroneous estimates of the size and number of blocks, as well as of geographically defined region of New Zealand. It is hoped that this the total number of haplotype-tagging SNPs (htSNPs) associated with population-based approach will eliminate the selection bias seen in block partitioning. In addition, heterogeneity of power can be a very many previous studies. Since recruitment was initiated in 2003, DNA relevant factor hindering comparisons of block structure both across samples, epidemiological data and clinical history have been collected genomic regions and among samples of varying sizes. Our analyses from 965 IBD patients (out of a total predicted population of 1400). suggest that about 50- to 100-fold larger sample sizes that those CARD15 genotype has been established for 922 of these IBD patients currently used are required to effectively map genome-wide patterns and 200 controls. Interim analysis of CARD15 genotype data has of GD with estimation procedures used in HapMap. found a significant increase in the frequency of individuals with twoGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 305 P1033. Frequency of Interleukin-2 gene promoter polymorphism P1035. Short tandem repeats haplotyping of the HLA region in at position -330 among Iranian patients with chronic hepatitis B preimplatation HLA matching infection in Iran F. Francesco1, S. Kahraman2, A. Biricik1, H. Karadayi2, Y. Saglam2, A. Nuc- L. Najafi1, Z. Hajebrahimi1,2, M. Somi1, M. Agah1,3, M. Zafarghandi1, M. Zali1; citelli1, M. Baldi1; 1Research Center for Gastroentrology and Liver Disease, Tehran, Islamic Re- 1"GENOMA" Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Rome, Italy, 2ART and Reproduc- public of Iran, 2Tarbiat Modarres University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, tive Genetics Unit, Istanbul Memorial Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey. 3Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. Recently, Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) has been Background: The clinical course of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection considered for several indications beyond its original purpose, not only varies from spontaneous recovery to chronic persistent infection to test embryos for a genetic disease, but also to select embryos for depending on viral and host factors. Cytokines play an important a non-disease trait, such as specific Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) role in the defense against viral infection, both indirectly, through haplotypes, related to immune compatibility with an existing affected determination of the predominant pattern of the host response, and child in need of an hematopoetic stem cell transplant. directly, through inhibition of viral replication. Several pro-inflammatory We have optimized an indirect single-cell HLA typing protocol based cytokines such as interleukin-2 (IL-2) and interferon-gamma (IFN- on a multiplex fluorescent polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of short g) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) have been identified as tandem repeat (STR) markers scattered throughout the HLA complex. participating in the viral clearance and the host immune response to The assay was clinically applied in 60 cycles (54 for β-thalassemia, 1 HBV. In this study we have evaluated IL-2 polymorphism in patient with for Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome, 2 for Diamond-Blackfan anemia and 3 chronic HBV infection. for Acute Lymphoid Leukaemia) from 45 couples overall, involving the Material and Method: We investigated -330 IL-2 polymorphism in testing of 486 embryos in combination with a genetic disease and 44 96 patients with chronic HBV infection, 96 subjects spontaneously embryos for HLA matching only. In 848/922 (92.0%) of blastomeres recovered from acute HBV infection, and 95 healthy controls. After a successful amplification was achieved, obtaining a conclusive HLA receiving an informed consent, genomic DNA was extracted from matching diagnosis in 483/530 (91.1%) of the embryos tested. In total, peripheral blood leukocytes by salting-out method. The -330 T/G 74 (15.3%) embryos revealed an HLA match with the affected siblings, polymorphism in the promoter region of IL-2 gene was detected by 55 (11.4%) of which resulted unaffected and 46 (9.5%) have been PCR-RFLP. transferred back to patients in 30 clinical cycles. Nine pregnancies Results: The prevalence of -330 IL-2 polymorphism is shown in the were achieved, 5 healthy HLA matched children have been already table below, obtained by Chi-Square test in SPSS 11.5 software . The delivered and cord blood stem cells were transplanted to 3 affected -330 G promoter allele frequency was 49.4%, 47.3%, and 47.8% in siblings, resulting in a successful hematopoietic reconstruction. chronic, spontaneous recovered patients and controls, respectively. Multiplex PCR of STR markers located in the HLA region has revealed Conclusion: These findings suggest no association between the IL-2 a reliable diagnostic tool for indirect HLA matching evaluation in single promoter polymorphism at position -330T/G and the development of cells. chronic HBV infection (p=0.83). P1036. Growth hormone (GH) receptor codon 437* T allele is The frequency of IL-2 (-330 T/G) polymorphism in studied groups related with GH therapeutic efficacy F. Tsai1, C. Tsai2; T/G or G/G T/T Total 1China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Tai- 73 23 96 chung Healthcare and Management University, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of Chronic 76% 24% 100% China. Objective: Growth hormone (GH) replacement is an effective therapy Spontaneus 70 26 96 for the GH deficient (GHD) children. However, the height gain post Recovered 72.9% 27.1% 100% GH replacement therapy varied differently between individuals. In this study, we aimed to investigate the correlations of the different gene Control 69 26 95 polymorphisms and the GH efficacy. 72.6% 27.4% 100% Patients and methods: A total of 100 GHD children (73 male, 27 female) who accepted one-year GH treatment were included. All 212 75 287 Total individuals were divided into three groups: (1) GHD; (2) 126 children 73.9% 26.1% 100% with familial short stature (FSS, n=126) (3) normal controls (n=100). Gene polymorphisms for GH receptor (codon 437, 488, 492, 540), P1034. Refined mapping of the autosomal recessive non- Janus kinase codon 1305, signal transducers and transactivators of syndromic deafness locus DFNB13 using eight novel transcription -5a codon 812, insulin-like growth factor I codon 230, microsatellites markers IGF binding protein-3 codon 2605, and acid-labile subunit codon I. Benrebah1, S. Masmoudi1, A. Rebai2, H. Ayadi3; 1285 were detected by the PCR-RFLP (restriction fragment length 1laboratoire de genetique humaine faculté de medecine Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, polymorphism). The correlations of these gene polymorphisms and 2Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 3laboratoire de genetique other parameters (sex, age, bone age, parents’ heights, serum GH humaine faculté de medecine Sfax,Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Sfax, concentration, pituitary size, and birth weight) upon first year growth Tunisia. velocity were evaluated. The locus for a type of an autosomal recessive non-syndromic Results: The G homozygote, G/T heterozygote and T homozygote deafness (ARNSD), DFNB13,was previously mapped to 17-CM for GHR codon 437 appeared the lower, moderate, and height growth interval of chromosome 7q34-36.In order to refine this interval, we velocity. Other gene polymorphisms and parameters were non- identified nine dinucleotide repeats in the 7q34 region. To investigate correlated with the GH-therapy efficancy. The G-related genotype and the polymorphism of these repeats, a population study of 74 unrelated allele were also related with higher susceptibility of FSS. individuals from different regions of Tunisia was carried out. Our Conclusions: GHR codon 437* T allele is associated with therapeutic results demonstrated that eight of the nine repeats are polymorphic. efficacy of GH replacement and lower susceptibility of FSS. GHR The average number of alleles at these informative loci was 9.12 with codon 437 gene polymorphism might become a useful marker for the a polymorphism information content of 0.71. Little evidence for linkage pre-treatment evaluation of GHD children. disequilibrium between some markers pairs was found. Haplotype analysis using these markers refined the DFNB13 interval to an area P1037. Screening for DFNB1, DFNB2, DFNB3, DFNB4, DFNB9 of 2.2 Mb between the D7S5377 and D7S2473.In order to identify the and DFNB21 loci in the Iranian patients with autosomal DFNB13 gene, we sequenced and eliminated three candidate genes. recessive non-syndromic hearing loss Other known and predicted genes are being screened for deafness- Y. Riazalhosseini1,2, A. Daneshi3, P. Imanirad1,2, M. Mohseni1, N. Bazazzade- causing mutations. gan1, E. Taherzadeh1, K. Kahrizi1, M. Farhadi3, H. Najmabadi1; 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and RehabilitationGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 306 Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular-Cellular Biology Depart- on chromosome Xq22. About 20% of PMD cases have been shown to ment, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of carry no mutation in the PLP1 gene suggesting involvement of other Otolaryngology, Rasoul Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, loci or mutations in noncoding regions of the PLP1 gene. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. In the present study, we tested the genetic homogeneity of PMD Autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) is the by performing linkage analyses in three PMD families. A common most common form of severe inherited hearing impairment. To date, haplotype was found in all affected individuals, their asymptomatic at least 43 loci for ARNSHL have been identified, indicating it as an mothers, and in two other asymptomatic females in the first family. extremely heterogeneous disorder. These loci are referred to as DFNB X chromosome inactivation (XCI) analysis revealed presence of the loci. Although, mutations at the DFNB1 locus (including GJB2 and same active chromosome in both affected and unaffected individuals GJB6 genes) are the most common cause of ARNSHL in populations ruling out the PLP1 region as the causative locus in this family. The two originating from Northern Europe, we have shown that mutations in affected brothers in the second family and the two affected sisters in GJB2 and the Δ (GJB6-D13S1830) do not play a significant role in the the third family, both born to unaffected parents, were found to inherit etiology of deafness in Iran. In this study, we assess the contributions different maternal haplotypes for the PLP1 locus. The lod score value made by other loci to the ARNSHL genetic load in Iran. We have was less than zero at θ = 0.00 confirming the results of haplotype selected 50 consanguineous families with normal GJB2 and GJB6 analysis. alleles to be screened for linkage to the DFNB2, DFNB3, DFNB4, The exclusion of linkage to the PLP1 locus in these families suggests DFNB9 and DFNB21 loci. Linkage analysis is applied using, in existence of at least one other locus and presence of genetic average, 3 short tandem repeat (STR) markers for each locus. These heterogeneity in PMD. loci have been excluded in 11 families but two families; each has been localized to DFNB4 and DFNB21. We are screening these families for P1040. Genotype distribution and allele frequencies of the mutations in SLC26A4 and TECTA, respectively. Our results suggest endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphism (G894T, that other loci may have the major causative roles in ARNSHL in Iran. 4a4b, T-786C) in women with coronary heart disease (CAD) in St. This hypothesis will be confirmed by including more families and Petersburg, Russia. screening additional loci. M. A. Bogdanova1, A. N. Voitovich1, M. Y. Pavlov2, A. Y. Anisencova1, Y. R. Kovalev1, V. I. Larionova1; P1038. Colobomatous macrophthalmia with microcornea 1St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Fed- syndrome maps to 2p23-p16 region containing CYP1B1, SOS1 eration, 2St. Petersburg Pavlov State Medical University, St.Petersburg, Rus- and SIX2 and 3 genes sian Federation. N. A. Akarsu1, N. H. Elcioglu2, B. Akın1, E. Toker3, M. Elcioglu4, A. Kaya5, T. Endothelial dysfunction is a key step in both initiation and progression Tuncali5; of atherogenesis. Nitric oxide is synthesized from L-arginine by 1Gene Mapping Laboratory, Pediatric Hematology, Hacettepe University, An- endothelial nitric oxide synthase encoded by eNOS gene. Mutations kara, Turkey, 2Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Oph- affecting the eNOS gene, and consequently impairing NO availability, thalmology, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Ophthalmology, Izzet Baysal might contribute to increased predisposition to CAD. University, Bolu, Turkey, 5Medical Genetics, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey. We designed this study to investigate the role of these 3 types of Colobomatous macrophthalmia, microcornea syndrome (MIM polymorphisms in the eNOS gene as predisposing factors to CAD in 602499) is a rare eye malformation manifesting iris coloboma, women. microcornea associated with macrophthalmia and high myopia. The In 79 angiographicaly diagnosed CAD women and in 145 unrelated mode of inheritance is autosomal dominant with full penetrance and controls genotypes of eNOS G894T and T-786C polymorphism were variable expressivity. We recently reported a third family with bilateral determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length involvement of the iris coloboma, microcornea, macrophthalmia and polymorphism analysis and the repeat polymorphism 4a4b was myopia. Additional iridocorneal angle abnormalities causing glaucoma analyzed by polymerase chain reaction. The genotype distribution was were present in three of the affected members (AJMG 2003: 121, 25- in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for all variants. Statistical significance 30). Neither a locus nor a gene responsible for this phenotype were of differences between groups was assessed with χ2 tests. identified as yet. For mapping purpose, we used 13 informative meioses Genotype distribution and allele frequencies in the controls and the (7 phase known) from this kindred. A total of 28 DNA markers selected group of patients (p<0.05). from chromosomes 2q35, 10q24, 11 and 14 were genotyped before We found no significant differences in genotypes and alleles frequency significant lod scores were obtained. In this screen, PAX (2, 3, 6, 9), distribution between patients and population control. Our findings CHX10, SIX1 and SIX4 were clearly excluded. A maximum two point neither support nor exclude possible associations between genetic lod score of 3.61 at 0 cM was obtained with the DNA marker D2S1788. variations in the eNOS gene and the presence of vascular disease Further saturation and haplotype analysis using 22 DNA markers from states. 2p23 region positioned the disease gene between tel-D2S2263 and P- D2S1352-cent within a 22 Mb physical interval. This region contains Genotype Allele Controls n (%) Patients n (%) value a number of candidate genes involving morphogenesis and eye 4b4b development. DNA sequencing analysis of CYP1B1 coding region 4a4b 90 (62.9) 56 (70.9) 0.232 (exons 2 and 3) revealed no causative mutation except two reported 4a4a 45 (31.5)8 (5.6) 20 (25.3)3 (3.8) SNP changes (R48G and V432L). These results indicated that this eye 4a 61 (21.3) 26 (16.5) 0.216 malformation, COMM (COlobomatous Macrophthalmia, Microcornea), 894GG 77 (52.4) 37 (49.3) maps to 2p23-p16 region. The major cause of congenital glaucoma, G894T 58 (39.5) 29 (38.7)9 0.783 CYP1B1, is less likely to be responsible for this phenotype 894TT 12 (8.1) (12.0) 894TT 82 (27.9) 47 (31.3) 0.548 P1039. Genetic Heterogeneity of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease: Exclusion of Linkage to the Proteolipid Protein 1 Locus in Three -786 TT 56 (38.4) 32 (40.5) Affected Families -786 C-786 70 (47.9)20 39 (49.4)8 0.647 CC (13.7) (10.1) B. Bilir1, Z. Yapici2, C. Yalcinkaya2, E. Battaloglu1; 1Bogazici University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, -786 110 (37.7) 55 (34.8) 0.450 Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Neurology, CC Istanbul, Turkey. P1041. Classification of haplotypes based on evolutionary Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is a rare X-linked recessive relationships hypomyelinating disorder of the central nervous system (CNS). The A. Saito, T. Shintani, K. Seto, M. Fujio, S. Mitsuyama, Y. Bito; clinical severity in PMD varies, but the common characteristics include Central Research Laboratory, Hitachi Ltd., Tokyo, Japan. nystagmus, psychomotor retardation, spasticity and ataxia. PMD is primarily caused by mutations in the proteolipid protein 1 (PLP1) gene Increasing numbers of marker loci make the number of different haplotypes too large, which reduces statistical power to an insufficientGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 307 level to detect an association between single haplotype and disease. cases and controls were 36.6 ± 13.5 and 35.0 ± 12, respectively. To obtain the sufficient statistical power, classification of haplotypes After DNA extraction by salting out method, polymorphisms of FokI, is often carried out. Many of the methods of the classification, BsmI, ApaI and TaqI were detected by PCR RFLP method. RESULTS: including hierarchical classification and partitions, require measures of The VDR genotype distribution in patients and controls are shown in similarity. Appropriate choice of the measure is a key factor to obtain Table 1. The frequency of A, B, F, and T alleles are 60.5% vs. 58.7%, good classification. However, the usual measures using the numbers 47.1% vs. 38.9%, 74.6% vs.75.2%, 63.3% vs. 71.1% in cases and of different variant sites do not always reflect the relationships of controls, respectively. Analysis of allelic frequencies revealed no haplotypes. In the present study, we have defined a new measure significant difference between AIH patients and controls for either based on evolutionary relationships between two haplotypes, and of the polymorphisms (P>0.05). CONCLUSION: Our results do not applied the measure to the classification of haplotypes. confirm the association between VDR polymorphisms and AIH. As a The presented approach is performed as follows. We first build the consequence, these polymorphisms cannot possibly be considered as maximum likelihood evolutionary tree from observed haplotypes, by biomarkers, at least, in Iranian patients with autoimmune hepatitis. assuming that each edge represents a single evolutionary change (i.e. Case Control single mutation or recombination). To satisfy this assumption, some Female (%) Male (%) Female (%) Male (%) unobserved haplotypes are incorporated as nodes to complete the AA 16 (30) 7 (39) 25 (34) 11 (31) tree if required. Once the tree is built, the maximum likelihood path Aa 31 (58) 9 (50) 38 (52) 18 (50) between two haplotypes is computed from probabilities of mutation and aa 6 (11) 2 (11) 10 (14) 7 (19) recombination. We define the likelihood as the measure of similarity. BB 9 (17) 5 (28) 14 (19) 3 (8) We then carry out the haplotype classification, by both common Bb 29 (55) 10 (55) 31 (42) 20 (55) hierarchical classification and partitions, using the defined measure. bb 15 (28) 3 (17) 28 (38) 13 (36) We have validated our approach using synthetically created datasets. The datasets are created by mixing haplotypes derived from different FF 34 (64) 6 (33) 39 (54) 23 (64) ancestors. The resultant classification shows good agreement with the Ff 16 (30) 10 (56) 27 (36) 13 36) ff 3 (6) 2 (11) 7 (9) 0 (0) given ancestors. TT 23 (43) 5 (28) 35 (48) 16 (44) P1042. Association of genetic polymorphisms in the ACE, BCHE Tt 22 (42) 12 (67) 34 (47) 19 (53) and APOE genes with Late-Onset Alzheimer Disease in the tt 8 (15) 1 (5) 4 (5) 1 (3) Korean population P1044. DNA typing in Tatar patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus E. Shin1, S. Choi2, Y. Cho1; 1Hanyang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2University of Southern Califor- D. S. Avzaletdinova1, O. E. Mustafina1, T. V. Morugova2; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Center, Russian Acad- nia, CA, CA, United States. emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Apolipoprotein E(APOE) ε4 allele and Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Ufa, Russian Federation. deletion(ACE-D) have been reported to have an association with Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is caused by interplay of genetic Late-Onset Alzheimer Disease(LOAD). Butylcholinesterase(BCHE) is and environmental factors. Human leukocyte antigen system (HLA) also known to be up-regulated in the Alzheimer Disease(AD) brain, has been demonstrated to contribute to T1DM genetic susceptibility. and the increased odds of carrying the K variant of BCHE(BCHE- Tumor necrosis factor α and interleukin 1β activate inducible NO- K) was indicated among AD cases as compared with controls. The synthase in β-cells causing their destruction. So, the genes, encoding objective was to determine if these DNA polymorphisms at the ACE, these cytokines, can be supposed as candidate genes for T1DM. We BCHE and APOE genes that have been linked with different levels aimed to analyze the relationship between HLA class II DRB1 and of enzyme expression, have some effect on the risk of developing DQB1 genes, G-308A polymorphism of tumor necrosis factor α gene LOAD. In order to verify the association of ACE and BCHE genes (TNFA) and T-511C polymorphism of interleukin 1β gene (IL1B) and with AD, as well as its association with APO-E genotype, ACE and susceptibility to T1DM in Tatars of Bashkortostan. We PRC-analyzed BCHE genotyping were performed in subjects with 62 LOAD cases DNA of 111 T1DM Tatar patients and 232 Tatar controls. The HLA- and 190 healthy controls including 68 healthy age-matched controls, DRB1 (investigated in 87 T1DM patients and 97 controls) and HLA- who were previously characterized for APOE gene. After component DQB1 (analyzed in 46 T1DM patients and 22 controls) genomic analyses, ACE-D, BCHE- K and APOE ε4 alleles disclosed the highest typing revealed increased frequencies of DRB1*04 (27.6% vs. 9.3%, prevalence in the AD group (P<0.05). A comparison between the AD P<0.001), DRB1*08 (8.6% vs. 1.0%, P<0.001), DQB1*02 (33.7% vs. and the healthy individuals, both with the APOE ε4 allele, indicated 15.9%, P=0.041), DQB1*0302/08 (26.1% vs. 6.8%, P<0.01) in T1DM an interaction between the BCHE-K and the APOE ε4 allele(p<0.05). patients compared to controls. The frequencies of genotype AG The association of the BCHE-K with AD was limited to carriers of the (32.4% vs. 19.4%, P<0.01) and allele A (19.8% vs. 10.6%, P=0.001) APOE ε4 allele, among whom the presence of the BCHE-K gave an of the TNFA G-308A polymorphism were higher in T1DM patients odds ratio of AD 3.48 (95% C.I. 1.3-9.2). Therefore, ACE D allele (n=111) than in controls (n=232). Concerning T-511C polymorphism seems to be a susceptibility factors for the AD with the APOE ε4 allele, of IL1B gene, we couldn’t find differences of the genotype and allele and the BCHE-K variant acts in synergy with the APOE ε4 allele as a frequencies between T1DM patients (n=60) and controls (n=166). susceptibility genes for AD. Thus, the genetic markers of T1DM in Tatars from Bashkortostan are DRB1*04, DRB1*08, DQB1*02, DQB1*0302/08 of HLA class II DRB1 P1043. Genetic association of vitamin D receptor polymorphisms wth autoimmune hepatitis in iranian patients and DQB1 genes, genotype AG and allele A of G-308A polymorphism of TNFA gene. Z. Motahari1, M. Zafarghandi1, F. Esteghamat1, M. Agah1,2, M. Zali1; 1Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Tehran, Islamic P1045. No association of the polymorphisms (TTTTA) in the Republic of Iran, 2Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. n CYP11A gene and VNTR in the INS gene with polycystic ovary Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is an immune mediated disorder of the syndrome liver with unknown P. Ferk, K. Gersak, N. Teran; etiology.1, 25 dihydroxyvitamin Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Division of Medical Genetics, Uni- D3 has immunomodulatory capabilities which extents its biological versity Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. effects through the vitamin D receptor (VDR).The aim of this study was Hyperandrogenism and insulin resistance are cardinal features of to investigate the association of VDR polymorphisms in Iranian patients polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Among several PCOS candidate with AIH . METHODS: In this study we investigated the frequency of genes, the gene encoding P450scc (CYP11A gene) and the insulin the VDR polymorphisms in a case-control study between 71 patients (INS) gene have been proposed. with AIH (53 female, 18 male), referred to Taleghani hospital (Iran), The aim of the study was to investigate an association of the (TTTTA) and 109 healthy blood donors (73 female, 36 male) matched by sex n microsatellite polymorphism in the CYP11A gene and the minisatellite and age after obtaining the informed consent. The mean age for polymorphism (VNTR) in the INS gene with PCOS.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 308 Forty-six PCOS women and 110 control patients were genotyped for 15 - 74 and 423 control subjects (115 Russians, 168 Tatars and 140 the genetic polymorphisms in the CYP11A and INS gene. Bashkirs) were genotyped using PCR- technique and subsequent The CYP11A allele frequencies were 0.56, 0.27, 0.09, 0.09 in the study enzyme digestion. and 0.55, 0.28, 0.09, 0.09 in the control group, for alleles with four, We found a significant association of the COMT*H/*H genotype with six, eight and nine TTTTA repeats, respectively. Eighty-five percent schizophrenia in different ethnic origins groups (Tatars: OR=2.38, of PCOS patients vs. 80.9 % controls had 4+ genotype (with at least 95%CI=1.19-5.64; Russians: OR=2.83, 95%CI=0.89-4.86; Bashkirs: one copy of the four-repeat-unit allele), and 15.0 % patients vs. 19.1% OR=2.11, 95%CI=1.22-6.23). controls had 4- genotype (without the four-repeat-unit allele). It was shown associations with schizophrenia of the SLC6A4 *S/*S In the INS gene, allele frequencies for class I and class III alleles were genotype (OR=2.04, 95%CI=0.98-4.27), of the HTR2A *A/*A genotype 0.25 and 0.75 in the study vs. 0.30 and 0.70 in the control group. The (OR=2.21, 95%CI=0.97-5.04) and of the DRD2 *N1/*N1 genotype (OR genotype frequencies were 0.54, 0.41 and 0.05 in the study vs. 0.49, = 2.8, 95% CI=1.33-5.92) in Tatars; of the DRD2 *A1/*A2 genotype 0.42 and 0.09 in the control group, for genotypes III/III, I/III and I/I, (OR=2.13, CI=1.02-4.47) in Bashkirs; of the SLC6A3 *9/*9 genotype respectively. (OR=17.28, 95%CI=2.09-3.99) in Russians. None of the alleles or genotypes in the two genes was statistically The obtained results are interesting for greater understanding of differently distributed between the study and the control group of molecular-genetic mechanisms of predisposition to schizophrenia. patients. Our results suggest that the CYP11A (TTTTA) and the INS VNTR P1048. The role of GSTM1, CYP1A1, CYP2D6, APOE gene n allelic variants are not likely to be associated with PCOS in Slovene polymorphisms in sporadic Parkinson's disease development patients. I. R. Gilyazova, I. Khidiyatova, V. Akhmetova, A. Baitimerov, R. Magzhanov, E. Khusnutdinova; P1046. Is p.S1235R a cystic fibrosis causing mutation? Results Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. from a French molecular collaborative study Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a complex disorder with multiple genetic C. Guittar1, E. Girodon2, F. Chevalier-Porst3, C. Dorche3, T. Bienvenu4, V. and environmental factors. The majority of PD cases (80-90%) are Dumur5, M. Blayau6, A. Iron7, H. Mittre8, D. Feldmann9, M. Claustres1, M. Des sporadic. Several causal genes for familial PD have been identified, but Georges1; genetic factors associated with sporadic PD haven’t been ascertained. 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et Chromosomique, Montpellier, France, Genes involved in the process of xenobiotic detoxication can play a 2Laboratoire de Biochimie, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 3Laboratoire causal role in PD development. de Biochimie Pédiatrique, Lyon, France, 4Laboratoire de Biochimie et Géné- We’ve performed analysis of some gene mutations and polymorphisms tique Moléculaire, Cochin, Paris, France, 5Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Biolo- in 200 sporadic PD patients and 210 controls to investigate their role gie Moléculaire, Lille, France, 6Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Rennes, in disease development. France, 7Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Bordeaux, France, 8Laboratoire de Analysis of GSTM1 gene revealed higher frequency of GSTM1- Biochimie B, Caen, France, 9Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Biologie Molécu- deficient genotype in PD patients in comparison with controls that laire, Trousseau, Paris, France. determines low level of enzyme activities in patients. Differences More than 1300 different mutations in the CFTR gene, causing or non- were significant (χ2 = 8,21,P=0,005, OR=1,45, CI=1,20-2,83). These causing disease, have been reported to the CF Consortium. p.S1235R, data confirm the hypothesis that GSTM1 gene, coding antioxidative initially reported in a CF patient with a second mutation on the same enzyme and playing a major role in toxins elimination, may be involved allele, has been found at a frequency higher than that of many other in PD pathogenesis. CYP1A1 and CYP2D6 polymorphisms didn’t mutations and its clinical significance is not clear. show significant differences between patients and controls. The aim of this study is to compare the phenotypes of 57 subjects One of genetic neurodegeneration markers is APOE gene with p.S1235R in order to classify this sequence anomaly. They were polymorphism. It is considered that *E4 allele plays a modifying role referred for diagnosis of classical CF, non-classic or atypical phenotypes in some neurodegenerative diseases, but its role in PD development or carrier screening. The entire coding and flanking regions and six remains contradictory. We found significant differences in allele microsatellite markers were analyzed. 8 patients (3 CF, 4 CBAVD, 1 and genotype distribution between patients and controls (χ2=10,43; ICP) and 2 normal individuals were compound heterozygotes for a P=0,005). Analysis of *E4 allele distribution showed significant severe CFTR mutation. p.S1235R was found to be associated on the differences between PD patients of Tatar origin and control group of same allele with a stop mutation (p.R785X) in 2 CF patients with a Tatars (χ2=7,45, P=0,007, OR=4,12), PD patients of Russian origin severe disease and TG13-T5 in the 4 CBAVD patients. The CF patient and control group of Russians (χ2=5,60, P=0,01, OR=4,82). So, allele with a mild phenotype, the ICP patient and the normal subjects did not *E4 is a risk factor of PD development in Tatars and Russians in the carry a complex allele. Volga-Ural region. Our data suggest that another CFTR mutation may influence the pathogenic effect of p.S1235R in severe classical CF or in patients P1049. Association of VDR Bsm I Polymorphism with Prostate with CFTR-opathies. However, p.S1235R alone, when combined Cancer in Turkish Population in trans with a second CF mutation, may be associated with a mild M. H. Müslümanoğlu1, O. Çilingir1, S. DEMİR1, M. Turgut2; phenotype or with absence of clinical manifestations. 1Osmangazi University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, Es- kisehir, Turkey, 2Osmangazi University Medical Faculty Department of Urology, P1047. Association analysis of neurotransmitter systems of Eskisehir, Turkey. brain genes with paranoid schizophrenia in different ethnic OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between VDR gene Bsm I origin groups from Russia polymorphism and prostate cancer in Turkish population. A. G. Zainullina, G. V. Sharaphutdinova, D. A. Gaysina, E. B. Jurjev, E. K. METHOD: DNA was extracted from whole blood of 39 prostate Khusnutdinova; cancer cases and 52 controls by Qiagen DNA extraction kit.The area Institute of Biochemistry & Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. of which Bsm I polymorphism located in 8th intron of VDR gene was Schizophrenia is a chronic debilitating psychotic mental disorder that amplified by PCR.Subsequently, PCR products have been digested affects about 1 percent of people. by Bsm I restriction enzyme and results were analysed by agarose gel The aim of our study was to test a contribution of 9 polymorphisms electrophoresis. of some candidate genes in paranoid schizophrenia, namely -5- RESULTS:Bsm I BB, Bb and bb genotype frequencies are not HTTLPR and VNTR in the serotonin transporter (SLC6A4), MspI in significiantly different between cases and controls(P>0,05). Bsm the serotonin 2A receptor (HTR2A), VNTR in the dopamine transporter I Bb genotype frequencies were 56.4 % and 57.6% , BB genotype (SLC6A3), TaqIA and NcoI in the dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2), A/ frequencies were 20.5 % and 26.9%, bb genotype frequencies were G polymorphism in intron 13 in the monoamine oxidase A (MAO A), 23% and 15.3 % in cases and controls respectively. Hsp92II in the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and NlaIV in the CONCLUSION: Our findings did not confirm an association between brain - expressed protein (G72) genes. VDR gene Bsm I polymorphism and prostate cancer in Turkish 351 patients (131 Russians, 112 Tatars and 108 Bashkirs) with population. paranoid schizophrenia (diagnosed as having ICD-10) at the age ofGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 309 P1050. Association of VDR Gene Apa I Polymorphism with Bone sites (BMD1=Lumbar Spine) and (BMD2=Femoral Neck)] of the cases Mineral Density in Obese Postmenopausal Women were compared. Tt heterozygote subjects had the highest lumbar spine O. Çilingir, M. Özdemir, T. Basmacı; BMD ( 098 ± 0.099 g/cm2) compared to TT and tt subjects, whereas no Osmangazi University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, Es- significant differences were seen between the genotypes and lumbar kisehir, Turkey. spine BMD. However, tt subjects had the highest femoral neck BMD To investigate the incidence of Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism (0.81 ± 0.05 g/cm2) and look for the association between VDR gene polymorphism Apa I genotypes and BMD of obese postmenauposal women in Turkish P1053. Association of genetic polymorphisms in ERa , ERβ and population. Genomic DNA of 87 nonosteoporotic and 72 osteoporotic AR genes with osteoarthritis subjects was extracted from whole blood. In order to detect the Apa I A. Tsezou, P. Fytili, T. Karahalios, K. Malizos; polymorphism in the 8th intron, genomic DNA was amplified by PCR and University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece. PCR products were further digested by Apa I restriction enzyme. The To elucidate the possible role of genetic variation in the estrogen fragments were detected by agarose gel electrophoresis. Comparison receptor α (ΕR-α), β (ΕR-β) and androgen receptor (AR) genes of genotype frequencies of osteoporotic and nonosteoporotic obese with osteoarthritis of the knee, the (TA)n , (CA)n and (CAG)n repeat postmenopausal women was done by using Chi square method. polymorphisms of ER-α , ER-β and AR genes were studied. Differencies in bone density at different skeletal sites (BMD1=Lumbar A case-control cohort of 94 patients with idiopathic knee osteoarthritis Spine) and (BMD2= Femoral Neck) between the osteoporotic and who had undergone total knee replacement (TKR) and 123 nonosteoporotic obese postmenopausal women defined by VDR unaffected controls were used. The (TA)n, (CA)n and (CAG)n repeat genotypes were determined by using variance analysis and BMD polymorphisms of the human ER-α, ER-β and AR genes were analyzed values of subjects with different genotypes were compared by t-test. It using an automated DNA analysis method. was observed that the frequency of aa genotype in osteoporotic obese An association was observed between (CA)n and (CAG)n repeat postmenopausal women were increased compared to nonosteoporotic polymorphisms in ER-β and AR genes and knee OA(p=0.000) and subjects. When we compared BMD-VDR gene polymorphism p=0.007), while no association was found between (TA)n repeat genotype relationship within the group, nonosteoporotic obese Aa polymorphism in the ER-α gene and knee osteoarthritis (p=0.3). The postmenopausal women had 0.98 ± 0.094g/cm2 lumbar spine BMD mean number of (CA)n repeats was higher in OA individuals than and it was higher compared to AA subjects who had 0.92 ± 0.060 g/ controls, while the mean number of (CAG)n repeats was lower in men cm2.No significant differences were detected between the geneotypes with OA compared to controls. This was reflected in a significantly and lumbar spine BMD in the osteoporotic obese group. However aa increased odds ratio (3.5 and 3.6 respectively) of knee OA in individuals subjects had the lowest femoral neck (0.67 ± 0.082 g/cm2). possessing alleles with more than 21 CA repeats, and having LL or SL genotypes, (95% CI 1.7-7.5, p=0.001) compared to individuals with P1051. Evaluation of RET variants and haplotypes as the SS genotype, while men having the L genotype of CAG repeats susceptibility factors for sporadic medullary thyroid cancer (OR=0.3) had decreased odds ratio for knee OA compared to those R. M. Fernandez1, A. Peciña1, G. Antiñolo1, E. Navarro2, S. Borrego1; with S genotype (95% CI 0.9-16, p=0.063). 1Unidad Clinica de Genetica y Reproduccion, HHUU Virgen del Rocio, Seville, An association between (CA)n and (CAG)n repeat polymorphisms Spain, 2Servicio de Endocrinología, HHUU Virgen del Rocio, Seville, Spain. in the ER- β and AR genes and knee osteoarthritis was found in Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a neoplasm of the C cells of individuals of Greek descent. the thyroid comprising about 5-10% of all thyroid malignancies. About 25% of all MTCs are believed to be inherited and grouped in a cancer P1054. Prevalence of pathogenic mutations in an Italian clinical syndrome known as Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), series of patients with familial dementia while the remaining 75% of all MTCs are sporadic (sMTC). While L. Benussi1, R. Ghidoni1, L. Barbiero1, S. Signorini1, L. Gigola1, F. Nicosia1, A. germline gain-of-function mutations in the RET proto-oncogene cause Villa1, A. Paterlini1, R. Rossi1, E. Sina1, P. M. Rossini2, G. Binetti1; hereditary MTC, the molecular mechanisms leading to the sporadic 1NeuroBioGen Lab Memory Clinic IRCCS CENTRO SAN GIOVANNI DI DIO, forms remain obscure. Brescia, Italy, 2Neuroscience Department AFaR Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Our group had evidence about the existence of a low-penetrance Roma, Italy. susceptibility locus for sMTC in linkage disequilibrium with RET Mutations in the genes encoding for presenilin 1 and 2 (PSEN1, variants S836S and IVS1-126G>T, and probably in 5´ with respect PSEN2), amyloid precursor protein (APP), and tau (MAPT) are both variants. To identify such locus, we performed a case-control associated with familial forms of dementia. Mutations in PSEN1 study analysing a wide spectrum of RET variants in the 5´ region of account for more than 50% of Alzheimer Disease cases with positive the gene. On the other hand, since an over-representation of G691S/ family history (FAD), while mutations in PSEN2 are more rare. Familial S904S variants in sMTC patients had been previously reported by cases with an autosomal dominant inheritance have been estimated other groups, we sought to determine if such association was also to have a frequency of APP mutations around 10-15%. Thirty to 50% present in our series. of Familial Frontotemporal dementia (FFTD) cases are explained by No differences were obtained among cases and controls in the MAPT mutations. distribution of all the variants tested. The whole findings would Our aim was to investigate the prevalence of pathogenic mutations suggest that the major genetic events contributing to the appearance in an Italian clinical series of patients with a positive family history of sMTC may reside in several different RET loci. In this way, we for dementia: we analyzed 13 patients with FAD and 40 patients with could hypothesise about the existence of at least two sMTC loci, FFTD. In the FAD group, we found two novel presenilin 2 mutations linked to S836S-IVS1-126G>T, or to G691S-S904S respectively. The (M239I, T122R) and one previously reported mutation in presenilin characterization of those loci is a challenge, and would have important 1 (P117L). No mutations were detected in APP gene. In the FFTD repercussions in the management of medullary thyroid carcinoma. patients group that we analyzed, we found just a patient bearing any mutation in the MAPT gene (tau-P301L).The communication of the P1052. Association of VDR Gene Taq I Polymorphism with Bone presence of mutations occured during genetic counselling sessions. Mineral Density in Obese Postmenopausal Women The frequencies of mutations in PSEN1, PSEN2 and APP genes were M. Özdemir, M. H. Müslümanoğlu, O. Çilingir, A. Uludağ; 7.14%, 14.28% and 0% and, restricting the analysis to early onset FAD Osmangazi University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, Es- cases, the frequencies were 14.28%, 28.57% and 0%, respectively. kisehir, Turkey. Our data suggest that other gene mutations or additional genetic factors The relationship between VDR gene Taq I genotypes and BMD might be responsible for disease onset in most cases of dementia of obese postmenopausal women in a Turkish population was with a positive family history. The non-homogeneous distribution of addressed in this study.Following the extraction of genomic DNA of pathogenic mutations might depend on a genetic drift. 87 nonosteoporotic and 72 osteoporotic subjects, Taq I polymorphism was analysed in the 9th exon of the gene. The genotypes and their relations with the clinical features [bone density at different skeletalGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 310 P1055. Mutation in Lysosomal Acid Phosphatase (Acp2) causes Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Med- cerebellum malformation by disrupting the synaptic transport ical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. A. U. Mannan1, J. Landgrebe2, W. Engel1; Abstract Patients with sporadic Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) show an 1Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany, 2Institute of Biochemistry II, increased allele sharing at markers in the 5' region of the RET locus, Göttingen, Germany. indicating the presence of a common ancestral RET mutation. In a Lysosomal acid phosphatase (Acp2) is a phosphoesterase of the previous study, we found a haplotype of six SNPs that was transmitted endosomal-lysosomal compartment. Its expression in brain is to 55.6% of our patients, whereas it was present in only 16.2% of the considerably higher as compared to basal level ubiquitous expression. controls we used. Among the patients with that haplotype, 90.8% had We have identified and characterized a mouse mutant named nax, it on both chromosomes, which gave a much higher increased risk of which exhibit complete impairment of the cerebellar cytoarchitecture. developing HSCR than when the haplotype occurred heterozygously. In nax cerebellum the precursor external granule cells fails to migrate In order to more precisely define the HSCR-associated region and to form inner granular layer, Purkinje cell layer is disorganized, and to identify candidate disease-associated variant(s), we sequenced Bergmann fibre structure is disrupted. Ultrastructural analysis of nax the shared common haplotype region from 10 kb upstream the RET cerebellum showed lysosomal storage bodies in cerebellar cells. gene through intron 1 (in total 33 kb) in a patient homozygous for the By linkage analysis and positional cloning, we identified a missense common risk haplotype and in a control individual homozygous for the mutation (G244E) in Acp2 gene in nax mice DNA. Identification of Acp2 most common non-risk haplotype. A comparison of these sequences as the gene mutated in nax mice provides a valuable model system revealed eighty-four sequence differences. Eight of these eighty-four to study the role of Acp2 in cerebellum homeostasis and lysosomal variations proved to be in regions highly conserved among different storage disorder. vertebrates and within putative transcription factor binding sites. We To decipher the underlying mechanism leading to cerebellum therefore, considered these as candidate disease-associated variants. malformation currently our studies are focused on differential gene Subsequent genotyping of these eight variants revealed a strong regulation in P5 stage nax cerebellum through microarray and real disease association for six of the eight markers. These six markers time RT-PCR analysis. We have identified 79 genes, which are either also showed the largest distortions in allele transmission. Interspecies up-regulated or down-regulated in P5 stage of nax cerebellum as comparison showed that only one of the six variations was located in compared to normal wild-type siblings. Our initial analysis suggests a region also conserved in a non-mammalian species, making it the that genes involved in synaptic vesicles and its transport are affected most likely candidate HSCR associated variation. in nax mice cerebellum. Further analysis on this differentially regulated gene is in progress. P1058. Association analysis of serotonin transporter promotor region polymorphism 5-HTTLPR with personality risk factors P1056. Polymorphism of the ACE(I/D), AGT (T174M), NOS1 (C/T) associated with pathological gambling in Han Chinese and NOS3 (VNTR, C691T, C774T, G894T) genes in patients with population insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus W. Y. Chau1, R. Y. L. Chen1, P. Sham2; T. Kosyankova1, N. Tarasenko2, E. Kondratieva2, V. Puzyrev1; 1Department of Psychiatry, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special 1Medical Genetics Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian Administrative Region of China, 2Institute of Psychiatry, King's College, United Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Kingdom. Polymorphisms of NO-synthases and renin-angiotensin-aldosteron Family and twin studies have demonstrated evidence for genetic system genes could be one of the earliest marker of vascular damages influence in the etiology of pathological gambling (PG). Recent in diabetes, when exacerbated hormonal and metabolic changes molecular genetic studies suggest possible association of serotonin accompanying with activation of oxidative processes and infringement transporter gene (5-HTTLPR) with PG. At the same time, researchers of the nitric oxide cycle exist. have attempted to identify core personality trait of PGs. It is believed An analysis of I/D polymorphism in the ACE gene and AGT (T174M), that people having certain personality traits maybe more vulnerable NOS1 (C/T) and NOS3 (VNTR, C691T, C774T, G894T) genes in to the development of PG and the strongest evidence exists for patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM, n=113, impulsivity. However, the manifestation of PG should not be simply 170 families) was carried out. 122 men without clinical symptoms of induced by either genetic or personality risk factors, but more likely cardiovascular diseases and diabetes were studied as control. the interplay between the two. This association study aims to examine There was an excess of the allele B of NOS3 gene (VNTR polymorphism) the interrelationship between PG related personality risk factors and patients with diabetic nephropathies (χ2=4.189, p=0.041) and excess 5-HTTLPR in Han Chinese male. of the allele A in patients with ketoacidic conditions (χ2=5.304, 134 PGs and 104 normal controls with mean age 41.84 and 40.80 years p=0.021). An association between the polymorphism and IDDM was (p=0.324) were genotyped for 5-HTTLPR. Personality risk factors were revealed: relative risk (RR) for NOS1 locus was 1.600 (p=0.007); RR identified through Zuckerman’s Sensation Seeking Scale, Barratt’s for NOS3 C691T was 1.990 (p=0.010); RR for NOS3 C774T was 2.230 Impulsivity Scale and Chinese Personality Assessment Inventory. PGs (p=0.007). Also, significant contribution of I/D polymorphism of ACE as compared to controls have significantly higher sensation seeking, gene in a variability of some parameters of lipids metabolism, body impulsivity, emotionality, external locus of control, pathological mass index and insulin doze was found out. Using Transmission/ dependence and antisocial scores. No significant differences were Disequilibrium Test (TDT), we found an association between the observed in genotype (p=0.963) and allele frequency (p=0.794) of NOS3 774C allele and IDDM (TDT=4.2, p=0.016). Finally, the 174T 5-HTTLPR between the two groups. Also, no association was found allele of AGT gene and the D allele of ACE gene were associated with between 5-HTTLPR genotype and any of the personality risk factors diabetic retinopathies (TDT=3.765, p=0.048; TDT=8.522, p= 0.004, identified. Since majority of gambling studies were based on Western respectively). samples, this negative finding for 5-HTTLPR as risk factor for PG may Thus, NOS-genes and renin-angiotensin-aldosteron system genes are be attributed to ethnic difference or our modest sample size. However, the risk factors for IDDM and the disease-associated traits. the core personality traits identified can be good endophenotypes for further genetic studies. P1057. Identifying candidate Hirschsprung disease associated RET variants. P1059. Frequencies of HFE mutations in Russia G. M. Burzynski1, I. M. Nolte2, A. Bronda1, K. K. Bos1, J. Osinga1, I. Plaza A. V. Lavrov, A. A. Baev, I. K. Surkova; Menacho1, B. Twigt1, S. Maas3, A. S. Brooks4, J. B. G. M. Verheij1, C. H. C. M. Research Center for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. Buys1, R. M. W. Hofstra1; Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is autosomal-recessive iron 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, The Netherlands, overload characterized by high polymorphism which embarrasses Groningen, The Netherlands, 2Department of Medical Biology, University of diagnostics. Estimation of the HFE main mutations’ (C282Y and H63D) Groningen, The Netherlands, Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Department of frequencies among HH and non-HH patients is necessary to determine Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, role of the mutations and possibility to use them for diagnostics. We selected 54 patients matching clinical and laboratory criteria of HH.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 311 Average age was 44,3 years (SD=13,3). Male/female ration was 3,5:1. 3A/4A (50.9±8 years), 4A/4A (52.5±7 years), 3.T-1370G - TT (51±8 The second group (n=567) was formed from patients of the following years), TG (50.8±8.6 years), GG (50±4.5 years). Comparing the ages departments: gastroenterology, hepathology, cardiology, endocrinology of ESRD in patients with different 3A/4A and K198N haplotypes we (diabetes). Average age was 50,1 years (SD=26,8). Male/female found significantly lower age of ESRD (47.1 ±5.9 years) in the carriers ration was 1:1,2. Only 39 blood samples from 54 HH patients were of 4A allele in combination with 198N allele than in the carriers of 4A available for genotyping: CC - 87,2%; CY - 7,7%; YY - 5,1%; HH - allele homozygous for K198 allele (52.9±9.4 years) (t-test, p< 0.01) 51,3%; HD - 46,1%; DD - 2,6%. The second group was genotyped: CC and in the carriers of 198N allele homozygous for 3A allele (53±9.8 - 94,5%; CY - 5,1%; YY - 0,4%; HH -70,9%; HD - 26,6%; DD - 2,5%. years) (t-test, p< 0.05). C282Y frequency is surprisingly low among HH patients compared to We found deleterious effect of the combination of 4A allele and 198N European data. Controversy H63D is relatively frequent among HH allele of EDN1 gene was observed in APKDK individuals. patients. Allele frequencies in the second group does not differ from Supported by grants IGA MZ CR 7733, 7633 and ZZ MSMT most population data in Russia and in Europe as well. However, H63D 0021620806 frequency is slightly higher in Russians. Though pathogenic genotypes (YY, DD, CY/HD) are quite frequent, clinically overt HH is very rare. Our P1062. Decreased frequency of the TNF2 allele of TNF-α -308 data supports low penetrance of C282Y mutation and demonstrates promoter polymorphism is associated with lacunar infarction also that it is necessary to search for new loci responsible for HH in B. Blaskó1, P. Harcos2, J. Laki1, Z. Széplaki3, Z. Szolnoki4, M. Kovács1, B. Me- Russia. Population screening of HH is not reasonable and use of HFE- legh5, G. Széplaki1, G. Füst1; genotyping should be restricted to very rare cases. 1Semmelweis University, 3rd Department of Medicine Research Lab, Budapest, Hungary, 2St. Imre Hospital, Department of Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, P1060. Association analysis of the candidate genes RELN, 3Semmelweis University, Neurological Clinical Group, Budapest, Hungary, LAMB1, CUTL1 and NRCAM for autism on chromosome 7q 4Pándy Kálmán County Hospital, Department of Neurology and Neurophysiol- N. H. Sykes1, J. A. Lamb1, G. Barnby1, E. Bonora2, A. J. Bailey3, A. P. Monaco1, ogy, Gyula, Budapest, Hungary, 5University of Pécs, Department of Medical Int. Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium(IMGSAC), www.well.ox.ac. Genetics and Child Development, Pécs, Budapest, Hungary. uk/~maestrin/iat.html; Background and Purpose- Enhanced release of proinflammatory 1The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, cytokines may contribute to the pathogenesis of stroke. We examined 2Unit di Genetica Medica, Bologna, Italy, 3Section of Child and Adolescent Psy- whether G to A promoter polymorphism in the tumor necrosis factor-α chiatry, University Department of Psychiatry, Oxford, United Kingdom. gene at position -308 affects the stroke risk. Autism is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder that usually occurs due Methods- We genotyped 336 patients with ischemic stroke and 273 to a complex genetic predisposition. It is characterized by impairments healthy controls for this polymorphism. We divided patients into different in reciprocal social interaction and communication, and restricted and groups by both modified TOAST and Oxfordshire Community Stroke stereotyped patterns of interests and activities. Previously linkage Project (OCSP) classification and determined the allele frequency in for autism has been found to chromosome 7q, which has been every group. replicated by many groups. Four candidate genes present in chr7q22- Results- Patients with ischemic stroke had a significantly (p<0.001) 31 have been screened for mutations and association with autism in decreased (0.115) frequency of the -308 A (TNF2) allele compared to the IMGSAC sample; RELN, LAMB1, CUTL1 and NRCAM. Several the healthy controls (0.196). When patients were classified according missense mutations were found in RELN and new coding variants in to a modified TOAST classification, reduction of the TNF2 allele was CUTL1 and LAMB1. Evidence for association was found with LAMB1 found to be restricted to the small vessel pathology, lacunar infarction and NRCAM. group (allele frequency: 0.068, p=0.003 compared to the healthy To further analyse these genes an additional 31 SNPs were genotyped controls). The result was confirmed by OCSP classification, where in 239 Affected Sibling Pairs from the IMGSAC sample. Association the TNF2 frequency in lacunar infarct (LACI) patients (0.065) was analysis was carried out using the Transmission Disequilibrium Test significantly (p=0.002) decreased. (TDT) and some evidence for association was found with LAMB1 Conclusions- Our results suggest TNF2 allele have a protective effect (p<0.05). TRANSMIT was also run to test for haplotype transmission but against the development of lacunar subtype of ischemic stroke. no significant results were obtained. 192 controls were genotyped and their allele frequencies compared with unrelated affected individuals P1063. No evidence of association of CXCL2 haplotypes with the in a case-control analysis, which was carried out using Fishers exact development of sepsis test. A significant result was found for a SNP in CUTL1 (p<0.001). N. Maca-Meyer1, C. Flores1, L. Pérez-Méndez2, R. Sangüesa3, E. Espinosa3, Although a denser marker map was used in this study to cover the J. Villar1; candidate genes in question it was not exhaustive. To definitively 1Research Institute, Hospital Universitario N. S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de exclude these genes further genotyping of an even greater number of Tenerife, Spain, 2Primary Health Care, Hospital Universitario N. S. de Cande- markers would be required. laria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 3Department of Anesthesiology, Hospital Universitario N. S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain. P1061. The influence of endothelin gene polymorphisms on the Sepsis is the most common cause of acute lung injury (ALI). It has been progression of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease shown that inflammatory and immune responses, cell proliferation, (adpkd) chemotaxis and blood coagulation are the five key biological J. Reiterova1, J. Štekrova2, M. Merta1, D. Kmentová1, V. Tesař1; processes involved in the development of sepsis and its complications. 1Nephrology Dept of General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, CXCL2 (MIP-2 alpha) has been recently catalogued as a candidate 2Dept of Biology and Genetics of General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech gene for ALI based on gene expression profiles derived from multiple Republic. animal models of lung stress. The encoded protein acts as a potent A significant phenotypical variability is observed in ADPKD. Endothelin- chemoattractant, and the abolishment of its effects leads to lung injury. 1 (ET-1) is a promoting factor in renal diseases. We examined the In this study we have analysed the ~2.1 kb sequence of the CXCL2 influence of single-nucleotide polymorphisms of EDN1 - K198N, 3A/4A gene in 66 septic patients and 364 unrelated population-based controls and T-1370G - on the progression of ADPKD. from the Canaries (Spain). We first measured linkage disequilibrium in 205 ADPKD patients (pts) were analyzed. Pts were divided in three 86 chromosomes using two previously described SNPs (rs3806792 groups: 1. 48 pts with ESRF later than in 63 years (slow progressors), and rs9131) and a insertion/deletion of [ATTT] motif (rs5859414), and 2. 83 pts with ESRD between 45-63 years and 3. 74 pts with ESRF found no evidence of historical recombination in the region. We then before 45 years (rapid progressors). DNA samples were genotyped for used one of these SNPs (rs3806792) along with a newly described three single-nucleotide polymorphisms of EDN1. The EDN1 genotype polymorphic short tandem repeat (D4S3454) to obtain known phased distribution showed no differences between slow progressors and haplotypes and analysed their association with the disease. We rapid progressors. We did not find significant differences in the ages of tested the overall haplotype frequency distribution between cases end stage renal disease (ESRD):1.K198N - KK (51.9±8.8 years), KN and controls and found no statistically significant differences. These (50.4±8.6 years), NN (51.8±7 years), 2. 3A/4A - 3A/3A (51.7±8 years), preliminary results suggest that CXCL2 genetic variants may notGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 312 contribute substantially to the development of sepsis. P1066. Genetic variants in both cysteinyl leukotriene 1 and 2 Supported by grants 37/02 and 44/02 from FUNCIS, 99/0361 and receptors are independently associated with atopy and asthma 02/1158 from FIS, and 209/03 from DGUI. in a Tristan da Cunha isolate. M. D. Thompson1,2, N. Zamel1,3, A. S. Slutsky1,4, C. M. Lilly1,5, M. Burnham1,6, K. P1064. LBP genetic variants and susceptibility to sepsis A. Siminovitch1,7, D. E. C. Cole1,8; C. Flores1, N. Maca-Meyer1, L. Pérez-Méndez2, R. Sangüesa3, E. Espinosa3, 1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Dept. of Laboratory Medicine and J. Villar1; Pathobiology, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Cana- 1Research Institute, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de da, 4St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Pulmonary and Critical Care Tenerife, Spain, 2Primary Health Care, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Cande- Division, Bringham & Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 6Dept. of laria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 3Department of Anesthesiology, Hospital Pharmacology, Toronto, ON, Canada, 7Depts. of Medicine, Immunology and Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain. Medical Genetics and Microbiology, University of Toronto, Samuel Lunenfeld Sepsis is the most common cause of acute lung injury, organ and Toronto General Hospital Research Institutes, Toronto, ON, Canada, 8Dept. dysfunction and death in critically ill patients. Previous association of Clinical Pathology, Sunnybrook & Women's College Health Sciences Centre, analyses using candidate genes support that variants in the genes Toronto, ON, Canada. involved in inflammation play an important role in the development of Asthma is a complex disorder with heterogeneous etiology, while atopy sepsis. Prior studies used LBP (the protein recognises Gram-negative is a well-defined phenotype of immune hyperactivity that often underlies bacteria endotoxin) as a candidate gene. However, the positive results asthma. The genes encoding the cysteinyl leukotriene 1 (CysLT at 1 found for a variant in the earliest study have not been replicated. Our Xq13.2) and 2 (CysLT at 13q14) receptors have been implicated in 2 aim in this work is to study the association of LBP gene with sepsis atopy, in part because they bind the cysteinyl leukotriene ligands that using a “haplotype tagging” approach. On the basis of their gene mediate atopic asthma, and they are targets for anti-leukotrienes used distribution and frequency, 11 SNPs were selected and assembled to treat asthma. We analyzed the association of single nucleotide into two SNaPshot multiplex reactions for the analysis. Four of them polymorphisms (SNPs) of CysLT (p.G300S) and CysLT (p.M201V) 1 2 were tagging identifying more than 90% of European haplotypes. After with either asthma or atopy phenotype. We genotyped the Tristan da haplotype reconstruction with PHASE 2.1 program, we assessed Cunha isolate with an excess prevalence of atopy (47% of 112 subjects), whether differences between cases and unrelated population-based and smaller cohorts of asthmatics (n=25) and non-asthmatics (n=25) controls from the Canaries (Spain) exist through an omnibus likelihood from the Boston area. The frequencies of the 300S and 201V variants ratio test statistic for the overall haplotype frequency profile, with were 15% (25/167 X chromosomes) and 13% (30/224 alleles) in the significance empirically determined via randomisation tests. Our Tristan da Cunha sample, and 4% (3/70 X chromosomes) and 0% in results are suggestive of the existence of sepsis susceptibility alleles the Boston sample, respectively. While the trend in the Boston sample on one or some sets of chromosomes exhibiting the allelic patterns of did not reach significance, both CysLT and CysLT SNPs were highly 1 2 haplotypes studied. correlated with atopy in the Tristan da Cunha sample (r=.35, p<.001 Supported by grants 37/02 and 44/02 from FUNCIS, 99/0361 and & r=.33, p<0.001, respectively). However, only the CysLT variant 2 02/1158 from FIS, and 209/03 from DGUI. was predictive of asthma (r=.21; p=0.045). All double heterozygotes were atopic, and further analysis of joint genotype is consistent with P1065. Vitamin D receptor allele combinations and FokI an additive model (r=.45; p<.001), whether corrected for age, gender polymorphism influence genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes and smoking, or not. This is the first description of association between in Dalmatian population CysLT genotypes and atopy/asthma phenotypes. Further testing in 1/2 V. Boraska1, T. Zemunik1, V. Skrabic2, I. Marinovic Terzic1, M. Peruzovic1, J. larger panmictic populations is warranted. Terzic1; 1School of Medicine, Split, Croatia, 2Clinical Hospital Split, Split, Croatia. P1067. Association of CARD15 gene variants with pediatric INTRODUCTION: Vitamin D and it's receptor gene (VDR) have inflammatory bowel diseases immunomodulatory properties and influence insulin secretion. Recent A. Ferraris1,2, B. Torres1,2, D. Knafelz3, B. Papadatou3, A. Barabino4, P. Lionetti5, data indicate VDR polymorphisms to be associated with type 1 G. L. de' Angelis6, G. Iacono7, G. D'Amato1,2, P. Fortina8, M. Castro3, B. Dal- diabetes mellitus (T1DM) and therefore we studied FokI polymorphism lapiccola1,2; in exon 2. 1CSS Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, MATERIALS AND METHODS: 134 individuals with T1DM and 232 Rome, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University control subjects from the Dalmatian population of South Croatia were La Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 3Gastroenteroly Unit, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Hospi- examined. FokI genotyping was performed by PCR amplification tal, Rome, Italy, 4Pediatric Gastroenterology, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, followed by FokI endonuclease restriction. Data were analysed 5Department of Pediatrics, University of Florence - Meyer Hospital, Florence, using the chi-square test. On the basis of our previous research, Italy, 6Department of Pediatrics, University of Parma, Parma, Italy, 7Pediatric haplotype analysis of VDR polymorphisms BsmI, ApaI and TaqI and Gastroenterology, Di Cristina Hospital, Palermo, Italy, 8Clinical Genomics Labo- their association with susceptibility to T1DM have been investigated. ratory, Center for Translational Medicine, Department of Medicine, Thomas Estimates of haplotypes were made using the statistical program Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States. EH+. Three major polymorphisms of CARD15 gene (R702W, G908R, RESULTS: FokI polymorphism showed unequal distribution L1007fsinsC) have been associated with Crohn’s disease (CD), but not (p=0.0049) between T1DM cases and controls indicating ff genotype with ulcerative colitis (UC), in different Caucasian adult populations. We to be associated with development of T1DM and Ff genotype to be analysed the three variants in 198 pediatric Italian patients affected by a protective one. BsmI, ApaI and TaqI polymorphisms were found to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), including 112 with CD and 86 with be in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) (p<0.0001). Bat haplotype UC, with an onset at ≤ 18 years. As a control group, 115 unaffected was observed 11 times in controls and not once in T1DM individuals individuals were analysed. Comparison of allele frequencies between (p=0.0007) and therefore revealed it's possible protective role. patients and controls demonstrated an independent association No significant LD between FokI and any other polymorphism was for all three variants with CD, but not with UC. After combining the detectable but, nevertheless, bf haplotype was significantly more three polymorphisms, 39.3% of CD patients carried at least one frequent in T1DM patients (p=0.0168) while the aF haplotype was CARD15 variant compared to 5.2% of controls (P<10-9; OR=11.75; observed more times in controls (p=0.0413). 95% CI=4.75-29.06). Eleven CD children (10.1%), but only one UC CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that VDR FokI polymorphism and no control subjects carried two CARD15 variants (homozygotes and several VDR allele variants are associated with susceptibility to or compound heterozygotes). The combined frequency of CARD15 T1DM in the Dalmatian population. variants was higher also in UC children compared to controls (14% vs 5.2%; P=0.029; OR=2.95, 95% CI=1.06-8.2). Analysis of genotype- phenotype correlation did not find any significant clinical difference between CARD15 positive and negative patients in both CD and UC groups. The present study shows that the major CARD15 variants areGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 313 strongly associated with pediatric onset CD in Italy. A possible role for also in patients suffering with NHL and, all around the world, it was these polymorphisms in pediatric UC is also supported; however, this confirmed except for patients studied in North Europe and some areas association needs to be confirmed in larger cohorts. Present results do of North America. In Italy, different groups showed prevalence ranging not predict a role for CARD15 genotypes in the clinical presentation of from 15 to 30%. The goal of this paper is to establish if a polymorphic pediatric IBD patients. gene encoding for cytokine could be a predisposing factor for this condition. To do this, we analyzed the distribution of the polymorphism P1068. The detection of genotyping errors and pseudo-SNPs via of IL-10 -1082 G/A in 63 patients, not infected with HCV, with NHL deviations from Hardy Weinberg equilibrium (NHL/HCV-) and in 50 patients, infected with HCV, with chronic active S. M. Leal; hepatitis, with NHL, (NHL/HCV+). In this study, for the first time we Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. show that irregardless of age, sex, virus genotype and/ or severity of Genotype error can greatly reduce the power of a genetic study. For chronic liver disease a significant prevalence of IL-10 -1082 GG genotype family data, genotype error can be assessed by examining marker seems to influence the occurrence of NHL in HCV infected patients. data for non-Mendelian inconsistencies, closely linked markers for In fact the distribution of the IL-10 -1082 G/A polymorphism was different double recombination events and consistency of duplicate genotypes. between NHL/HCV+ and NHL/HCV- patients (P=0.028). The frequency For case-control data, duplicate samples are genotyped, and controls of the IL-10 -1082 G allele (P=0.019) and the frequency of the IL-10 -1082 GG are tested for deviations from Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE). genotype against overall genotypes (IL-10 -1082 GA/AA) were significantly Although genotyping errors can cause deviations from HWE, these higher in NHL/HCV+ patients as compared with NHL/HCV- patients deviations are usually small, and the power to detect them is low (P=0.014). except for high rates of genotyping error and/or large sample sizes. An additional problem is that even when deviations from HWE are P1071. N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit NR1 gene (GRIN1) detected for marker loci, without additional experimentation it is not and temporal lobe epilepsy: no evidence of association analysis possible to unequivocally implicate genotyping error as the cause. The for genetic variant in promoter region of the gene power and sample sizes necessary to detect deviations from HWE for I. Manna1, A. Labate1,2, A. La Russa1, E. Le Piane3, F. Condino1, R. Cittadella1, SNP data was examined for a variety genotyping error and pseudo- U. Aguglia3, A. Quattrone1,2, A. Gambardella1,2; SNP models. For the majority of the genotyping models examined, the 1Institute of Neurological Sciences- CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neu- power is poor to detect deviations from HWE. For example, for 1,000 rology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Regional Epilepsy Centre, controls, if an allele with frequency of 0.1 fails to amplify for 28% of the Reggio Calabria, Italy. heterogeneous genotypes producing a sample error rate of 0.05, the Glutamate is the principal excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain. power is 0.51 to detect a deviation from HWE at an alpha level of 0.05. Excitatory amino acids are very important in the synaptic transmission On the other hand, the detection of deviations from HWE for pseudo- of the brain, and for this reason does not surprise that such excitatory SNPs (paralogous and ectopic sequence variants) for the majority of pathways is involved in the onset and propagation of epileptic seizures. models examined produced a power of >0.8 for sample sizes as small Recently, in epileptic animal models has been shown that increased as 50 individuals. excitability might be due to an abnormal glutamatergic transmission involving altered properties of ionotropic N-methyl-D-aspartate P1069. SimPed: A simulation program to generate haplotype and (NMDA) receptors. genotype data for pedigree structures Here, we aim to assess if the human non lesional temporal lobe B. Müller-Myhsok1, K. Yan2, S. M. Leal2; epilepsy (TLE) is associated to changes in the subunit NR1 of the 1Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 2Baylor College of Medi- GRIN1 receptor which is the common subunit of the NMDA receptor. cine, Houston, TX, United States. We screened single nucleotide polymorphisms (G1001C) of the With the widespread availability of SNP genotype data, there is greater upstream region using a case-control study. The alleles distribution of interest in analyzing pedigree haplotype data. For microsatellite markers the G1001C polymorphism were analyzed in 266 Italian patients with due to their physical distance intermarker linkage disequilibrium is non-lesional TLE (146 women and 120 men; mean age 47.3±17.8) usually low; however, for dense maps of SNP markers, there can be and in 374 healthy controls (182 women and 192 men; mean age strong linkage disequilibrium between marker loci. Linkage analysis 49.2±21.9) matched for age, sex and ethnicity. The DNA study was (parametric and nonparametric) and family-based association studies performed using a PCR amplification followed by digestion with a are currently being carried out using dense maps of SNP marker loci. restriction endonuclease. Monte Carlo methods are often used for both linkage and association No statistical significant differences in the 1001G/C genotype and studies; however, to date there are no programs available which allele frequencies between patients with temporal lobe epilepsy and generate haplotype and/or genotype data consisting of a large number controls (p=0.053 and p=0.032, respectively) were found. Neither of loci for pedigree structures. A program, SimPed has been developed association was found in sex, age at onset and duration of disease to quickly generate haplotype and/or genotype data for pedigrees after dichotomization of the data in terms of carrier or non-carrier for of virtually any size and complexity. Marker data either in linkage C allele. disequilibrium or equilibrium can be generated for > 10,000 diallelic In conclusion, our results do not suggest any association between or multiallelic marker loci. Haplotypes and/or genotypes are generated the GRIN1 polymorphism (G1001C) and non lesional temporal lobe for pedigree structures using specified genetic map distances and epilepsy. haplotype and/or allele frequencies. The data generated by the SimPed program is useful for a variety of analysis purposes, including P1072. Association of paraoxonase 1 gene polymorphisms with evaluating methods that estimate haplotype frequencies for pedigree Type 2 diabetes mellitus data and estimating empirical p-values for linkage and family-based M. Flekac, J. Skrha; association studies. 3rd Department of Internal Medicine, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles Univer- sity, Prague, Czech Republic. P1070. The influence of interleukin-10 (IL-10) promoter Background: Low antioxidant activity of paraoxonase (PON1) in patients polymorphism on the occurrence of non Hodgkin Lymphoma with Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), where an increase in oxidative (NHL) in subjects infected with Hepatitis C Virus (HCV). stress was detected, has been traced, in part, to polymorphisms within M. Capasso1, M. Persico2, E. Persico2, V. Aglio1, D. Spano1, C. Marzocchella2, promoter and coding regions. A. De Renzo2, F. Cimmino1, A. Iolascon1; Aim: To investigate the association of the four single-nucleotide 1Ceinge Advanced Biotecnology, Napoli, Italy, 2University Federico II, Napoli, polymorphisms (SNPs) of PON1, Met-Leu 55 (M55L), Gln-Arg 192 Italy. (Q192R) in coding and in promotor region (-107C/T, -907G/C) with HCV along with chronic liver disease is also considered a causative DM. agent of other clinical pathological conditions which testify the possible Design and methods: Case-control association study. Distribution of direct pathogenic role of the virus in several different cell types including the SNPs was determined by PCR-RFLP. The allele and genotype hepatocytes and leukocytes. Prevalence of HCV is significantly higher frequencies were calculated in DM (n=109) diagnosed by the WHOGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 314 criteria and in healthy controls (n=70). There were no differences by ~3 fold. We have also investigated a number of hormonal gene between these groups in gender and age distribution. Following variants. These studies have implicated variants in both the estrogen biochemical parameters were measured. Fasting plasma glucose receptor and progesterone receptor genes. Furthermore, interaction (FPG), concentration of triglycerids (TG), LDL - cholesterol (LDL-C), analysis revealed that individuals who carried at least one copy of glycated hemoglobin (FPG 9,29±3,09 mmol/l, TG 1,91±0,32 mmol/ both hormone receptor susceptibility genotypes were even more l , LDL- C 3,22±0,78 mmol/l, glycated hemoglobin 6,65±1,76 in DM likely to suffer from migraine, indicating that these genes also appear vs. FPG 4,95±0,49 mmol/l, TG 1,43±0,63 mmol/l, LDL-C 3,00±0,66 to act synergistically. These overall results indicate that migraine is a mmol/l in controls).Normal urinary excretion of albumin was found in complex polygenic disorder, involving multiple and possibly interacting all patients. gene components. Results: The allele frequencies of L55M were L= 0,583, M= 0,417 in DM vs. L= 0,850, M= 0,150 in controls, in Q192R were Q= 0,849, R= P1074. Hypertension with and without metabolic syndrome 0,151 in DM vs. Q= 0,543, R= 0,457 in controls. There were detected presents as distinct clinical and genetic entities in French- statistical significant differences in allele and genotype frequencies Canadians between studied groups in L55M (P=0,01) and Q192R (P= 0,01), O. Seda1, E. Merlo2, J. Tremblay1, U. Broeckel3, M. Kaldunski3, D. Gaudet4, G. whereas polymorphisms in promotor region differed statistically Bouchard5, F. Gagnon6, G. Antoniol7, P. Brunelle1, A. Gurau1, F. Gossard1, T. nonsignificant. A. Kotchen3, Z. Pausova1, S. N. Orlov1, R. Wan1, M. Jomphe5, J. Pintos1, A. W. Conclusion: These data indicate that PON1 SNPs in coding area could Cowley, Jr.3, P. Hamet1; be regarded as genetic factors associated with DM. 1Research Centre CHUM, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 2École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 3Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, P1073. Performance evaluation of the SNPlex Genotyping WI, United States, 4Complexe hospitalier de la Sagamie, Chicoutimi, PQ, Cana- System using population validated SNPs da, 5Université du Québec à Chicoutimi, Chicoutimi, PQ, Canada, 6University of M. H. Wenz, J. C. Briggs, Y. Wang, A. R. Tobler; Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 7University of Sannio, Benevento, Italy. Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. Hypertension is generally perceived as a constitutive attribute of In addition to producing highly accurate and reliable data, a high- the metabolic syndrome, though not a requisite one in either of the throughput SNP genotyping system must offer speed and flexibility, definitions by the World Health Organization or the National Cholesterol paired with low cost. We have recently introduced the SNPlex™ Education Program’s Adult Treatment Panel III. While hypertension Genotyping System that utilizes multiplexed OLA/PCR and capillary without metabolic syndrome has received little attention recently, its electrophoresis to genotype SNP information encoded in genomic DNA. genetic determinants and cardiovascular outcomes may be distinct In each multiplex reaction, up to 48 SNPs are interrogated in parallel, from hypertension within the context of metabolic syndrome. using a set of SNP-specific ligation probe pools. After purification, all In 120 hypertensive French-Canadian families from the Saguenay-Lac- specific ligation products are amplified simultaneously with one pair St-Jean region of Quebec, we identified and compared those with a of universal PCR primers. Biotinylated amplicons are captured in high density (>50%) of metabolic syndrome (HDMS, n=25) vs. families streptavidin coated microtiter plate wells. A set of universal fluorescently with no metabolic syndrome in propositus sibships (LDMS, n=23). labeled probes, called ZipChute™ reagent, is hybridized to single- Using a method of layered founders, we assessed the separability of stranded amplicons. After selective hybridization, the ZipChute probes hypertensive HDMS and LDMS families in terms of specific ancestry. are eluted for subsequent detection on Applied Biosystems 3730/xl We compared > 40 hemodynamic, metabolic and anthropometric and 3130xl Analyzers. The GeneMapper® Software determines the traits and their heritability. The LDMS hypertensives showed distinct SNP genotypes, which are displayed in cluster plots with associated features in comparison to hypertensives in HDMS families, e.g. genotype data. We will present data generated by utilizing a simplified significantly lower volume of extracellular water (19.0±0.5 vs. 16.2±0.5 SNPlex System assay workflow that validate the SNPlex System L, p=0.0001) and higher Na+/K+ cotransport in erythrocytes. Heritability for high throughput SNP genotyping. Accuracy and precision data estimates suggested higher heritability of blood pressure, extracellular generated by different sites, obtained both with 3730/xl and 3130xl water and several metabolic traits in LDMS families. At the depth of 14 Analyzer platforms, will be shown for a 48-plex SNP set, the SNPlex layers (generations), the ancestors of LDMS families showed a higher System Control Pool. This set consists of an optimized ligation probe specificity of genetic contribution to the recent generation in contrast set that addresses 48 population validated SNPs. This control pool with HDMS families (75% vs. 55%). In summary, hypertension with together with a genomic DNA panel is designed for use in quality and without features of metabolic syndrome constitutes distinct entities control, trouble shooting, and training purposes. in terms of genetic and clinical characteristics, possibly with specific cardiovascular outcomes. P1073. The role of vascular and hormonal gene variants in Supported by: NIH SCOR, IHRT CardioGEn, CIHR MT-1183, migraine susceptibility TACTICS. L. R. Griffiths1, N. J. Colson1, R. A. Lea1, M. P. Johnson1, S. Quinlan1, J. Mac- Millan2; P1075. The effects of complex unaccounted pedigree structure 1Genomics Research Centre, Gold Coast, Australia, 2Queensland Clinical Ge- on homozygosity mapping netics Service, RBH, Brisbane, Australia. Y. S. Aulchenko1,2, F. Liu1, S. Elefante1, C. M. van Duijn1; Migraine is a common and debilitating neurological disorder 1Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Institute of Cytology & characterised by headpain, nausea, vomiting, photophobia and Genetics SD RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. often severe, neurological disturbances. Although calcium channel Genetically isolated populations have proven to be a useful tool in and ATPase gene variants have been implicated in the rare familial mapping genes underlying complex human disease. One of the most hemiplegic migraine sub-type, the exact number and identity of genes powerful tools, which could be applied for gene identification in such involved in the more common types of migraine have yet to be defined. populations, is homozygosity mapping. When performing homozygosity Genetic linkage studies in our laboratory have so far revealed migraine mapping, one may typically account only for a few of the shortest susceptibility regions on chromosomes 19, X and 1, emphasising the loops, in part because more extended genealogic information may heterogeneity of the disorder. In order to identify the molecular basis be missing, or due to computational complexities arising in analysis of migraine, neurotransmitter-related pathways have been the main of larger pedigrees. Ignoring part of pedigree information might lead focus of studies. However vascular and hormonal disturbances also to false positive findings. We evaluated the effect of underestimation occur in migraineurs, as highlighted by alterations in cerebral blood of the inbreeding on type I error of homozygosity mapping using flow and hormonal triggers of migraine. We have recently investigated heterogeneity LOD scores. In general, the inflation of type I errors a number of genetic factors involved in these functions. These is sensitive to the extent to which true inbreeding is underestimated studies have provided evidence implicating variants in the methylen and to marker allele frequencies. We investigate type I errors using etetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) and angiotensin I-converting simulated data and real data on Alzheimer disease patients identified enzyme (ACE) genes, as interacting determinants of migraine, that in a recent genetically isolated population. Using this data, we show increase total migraine risk by ~2-fold and migraine with aura risk which scenario may lead to a real hazard in gene-identification. WeGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 315 work out recommendation on how to avoid inflation of type I error and P1079. PED 5 pedigree drawing software over-estimation of obtained LOD scores. H. Plendl, A. Caliebe, W. Grote; Institute of Human Genetics, UKS-H, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany. P1077. The E-selectin S128R polymorphism in patients with PED is a fast interactive pedigree drawing software for Windows 98 ankylosing spondylitis from Romanian population (R) and above. PED was introduced at the ESHG Conference in 1997 O. Popa1, R. Sfrent-Cornateanu1, L. Popa2, M. Bojinca3, C. Bara1; and now has a continuously growing user community with researchers 1Department of Immunology and Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine, Univer- and clinicians in over 30 countries worldwide. PED complies with the sity "Carol Davila", Bucharest, Romania, 2"Grigore Antipa" National Museum of "Recommendations for standardized human pedigree nomenclature" Natural History, Bucharest, Romania, 3"I.C. Cantacuzino" Hospital, Bucharest, proposed by the PSTF (Bennet RL et al, Am J Hum Genet 56:745- Romania. 752,1995). Apart from fully sizable printed output, pedigrees can be As an active participant in inflammatory processes, the vascular exported as Windows metafiles (WMF) to virtually any Windows Office endothelium produces E-selectin in response to proinflammatory or drawing program. cytokines. The E-selectin gene S128R (serine to arginine) Among other enhancements, PED 5 now can fetch family information polymorphism has not been investigated yet in relation with ankylosing from a data file with LINKAGE or CSV (comma separated values) spondylitis (AS). format, where each line describes an individual by the pedigree ID, We have tested a limited number of AS patients (N=35) and an the individual's ID, the IDs of his/her father and mother, the gender, ethnically matched control group (N=40) from Romanian population the phenotype or affectation status, and any other data related to for S128R polymorphism in E-selectin gene. In the case group, 24 the individual (like haplotypes, or clinical characteristics). Imported (68.6%) individuals exhibited wild type E-selectin 128S genotype, 7 pedigrees can virtually be of any size; also descendants with a second, (20%) were heterozygous S128R and 4 (11.2%) were homozygous third, or even tenth partner or any descendants of the probands' for the 128R allele. In the control group, the distribution was 26 (65%) ancestors will be correctly displayed. Currently, marriage loops are not homozygous 128S, 13 (32.5%) heterozygous S128R and 1 (2.5%) handled; they must be edited in the edit window. Pedigree charts can homozygous 128R. also be exported to these standard file formats. With each open/edit/ The distribution of the E-selectin genotype in our control group showed save cycle, all IDs will be preserved. So pedigree data can easily be Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, which verified that the control group was imported into a spreadsheet, a database, or further be used in linkage statistically appropriate, and that the genotyping protocol was error- calculations or risk assessment. A demonstration program is available free. at www.medgen.de/ped. The genotype distribution in the AS group was statistically significant different (χ2=5.74) from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. P1080. The MTHFR C677T variant is associated with an Disease association with S128R was assessed by single-locus and increased risk of migraine with aura in Canarian patients. single-locus allele based χ2 tests for a 3x2, respectively 2x2 contingency P. Tejera, N. Ruiz, S. Méndez, F. Montón; table, to compare each genotype/allele frequency in patients with AS Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario Nª Sª de La Candelaria, Santa versus control individuals. No significant association was found in Cruz de Tenerife, Spain. either situation. Migraine is a complex neurovascular disorder that affects The Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium observed in AS group could be approximately 12% of the Caucasian population. Although the produced by random sampling errors due to small population size pathophysiological events that underline migraine are not fully (estimated frequency of AS in general Caucasian population is 0.1- understood, migraine neurobiology may be explained as the result of 0.2%). disturbances in neurological pathways and cerebral circulation. High serum homoscysteine levels have been shown to produce endothelial P1078. Contribution of polymorphisms Ile50Val and A1188C in injury, altering the cerebrocirculatory system. The 5,10-methylenetetr IL4RA and IL12B genes into predisposition to hepatofibrosis ahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) enzyme is involved in homocysteine development in patients with viral hepatitis metabolism. The MTHFR C677T genetic variant has been correlated I. A. Goncharova1, M. B. Freidin1, L. E. Dunaeva2, E. V. Beloborodova2, E. I. with a reduced enzyme activity and hyperhomocisteinemia. Beloborodova2, V. P. Puzyrev1; In this study we determined the prevalence of the MTHFR C667T 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Sibirian medical polymorphism in migraineurs and test its association with migraine state university, Tomsk, Russian Federation. susceptibility using an unrelated case-control design. Seventy four High prevalence of viral hepatitis and severe complications of the patients with migraine headache (50% with aura, MA, and 50% without disease such as cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma, cause the aura, MOA) and 118 non-affected controls were recruited from the interest to study genetic basis of susceptibility to viral hepatitis. Genetic same geographical area (Canary Islands, Spain) and genotypes for status of the host organism is one of the main factors whish determine the MTHFR C677T were determined by PCR-RFLP. individual reaction to the viral infection and particularities of disease Our results show that the MTHFR 667T allele was over-represented in course. We studied the association of polymorphisms Ile50Val in IL4RA the migraine group compared to the control group, principally among gene and A1188C in 3’-UTR region of IL12B gene with clinical features the MA subtype (43.2% vs 29.7%) (χ2 = 3.98, p=0.04). A comparison of of chronic viral hepatitis and extent of hepatofibrosis. The case group the genotype distribution showed a higher incidence of the homozygous consisted of 61 patient with chronic hepatitis. A sample of Tomsk city transition (T/T) in the migraine group and specifically in the MA group. inhabitants was used as a control group (N=128). The genotyping was The T/T genotype of the MTHFR gene in the Canarian patients studied done by PCR-restriction analysis. There were no significant differences was associated to and increase risk of suffering migraine (OR= 1.6 in genotypes and allele frequencies between cases and controls. Also, 95% CI 1.05-2.49, p=0.02), particularly MA (OR= 1.8 95% CI 1.05- no association of A1188C polymorphism in IL12B with disease course 3.09, p=0.03). was identified. However, there was difference in genotype distribution Funding Source: FUNCIS 39/02 for IL4RA polymorphism in subgroups of patients divided by different extent of fibrosis. From one side, there was increasing of the frequency P1081. Polymorphisms of mitochondrial nuclear-encoded of homozygotes Ile/Ile and Val/Val in the group without fibrosis, and complex II and Citrate Synthase genes in idiopathic male from other side, there was accumulation of Ile/Val heterozygotes infertility along with fibrosis progression, from 7.1% in the group without fibrosis S. Bonache1, J. Sarquella2, J. Martinez1, J. Arrús2, L. Bassas2, S. Larriba1; up to 47.6% in initial fibrosis (p=0.035) and 57.7% in moderate and 1Medical and Molecular Genetics Center - IRO - IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llo- profound fibrosis (p=0.004). This finding suggests that the carriers bregat (Barcelona), Spain, 2Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain. of Ile/Val genotype for IL4RA have increased risk for hepatofibrosis Previous studies have shown a correlation between sperm cell development while being affected by viral hepatitis. concentration in the ejaculate and nuclear-encoded [Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) complex or complex II and citrate synthase (CS)] mitochondrial enzyme activities [Ruiz-Pesini et al., (2000) Clinica Chimica Acta 300, 97-105]. From these data, we postulateGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 316 that enzymatic expression should be decreased in severe sperm Presented results support the assumption, that ApoA5 belongs to the impairment and investigate if this decrease could be a consequence of most important genetic determinants of plasma triglycerides detected the presence of sequence variants on these genes. so far. An exhaustive mutational study of the five genes was performed using Supported by the grant of IGA of the Czech Ministry of Health NB the SSCP/HD technique followed by sequencing of abnormal migrating 7392-3 and by the Research project MSM002162080 of the Czech patterns in 44 infertile men with a phenotype of non-obstructive Ministry of Education azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia (<5 million sperm per mL) and 46 fertile men as the control group. Several sequence variations P1084. The interaction between Metabolic Syndrome and PON1 in these genes were identified: 21 in SDHA (13 in coding regions), 4 in polymorphisms increases the risk of coronary artery disease SDHB (two of them in exonic sequences), 4 in SDHC (one in a coding E. Trabetti1, U. Cavallari1, M. Biscuola1, N. Martinelli2, D. Girelli2, O. Olivieri2, S. region), 5 in SDHD (three of them in coding regions), and 5 in CS Friso2, F. Pizzolo2, I. Tenuti2, C. Bozzini2, G. Villa2, B. Ceradini2, M. Sandri2, S. (one in an exon). Five of these nucleotide changes produced amino Cheng3, M. A. Grow3, R. Corrocher2, P. F. Pignatti1; acid substitutions. The frequency of nucleotide variations showed no 1Dept Mother & Child/Biol & Genet, Section of Biology and Genetics, Univ Ve- statistically significant differences between infertile and fertile groups. rona, Verona, Italy, 2Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Univ These preliminary results suggest that no particular allele or haplotype Verona, Verona, Italy, 3Department of Human Genetics, Roche Molecular Sys- in these genes appears to be associated to male infertility and that tems, Inc., Alameda, CA, United States. the activity of mitochondrial enzymes may be transcriptionally and/or Background. Serum paroxonases play an important role in anti- transductionally regulated. New SNPs identified should be useful in oxidant defences and prevention of atherosclerosis. Metabolic segregation and linkage disequilibrium analyses in families affected syndrome is a clinical condition associated with increased oxidant by other disorders caused by these nuclear encoded mitochondrial stress and cardiovascular mortality. Two common polymorphisms of genes. PON1, Leu55Met and Gln192Arg, have been suggested to modulate cardiovascular risk. P1082. Homozygosity mapping of an Usher-like syndrome to Methods. 915 subjects were subjected to angiographic documentation chromosome 15q21.3-q23 of coronary artery vessels: 642 were classified as atherosclerotic E. Ostergaard1, T. Rosenberg2, K. Brondum-Nielsen1, L. B. Moller1; (CAD) and 273 as non atherosclerotic (CAD-free). 224 subjects 1John F. Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 2National Eye Clinic for the met the diagnostic criteria of metabolic syndrome. All subjects were Visually Impaired, Hellerup, Denmark. genotyped for the two PON1 polymorphisms. Mutations in 7 different genes have so far been identified in Usher Results. A significant interaction between metabolic syndrome and syndrome and 4 loci have been mapped. Three clinical types are both PON1 polymorphisms in determining CAD risk (p<0.05) was distinguished. observed. The 55Leu and the 192Arg alleles, associated with reduced In 1996, an autosomal recessive Usher-like syndrome was reported protection against lipid peroxidation, were associated with CAD only in in two branches of a large, consanguineous family from Denmark. A the metabolic syndrome subgroup. Subject with metabolic syndrome common ancestor born in 1702 was identified. and both 55Leu and 192Arg alleles had significantly increased risk The syndrome is characterised by congenital cataract, which (OR 9.38, 95%CI 3.02-29.13 after adjustment by multiple logistic distinguishes it from other Usher types, severe and progressive regression) relative to subjects with 55Met/Met-192Gln/Gln genotype. hearing impairment with onset from 8 to 20 years, adult-onset retinitis Conclusion. PON1 polymorphisms modulate coronary artery disease pigmentosa and vestibular dysfunction. This is the only reported family in metabolic syndrome patients. with the syndrome. In order to try to identify the causative gene, we performed homozygosity P1085. Further evidence for a genetic heterogeneity of Mal de mapping in five affected members of the family with 400 polymorphic Meleda microsatellite markers with an average spacing of 9.2 cM. The disease C. Charfeddine1, M. Mokni2, C. Bouchlaka1, H. Zribi2, S. Kassar1, S. Boubaker1, was mapped to an 11.8 Mb interval on chromsome 15q21.3-q23, A. Ben Osman2, K. Dellagi1, S. Abdelhak1; between markers D15S648 and D15S1025. The region contains 1Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Hopital La Rabta, Service de Derma- around 100 known genes. By cDNA sequencing, four candidate genes tologie, Tunis, Tunisia. in the region were excluded as responsible for the disease. Mal de Meleda (MDM) (MIM 248300) is a rare inherited skin disorder which belongs to a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group P1083. Apolipoprotein AV gene SNP determination in patients of palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK). The disease has a world-wide with high triglyceride levels distribution mainly in the Mediterranean population. Clinically, MDM A. Horinek1,2, M. Vrablik1,2, K. Zidkova1, R. Ceska1,2, J. A. Hubacek3; is characterized by erythema and hyperkeratosis extend to the 11st School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2General dorsal face of hands and feet. The gene responsible for MDM, ARS Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Centre for Experimental Medicine, (component B)-81/s, has been mapped on chromosome 8qter using Institute of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. homozygosity mapping. The ARS gene encodes for the SLURP-1 Objective: A new gene designated apolipoprotein A-V (APOAV) has protein (Ly-6/uPAR related protein-1). Various mutations within the been identified in the APOAI/APOCIII/APOAIV gene cluster. The ARS gene have been identified to underline MDM disease in different aim of our study was to examine the SNPs frequencies in a group populations. We have recently demonstrated that three different of patients with extreme triglyceride levels compared to controls with homozygous mutations (82delT, C77A, C99Y) are responsible for normal lipid ones. Methods: The patient group consisted of 132 MDM disease in 17 patients belonging to 8 unrelated consanguineous unrelated individuals, in the control group 59 people were screened. families from Northern Tunisia. We report here, one Tunisian family Five SNPs were tested (SNP3-rs662799, rs651821-Kozak, rs1729410, with three siblings presenting with classical clinical features of MDM. rs4938312, rs648450) and variabilty of the exon 1 and a putative TATA No mutation was detected by direct sequencing of all three exons box together with the DR1 and IR8 elements in the promoter ApoAV and flanking intronic region of the ARS gene for the three patients. region was screened. Results: The frequency of carriers of SNP3 Furthermore, linkage analysis, by genotyping all family members, minor allele (7 homozygotes and 41 heterozygotes) were much higher using microsatellite markers, excluded the ARS gene region. Genetic in patients group compared to the population sample. On the other heterogeneity is a likely explanation for our findings, as this has been hand no homozygotes and 3 heterozygotes only were determined in already hypothesized by other authors. A genome-wide search for the the control group. The same allele distribution was observed for the locus of the present phenotype is in progress. SNP rs651821-Kozak. SNP rs1729410 did not show any conclusive linkage association evidence. We did not find any polymorphism in the P1086. Analysis of eNOS, ACE and MTHFR genes case of rs4938312 and rs648450. Neither mutation nor polymorphism polymorphisms in placental insufficiency. were determined in the exon1 or the promoter region. Conclusions: I. A. Zainullin1,2, V. A. Kulavsky2, A. G. Zainullina1, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; Our study verified the association between the SNP3 and SNP-Kozak 1Institute of Biochemistry & Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State minor allele in the APOAV gene and extreme triglyceride levels. Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 317 Recently, significant associations of endothelial nitric oxide synthase were analyzed. We could not detect any disease causing mutations, (eNOS), angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and methylenetetrahy but further investigation is ongoing to identify the genetic cause of AOS drofolate reductase (MTHFR) genes polymorphism with thrombophilia in these families. at pregnant, recurrent spontaneous miscarriages and preeclampsia in women of different populations were reported (Tempfer et al, 2001; P1089. A second locus for autosomal recessive nonsyndromic Buchholz et al, 2003; Vefring et al, 2004; Lin et al, 2005). These loci optic atrophy are located on different chromosomes and encode products involved J. Désir1, N. Van Regemorter1, M. Cordonnier2, J. Laes3, B. Pichon1, M. into various metabolic pathways leading to obstetrics pathology. Abramowicz1; Therefore, we studied the eNOS VNTR polymorphism in 4 introne, 1Genetics Department, Hôpital Erasme-ULB, Free University of Brussels, ACE I/D polymorphism and MTHFR C677T polymorphism in women Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Ophtalmology, Hôpital Erasme-ULB, Free with to placental insufficiency (PI) from Bashkortostan (Russia). 78 University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium, 3Molecular Genetics Department, women with PI induced gestational hypertension and 130 normotensive Biovallee laboratory, Gosselies, Belgium. women with normal pregnancy were genotyped using PCR technique Nonsyndromic optic atrophy, when familial, is usually transmitted in and subsequent enzyme digestion. We did not find significant an autosomal dominant pattern. Recessive optic atrophy is rare and association of the eNOS, ACE and MTHFR polymorphisms with PI, but is usually associated with multisystemic disease involving the central there were differences in ACE genotype frequencies between women nervous system and other organs. Recently, a locus for isolated with gestational hypertension and normotensive women (χ2 = 3.80; p autosomal recessive optic atrophy (ROA1) has been mapped to = 0.049). chromosome 8q21-q22. We investigated a novel consanguineous Further studies are needed to confirm the eNOS, ACE and MTHFR family of Morroccan origin with nine children. Three of them were polymorphisms with PI. affected with isolated optic atrophy. They presented with moderate to severe loss of visual acuity, temporal optic disc pallor and color vision P1087. Association between GEFS+3 locus and GEFS+ deficits. Two sibs reported subnormal vision since infancy. The third syndrome in two affected Tunisian families was initially suspected of Leber optic atrophy because of a sudden N. Fendri1,2, F. Kammoun2, A. Rebai3, C. Triki2, F. Fakhfakh1; loss of visual acuity at age 16 years. No mutation was detected in 1laboratoire de génétique moléculaire humaine, faculté de medecine Sfax, Sfax, mitochondrial DNA. Interestingly he was treated for subacute axono- Tunisia, 2Unité de Neuropédiatrie de SFAX, CHU Habib Bourghiba de SFAX, demyelinating polyneuropathy at age 33. We performed a genome- Sfax, Tunisia, 3Unité de Biostatistique, Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Sfax, wide search for homozygosity in affected siblings using an 11K SNP Tunisia. microarray chip (Affymetrix). A 10 cM homozygous region was found Febrile seizure (FS) occur between 3 months and 6 years of age, and on chromosome 11. Our data show genetic heterogeneity within do not show evidence of defined cause. In FS, only five loci have been autosomal recessive optic atrophies, and suggest a causal link with reported but no responsible gene has been identified so far. FS and polyneuropathy in one of our patients. epilepsy have been recently described in a syndrome called generalized epilepsy with febrile seizure plus (GEFS+). GEFS+ syndrome is an P1090. Alcohol dehydrogenase genes and susceptibility to Fetal heterogeneous autosomal dominant disorder characterized by FS Alcohol Syndrome in South African Coloured populations which persist after 6 years of age and/or by afebrile seizures. Four D. Naidoo, M. Ramsay; responsible genes of GEFS+ have been identified: SCN1B, SCN1A, University of Witwatersrand and National Health Laboratory Service, Johan- SCN2A and GABRG2 localized on chromosomes 19q13.1, 2q24 and nesburg, South Africa. 5q31.1-q33.1 respectively. Mental retardation is a prominent feature of fetal alcohol syndrome The aim of this report is to search for a linkage and/or association (FAS) and is attributable to the teratogenic effects of in utero alcohol between the known FS and GEFS+ loci and GEFS+ syndrome in exposure in individuals with susceptible genetic variants. Possible affected Tunisians families. candidate genes involved with the aetiology of FAS include alcohol A total of 14 patients with GEFS+ and 55 controls belonging to two dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). Tunisian families affected with GEFS+ syndrome were studied. A case-control genetic association study was done to examine the Genetic analysis of genomic DNA has been performed using roles of ADH1B, ADH1C and ADH4 in two Coloured populations from microsatellite markers spanning the FS and GEFS+ loci. Statistical the Northern and Western Cape with a high prevalence of FAS. Single analysis has been realized by intrafamilial association test (FBAT) and nucleotide polymorphisms associated with the genes were typed using by parametric linkage (LOD scores) and non-parametric linkage (NPL) PCR-based methods in the FAS children and controls. tests. In addition, a transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) has been Previous studies in the Western Cape suggested that the ADH1B*2 performed using the computer program GENHUNTER v 2.1. allele The result of FBAT test revealed an association between GEFS+3 confers protection against the development of FAS (p=0.0036), locus and GEFS+ syndrome in these two Tunisian families with a very however this was not significant in the Northern Cape (p= 0.088). significant P value. This association was also confirmed by results of Further preliminary studies on ADH1B, ADH1C and ADH4 have TDT test. revealed significant associations where each of the alleles mentioned below appears to decrease the risk of developing FAS. Allele ADH1B*3 P1088. Clinical Report of a Belgian family with Adams-Oliver is significantly asociated in the Northern Cape only (p= 0.043); syndrome and molecular analysis of 5 candidate genes. ADH1C*2 allele in both populations (p= 0.024); and the ‘T’ allele of P. Verdyck1, B. Blaumeister1, M. Holder-Espinasse2, W. Van Hul1, W. Wuyts1; the rs1126670 polymorphic locus in ADH4 in the Western Cape only 1University and University Hospital of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Institute of (p = 0.008). These results show that the ADH genes do play a role in Child Health, London, United Kingdom. susceptibility to FAS in South African Coloured populations. Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare congenital disorder defined by the combined presence of both limb truncation and scalp defects, frequently associated with underlying defects in the parietal bones. We P1091. Homozygosity for a frequent and weakly penetrant present a Belgian AOS family with several affected individuals over 4 predisposing allele at the RET locus in sporadic Hirschsprung generations. Clinical symptoms included large areas of alopecia on disease the vertex of the skull and serious limb reduction defects with large A. Pelet1, L. de Pontual1, M. Cément-Ziza1, R. Salomon1, C. Mugnier1, F. Mat- phenotypic variation between the affected family members. suda2, M. Lathrop2, A. Munnich1, J. Feingold1, S. Lyonnet1, L. Abel3, J. Amiel1; Although AOS is clearly genetic and mostly inherited as an autosomal 1Unité de Recherches sur les Handicaps Génétiques de l'Enfant INSERM U- dominant trait, no disease causing gene has been identified so far. 393, Paris, France, 2Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France, 3Laboratoire We therefore selected a number of candidate genes for AOS based de Génétique Humaine des Maladies Infectieuses, INSERM U-550, Paris, on the phenotype of knockout mice, and/ or clinical overlap with other France. human diseases. Using sequencing and linkage analysis in 10 AOS Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), the most common malformation of families, the MSX1, CART1, P63 (P73L), RUNX2 and HOXD13 genes the hindgut (1/5,000 live birth), is a neural crest derived malformationGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 318 characterised by the absence of enteric ganglia of variable length of the controls from the same origin were sequenced. Alignment was made intestine. The genetics of HSCR is complex. Genetics and functional with the Cambridge Reference Sequence (CRS) and any differences evidences support that the RET proto-oncogene is the major disease- recorded as single base substitution (SBS) numerical changes in C- causing locus. However, a mutation within the RET gene coding tract (PCT), insertions and deletions .PCT changes were present in sequence could be detected in only 40% and 10-20 % of familial 52% compared to 71% diabetes patients. We found that polymorphism and sporadic cases respectively, despite families co-segregation C150T was exist in 42.8% diabetes patients compared to normal cases with markers at the RET gene locus. These data suggesting a (28.6%). Also variation in T16189C was found in 14.2% diabetes frequent hypomorphic allele(s) at the RET locus, led us and others patients compared to our normal related population (28.6%). mtDNA to perform linkage disequilibrium mapping, using single nucleotide mutations within the D-loop control region are a frequent event in polymophisms (SNPs) scattered along the RET genomic domain. Diabetes typeII and may be an indicator of mtDNA instability. We identified a predisposing haplotype located in the 5' region of the RET gene. In order to refine the mapping of predisposing allele(s) P1094. Mutation analysis in Duchenne/Becker muscular and to characterise its genetic behaviour, we used transmission dystrophy patients: identification of 11 novel mutations disequilibrium test across the RET gene, in a series of HSCR cases F. Joncourt1, D. Bartholdi2, S. Fokstuen3, S. Gallati1; divided according the presence/absence of a RET gene mutation, and 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Berne, Switzerland, 2Institute for Medi- the familiality (sporadic or multiplex). We observed highly significant cal Genetics, Zürich, Switzerland, 3Division of Medical Genetics, University over-transmission of a predisposing SNPs haplotype extending over Hospital Geneva, Switzerland. 23kb from the promoter region to exon 2. Over-transmission was In approximately one third of Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy not significant when considering cases with RET gene mutation. (DMD/BMD) patients the disease is caused by point mutations in the Conversely, the majority of sporadic HSCR cases with no RET gene dystrophin gene on Xp21. Using SSCP-HD analysis followed by direct mutation showed homozygosity for the predisposing haplotype sequencing of the variants we have performed mutation analysis in suggesting its major involvement and its dosage-sensitive effect on a series of DMD/BMD patients after negative deletion screening. In the RET signalling pathway in the commonest form of HSCR. addition to a series of known mutations, 11 novel mutations were identified: 3 nonsense mutations (Q393X, W1029X, W2479X), 1 P1092. Linking TGFA gene to Cleft Lip with or without Cleft missense mutation (S868G), 2 small deletions (4350delA, 5124_ Palate 5127delGAAA), 1 duplication (5020_5021dupTT) as well as 4 splice- A. Morkuniene1, A. Utkus1, D. Kasperaviciute1, L. Linkeviciene2, V. Kucinskas1; site mutations (357+1G>C, 1993-3C>G, 5922+5G>A, 7309+4G >A). In 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithu- general nonsense mutations and other changes leading to a frameshift ania, 2Istitute of Odontology, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. result in a truncated, non-functional dystrophin protein, causing the The transforming growth factor alpha gene (TGFA, 2p13) has emerged severe DMD form of the disease. Inframe and missense mutations, as a promising candidate gene for orofacial clefting based on data from leaving the dystrophin partially functional, mostly lead to the milder expression and allelic association studies. Assessment of different BMD. The newly detected nonsense mutations as well as the deletions TGFA gene markers in a number of separate studies has resulted in and the duplication confirmed this observation, while the missense association with CL/P phenotype as well as in negative results. Thus mutation S868G was associated with a DMD phenotype. Predicting the question of if and how allelic variants of TGFA gene (eg. TaqI the effect of splice-site mutations is more difficult. The patients with polymorphism) could contribute to the risk of clefting in children is still 357+1G>C and 1993-3C>G suffered from DMD, while for those with open. 5922+5G>A and 7309+4 G>A the diagnosis was BMD. The mutations In the present study biallelic TaqI marker (A1 allele is reference and A2 segregated with the disease and were not present in any unaffected - variant, i.e. deletion of 4 bp in intron V) was analyzed in the sample male. Their pathogenic nature was inferred from these family data, of 51 unrelated case-parent triads, where the case was a child with an as well as from the predictions by a splice-site finder. In order confirm isolated non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P). pathogenicity of these mutations, RNA analysis will be performed. The inheritance of TaqI marker alleles of the TGFA locus was studied by using PCR genotyping of the triads. The standard transmission/ P1095. Campora: an isolated population database for the study disequilibrium test (TDT) as described by Spielman et al. (1993) was of cardiovascular traits used for statistic analysis. The paternity was confirmed in all families M. Ciullo1, T. Nutile1, V. Colonna1, M. Astore1, A. Calabria1, O. Guardiola1, G. L. before TDT analysis.We found only 22 informative case-parent triads Iovino2, B. Trimarco2, G. Lembo3, M. G. Persico1; (i.e. heterozygous parent) out of 51 initially genotyped ones. We 1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati-Traverso - CNR, Naples, Italy, evaluated the presence of association between TaqI marker alleles 2Department of Internal Medicine, "Federico II" University of Naples, Naples, in the TGFA gene and the risk of isolated CL/P. Our data provide no Italy, 3IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli (IS), Italy. evidence of TGFA genotype in the TaqI site and susceptibility to cleft The population of the small village of Campora in the Cilento area lip and/or palate within case-parent triads and there is no significant of South Italy was chosen as model of isolated founder population linkage disequilibrium with the A2 allele in TaqI site and CL/P for the identification of allelic variants responsible of complex traits phenotype. by means of genomic regions identical by descent (IBD) search. We have demonstrated that the population of this village derives from P1093. Polymorphism in the non-coding region of human about fifty founders that contributed to the repopulation of the village Mitochondrial DNA in Iranian diabetes type II patients after the plague of the 17th century. We attempted the description of G. Dorraj, V. Khalili, M. Houshmand; the phenotype of each individual in the population by instrumental National Institute for Genetic engineering and Bio, Tehran, Islamic Republic of measurements of several parameters with particular attention to the Iran. cardiovascular system. We have assembled a database containing The sequence in the first hypervariable segment (HVS-I) of the control a 10,737-individual pedigree, spanning over 17 generations, and region has been used as a source of evolutionary information in most connecting all the 1400 living Campora’s inhabitants with data derived phylogenetic analyses of mtDNA. Population genetic inference would from: the genome screening with a 1094- microsatellite map (average benefit from a better understanding of the variation in the mtDNA coding marker distance: 3.4 cM), blood tests, personal and familial past region, but, thus far, complete mtDNA sequences have been rare. We diseases, past and present drug therapies, diet, smoking habit and determined the nucleotide sequence in the none- coding region of alcohol use, cardiovascular instrumental check up (Ultrasonography mtDNA from Iranian patients sequencing by direct sequencing of the and ECG) to measure left ventricular interior dimension and mass, D loop. intima-media thickness of carotids, measurement of left ventricle The D-loop region is a hot spot for mtDNA alterations and it contains volume changes, blood pressure and anthropological measurements. two hypervariable regions (HVS-I and HVS-II). In order to identify We will present our data on methodology of analysis and preliminary polymorphic sites, and also to find out any possible variations in D- data of the search of loci responsible for cardiovascular disease loop of diabetes typeII patients, the complete non-coding region of mitochondrial DNA from 7 Azari type2 diabetic patients and 23 normalGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 319 P1096. MDR1 C3435T Polymorphism and susceptibility to 0.74, 95% CI 0.39-1.42). The genotype distribution of the other 7 inflammatory bowel disease: lack of association in an Italian GAS6 polymorphisms (c.280+170C>G, c.712+26G>A, c.713-155T>C, population. c.1263G>C, c.1332C>T, c.1478-94C>G and c.1869T>C) did not differ C. M. Caligara1, V. Bianchi1, S. Ardizzone2, G. Maconi2, E. Colombo2, G. Bian- between patients and controls. chi Porro2, M. L. Tenchini1; Conclusions: The AA genotype of the GAS6 -c.834+7 G>A SNP- is 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Science,University of Milan., less prevalent in patients with ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke than Milan, Italy, 2Chair of Gastroenterology, L. Sacco University Hospital., Milan, in healthy controls but this association is not independent from other Italy. vascular risk factors. The rest of GAS6 polymorphisms analysed are The C3435T multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) gene polymorphism not associated with ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke. and homozygous TT genotype has been recently found to be We thank ISCIII (01/1468 and C03/07) and MCYT (SAF 2001-1059- overrepresented in ulcerative colitis (UC). However, further studies C02) for grants. reported no evidence of this association with UC or Crohn’s disease (CD). Aim of this study was to evaluate the frequency of C3435T MDR1 P1098. Linkage to rheumatoid factor seropositive rheumatoid polymorphism in UC and CD patients. 150 UC and 200 CD patients, arthritis confirms the involvement of the protein tyrosine and 300 healthy subjects were consecutively enrolled. All study phosphatase 22 gene participants were unrelated Caucasians of Italian origin. Genomic P. Dieudé1,2, S. Garnier1, L. Michou1, E. Petit-Teixeira1, E. Glikmans1, C. Pier- DNA was extracted from peripheral blood, genotyping was performed lot1, S. Lasbleiz1, T. Bardin2, B. Prum1, F. Cornélis1,2; by PCR and Sau3AI restriction analysis. The results were confirmed 1Laboratoire de Recherche Européen pour la Polyarthrite Rhumatoïde - Gen- by sequencing a limited number of samples using an automated DNA Hotel - EA3886 Evry Genopole, Evry, France, 2Fédération de Rhumatologie sequencer. Differences between cases and controls were compared -Centre Viggo Petersen - CHU Lariboisière -APHP, Paris, France. by using a 2x2 contingency and χ2-test statistics. Odds ratios (OR) Objective. The protein tyrosine phosphatase-22 (PTPN22) gene with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were also calculated. Both allele encodes for the lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase (LYP), involved in the frequencies and genotype distributions did not significantly differ negative regulation of early T cell activation. Recently, an association between UC, CD patients and the health control group. has been reported between PTPN22-620W functional allele and rheumatoid factor positive (RF+) rheumatoid arthritis (RA) as well as Allele Genotype C vs T CC vs. TT other autoimmune diseases. However, the linkage proof required to Cases and Total confirm a new genetic factor could not be definitely produced by an Controls numbers C T CC CT TT OR OR affected sib-pair (ASP) analysis. Our aim was to test this allele for (95%CI) P value (95%CI) P value linkage to RF+ RA with the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT),. >0.05 >0.05 Methods. DNA from the French Caucasian population was available CD 186 181 191 45 91 50 0.95 0.88 for 2 sets of 100 families with one RA patient and both parents, and for 88 RA index cases from RA ASP families. Genotyping was done by 48.6% 51.4% 24.2% 48.9% 26.9% 0.72-1.27 0.48-1.58 PCR-RFLP. The analysis was performed using the TDT, the genotype CU 85 >0.05 >0.05 relative risk (GRR) and a ASP-based tests. 76 94 14 48 23 1.12 1.30 Results. The TDT of the PTPN22 620W allele showed linkage and association for RF+ RA (61% transmission, P = 0.037). The GRR 44.7% 55.3% 16.5% 56.5% 27.0% 0.59-2.41 showed the risk allele in 34% of RF+ RA patients and in 24% of controls Controls 195 0.78-1.6 (P = 0.047, OR 1.69, 95%CI [1.03-2.78]). The ASP investigation 185 205 81 82 32 showed no enriched risk allele in RA multiplex families, leading to a major lack of power of ASP analysis. 47.4% 52.6% 41.5% 42% 16.5% Conclusion. This study is the first to show clear linkage of PTPN22 to RF+ RA, providing compelling evidence for PTPN22 as a new RA, Conclusions. These data enlarge the list of studies where no gene. implication of C3435T MDR1 polymorphism in UC or CD was detectable. These different results may be attributed to ethnic diversities of the P1099. Hormone receptor variants and premature ovarian failure studied populations and suggest that C3435T might not be the only K. L. Bretherick1, M. R. Fluker2,3, W. P. Robinson1; polymorphism in MDR1 gene implicated in the susceptibility to UC or 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2B.C. Children's and CD. Women's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Genesis Fertility Center, Vancou- ver, BC, Canada. P1097. GAS6 polymorphisms in patients with ischemic or Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is the occurrence of menopause hemorrhagic stroke before age 40, and affects approximately 1% of women. Variants in X. Muñoz1, V. Obach2, B. Hurtado1, M. Revilla2, A. Chamorro2, P. García de hormone receptor genes may affect hormone function and contribute Frutos3, N. Sala1; to infertility and an earlier age at menopause. We therefore examined 1IDIBELL-Institut de Recerca Oncològica, Barcelona, Spain, 2Unitat d’ictus, the presence of polymorphisms in hormone receptor genes including Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 3IIBB-CSIC-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, androgen receptor (AR) and estrogen receptor α (ERα) in POF patients Spain. and control women ascertained in Western Canada. The AR gene Growth arrest-specific 6 gene product (GAS6) is a tyrosin kinase contains a translated, highly polymorphic CAG repeat that has been receptor ligand with anti-apoptotic and pro-thrombotic effects. In inversely correlated with receptor activity. Long AR repeats (≥24 CAG a previous study we identified different GAS6 SNPs and found an repeats) were found in 38 of 106 (36%) POF patient alleles and 162 association between c.834+7G>A, in intron 8, and stroke. The purpose of 588 (28%) control alleles (p=0.08). Since the AR gene is on the X of the present study was to confirm these results with the analysis of 8 chromosome, expression of alleles may be affected by X chromosome GAS6 SNPs in a larger population of 588 stroke patients (407 ischemic inactivation (XCI) skewing. We therefore assessed AR repeat size and 181 hemorrhagic) and in 127 healthy controls. weighted by XCI ratio in a subset of patients and controls. XCI The genotypes for the 8 GAS6 polymorphisms were determined either weighted AR repeat sizes ≥24 occurred in 15 of 53 (28%) POF patients by PCR and restriction analysis or by real time PCR and fluorescent and only 13 of 97 controls (13%) (p=0.03). A TA repeat in the ERα probe hybridisation in a LightCycler. gene promoter was also examined and long repeats (≥18 TA repeats) Results: The prevalence of the AA genotype of GAS6 c.834+7 G>A were significantly more common in the POF patient population than in was 12.2%*, 10.4%* and 18.2%, respectively in patients with ischemic controls (p=0.002) (60/104 (58%) POF alleles vs. 84/214 (39%) control stroke, hemorrhagic stroke and in controls (*chi-square, p<0.05 of AA alleles). Assessment of polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor β and vs non-AA compared with controls). After adjustment for age, gender, the FSH receptor genes are currently underway. Although we cannot current smoking, hypertension, diabetes and hypercholesterolemia, exclude a confounding effect of ethnicity, these results suggest a role the AA genotype was not independently associated with stroke (OR for functional hormone receptor variants in POF pathogenesis.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 320 P1100. Molecular analysis of the Fragile X mental retardation polymorphism G/C) and cytohrome P450 2E1 gene (CYP2E1; 5’- syndrome in Volga-Ural region of Russia. flanking region polymorphism G/C) were examined in two urban D. Islamgulov1,2, A. Karunas1, R. Valinurov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; (Seversk, n=124 and Tomsk, n=112) and one rural (Kargala, n=96) 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Republican Russian populations. No interpopulation or sex difference in allele psychiatric hospital, Ufa, Russian Federation. frequencies was revealed. The genotype frequencies obeyed the Hardy- Fragile X syndrome is most common inherited cause of mental Weinberg equilibrium and the alleles were in linkage equilibrium or retardation (MR). For the first time we have realized a study using gametic equilibrium in the total sample. The frequencies of the derived molecular screening to estimate the prevalence of fragile X syndrome alleles at ADH1B (*G (+Msl I) allele) and CYP2E1 (*C (+Pst I) allele) among mentally retarded children of Bashkortostan. Molecular were low (5.87% and 2.56%, accordingly). ADH7 gene polymorphism screening was carried out using methylation-sensitive polymerase show the high level of genetic variability; the frequency of the “mutant” chain reaction (PCR) to detect CpG methylation. We used DNA ADH7*C (-Sty I) allele was 45.48%. Similar allele frequencies of these samples from male patients at the age of 3 to 18 years with non- genes were revealed in most Caucasoid populations.The alcohol specific MR (n=214). We found that 4.2% (n=9) of mentally retarded dehydrogenase gene polymorphisms were significantly associated male screened by DNA analysis had the fragile X full mutation. This with an increased risk of comorbidity of alcoholism and tuberculosis result is very close to the prevalence of the fragile X syndrome in (n=83) in Tomsk population. The frequencies of the derived ADH1B*G, Caucasian MR population, where it accounts for 2.6 to 8.7% among ADH7*C and CYP2E1*C allele were 1.81%, 54.82% and 1.81% in moderate to severely retarded males. patients accordingly. In individuals with ADH1B*A allele odds ratio In order to investigate the origin of the fragile X mutation, we for comorbidity of alcoholism and tuberculosis is 3.39 (95% CI 0.99 assessed the size of the microsatellite markers DXS998, DXS548 and - 13.93; P=0.052) and in individuals with ADH7*G allele - 0.69 (95% CI FRAXAC1 in FRAXA patients and control groups. We found a different 0.48 - 0.98; P=0.031). The ADH1B*G (*47His) allele encodes enzyme distribution of alleles between fragile X patients and controls for loci with higher activity, likely causing protection against alcoholism. DXS998, FRAXAC1, but not detected apparent linkage disequilibrium Possibly the association with ADH7*G allele are explained by linkage for DXS548 locus. The frequencies of DXS998/FRAXAC1 haplotypes disequilibrium with other functionally significant loci or by stochastic 117/152 bp (3-4) and 113/156 (1-2) were significantly greater in affected reasons. males in comparison with healthy donors. The data of this study revealed significant differences in the distribution P1103. Mutation detection in a large cohort of patients with of DXS998/FRAXAC1 haplotypes between fragile X patients and Common Variable Immunodeficiency using Multiplex Capillary Heteroduplex Analysis (MCHA) controls. C. Bacchelli1, S. Buckridge1, A. D. B. Webster2, U. Salzer3, C. Kinnon1, A. P1101. Selection of putative functional coding SNP for direct Thrasher1, H. B. Gaspar1; genetic association studies of complex traits 1Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, S. Guenther1, C. R. Scafe2, A. Kejariwal2, E. G. Spier2, P. D. Thomas2, D. A. 2Department of Clinical Immunology, Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine, Gilbert2, F. M. De La Vega2; London, United Kingdom, 3Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, 1Applied Biosystems - Germany, Uberlingen, Germany, 2Applied Biosystems, Department of Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. Foster City, CA, United States. Common Variable Immunodeficiency (CVID), one of the most common Genetic association studies of complex disease can be: indirect, when primary immunodeficiency syndromes, is a heterogeneous group of surrogate markers in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with the disease allele disorders characterized by hypogammaglobulinemia and specific are tested for trait association; or direct, in which a list of putatively antibody deficiency resulting in recurrent infective and inflammatory functional SNPs, non-synonymous coding variants (nsSNPs), are problems. Although most cases of CVID are sporadic, about 20-25% tested for their disease relevance directly. An indirect genome scan are familial, displaying autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive would probably need from 120,000 to 1 million SNPs - an enormous modes of inheritance. CVID patients have T cell defects as well as genotyping cost and a problem of statistical inference. A direct genome defects in terminal B cell differentiation. Although the genetic defect is scan may require typing only tens of thousands common nsSNPs. The unknown, a number of genes are now emerging which may be good feasibility of such studies requires that most of the common variants candidates to screen to identify molecular defects in CVID. Detection influencing the susceptibility to complex disease are available for of unknown mutations in a large number of genes and a large genotyping. About 40,000 candidate nsSNPs are available on public number of samples through DNA sequencing is an expensive and databases and an additional 30,000 novel nsSNPs were discovered time-consuming process. In our cohort of CVID patients, we adopted by resequencing the exons of 23,363 human genes. Combined, Multiplex Capillary Heteroduplex Analysis (MCHA) as a method to these datasets provide a comprehensive resource of nsSNPs rapidly identify DNA fragments containing mutations, the exact nature making feasible the execution of candidate gene/region and whole of which may subsequently be determined by DNA sequencing. MCHA genome direct association studies. We designed genotyping assays is a simple and rapid assay performed on a 96-capillary sequencer, for these nsSNPs as TaqMan® SNP Genotyping Assays and for the the MegaBACE 1000, and has the ability to detect point mutations with SNPlexTM Genotyping System, a high throughput implementation of high sensitivity. High throughput is achieved by multiplexing compatible the oligonucleotide ligation assay. We prioritized a subset of 28,709 fragments in the same capillary and by analysing 96 samples in 40 nsSNPs, including over 9,000 novel SNPs, based on their measured minutes. The overall mutation detection rate is currently over 95%, or expected heterozygosity in populations of European and African confirming the usefulness of this particular method for high throughput descent. This list represents the common nSNPs in the genome and mutation detection. an analysis of the gene classes overrepresented therein meets our expectations of genes that can tolerate slightly deleterious mutations. P1104. DGGE analysis of several genes in patients with (idiopathic) Dilated Cardiomyopathy referred to the combined These assay resources are available to researchers through our cardiogenetics clinic SNPbrowserTM Software and our web site. Y. J. Vos, J. P. van Tintelen, M. Kraak, H. Katerberg, L. G. Boven, M. P. P1102. Association of ADH1B, ADH7, CYP2E1 gene v.d.Berg, R. M. W. Hofstra; polymorphism with alcohol dependence in Russian populations University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. of Siberia Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a heart muscle disease characterised A. V. Marussin, V. A. Stepanov, M. G. Spiridonova, E. Y. Bragina, I. A. Gon- by left ventricular dilatation with impaired contraction of the left ventricle. charova; Dilated cardiomyopathy is also associated with limb girdle muscular Research Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk Research Center, Siberian dystrophy 1B (LGMD1B) and Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federa- (EDMD). Idiopathic DCM is familial in up to 30% of cases. Mutations tion. in different genes have been identified as disease associated, among The allele and genotype distribution of two alcohol dehydrogenase others in the gene encoding lamin A/C (LMNA), delta-sarcoglycan genes ADH1B (exon 3 polymorphism A/G (47His)), ADH7 (intron 5 (SGCD), troponin I (TNNI3), beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7), desmin,Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 321 cardiac actin, dystrophin and tafazzin. The most common mode of (p = 0.029), obsessive-compulsiveness (p = 0.021), depression (p = inheritance in families with DCM is autosomal dominant and the most 0.032), anxiety (p = 0.004), hostility (p = 0.028), phobic anxiety (p = commonly mutated gene so far is LMNA with a mutation frequency of 0.029) and paranoid ideation (p = 0.008). The results presented here 5-10% of all DCM cases. suggest that the 5HT2C gene may participate in the physiopathology In recent years we collected material from more than 100 patients of ED, not only through its direct effect on eating behaviour, but also on referred to our combined cardiogenetics outpatients clinic. To identify the anxiety and depressive traits associated to anorexia and bulimia the genes involved in (familial) DCM or DCM associated with muscular nervosa. disease in our population we developed an efficient screening method, Supported by the “Fondo de Investigaciones Sanitarias” (PI040632 based on denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) and and Psychiatry Genetics network, G03/184), and the “Departament sequence analysis, for the LMNA, SGCD, MYH7 and TTNI3 genes. d’Universitats i Societat de la informació, Generalitat de Catalunya”. Up to now eleven different mutations have been found in LMNA, two in TNNI3, and none in SGCD and MYH7, of which five had not been P1107. Mutational analysis of the PROP1 gene in Polish patients described before. The most remarkable finding was the identification with combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) of an LMNA mutation in a family with pure cardiac conduction R. Kalak1, K. Ziemnicka2, K. Drobnik2, J. Zielaskowska1, J. Kosowicz2, M. Gryc- disease (CCD), A225X, thereby expanding the clinical spectrum of zynska2, J. Sowinski2, R. Slomski1,3; laminopathies, although CCD can precede ventricular dilatation up to 1University of Agriculture, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, 20 years. Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland. Genetically determined congenital form of the combined pituitary P1105. Familial steroid responsive nephrotic syndrome: search hormone deficiency (CPHD) occurs in about 10% of patients with for a candidate gene impaired production and secretion of anterior pituitary hormones. PIT1 T. Oved1, D. Landau2, H. Shalev2, R. Parvari1; (POU1F1), HESX1, PITX1, PITX2, LHX3, LHX4 and PROP1 genes are 1Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Soroka Medical Cen- involved in ontogenesis of anterior pituitary gland. The PROP1 gene, ter, Beer Sheva, Israel. located on chromosome 5q35, consists of three exons and spans 4 kb. The etiology for Steroid-responsive idiopathic nephrotic syndrome Gene product, a tissue specific paired-like homeodomain transcription (SSINS), the common form of childhood nephrosis is unknown. We factor consists of 226 amino acids. Mutations in PROP1 gene appear identified an extended Bedouin family with a high rate of consanguinity, to be one of the most common causes of familial CPHD and may suitable for linkage analysis (LOD score of 3.5 for a model marker at account for up to 50% of all cases. We analyzed PROP1 mutations 0cM distance for recessive inheritance). Its 10 affected individuals’ in a group of 35 Polish patients from 32 families with CPHD and gene clinical presentation and steroid response are similar to the non-familial defects were found in fifteen (42.9%) patients. Analysis revealed three SSINS. Retrospective analysis of all children with INS treated by our different mutations: c.150delA, c.301_302delAG and novel transition institution in the past 15 years revealed another 5 non-related Bedouin c.334C>T causing p.Arg112X substitution. Six patients were found families with 2-3 first-degree cousins affected with SSINS in each. The to be homozygous for c.150delA and eight such mutations were in overall familial SSINS rate among the Bedouin population (excluding compound heterozygosity with c.301_302delAG mutation (6 cases) or the index family) is 26%, contrary to 4.7% among Jewish. with substitution c.334C>T (two brothers). One patient was found to be DNA was extracted from 8 affected individuals in the index family heterozygous for mutation c.150delA but compound mutation at other and 16 of their non affected siblings and parents. Genome wide allele was not found. The most frequent mutation - deletion c.150delA linkage analysis with a panel of 387 supplemented by 70 polymorphic (72.4% of all found mutations) is rare in other populations. Genotyping markers, aimed to limit intervals to~10cM and verify markers showing of marker D5S408 linked to the PROP1 gene suggests that c.150delA allele homozigotization, failed to identify linkage based on autosomal in Polish patients is not a result of single common founder mutation. recessive and X-linked recessive models of inheritance. In addition, linkage was excluded to 8 candidate genes associated with NS by P1108. Studies of chimerism in twins the use of adjacent polymorphic markers. In summary: Although K. Wielgus1, B. Siemieniako1, K. Kowalska2, M. Szalata1, J. Kempiak3, G. Bre- the Bedouin population presents an increased familial tendency for borowicz3, R. Slomski2; SSINS (milder diseases), this disease is probably not caused by the 1University of Agriculture, Poznan, Poland, 2Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, homozigotization of one major susceptibility gene since autosomal Poznan, Poland, 3University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. recessive and X-linked recessive inheritances were ruled out by It is already known that in vitro fertilization is associated with an increase genetic analysis of a statistically significant family. Autosomal dominant in embryo splitting and monozygotic twinning. It may be also associated (with partial penetrance) and multifactorial inheritances cannot still be with an increase risk of embryonic fusion before implantation. Zygosity ruled out studies on DNA extracted from peripheral blood of 87 twins conceived by in vitro fertilization, born in Clinics of University of Medical Sciences, P1106. Association of the serotonin receptor 5HT2C with eating were undertaken. Analysis of restriction fragments length polymorphism disorders and related psychopathological traits (RFLP) detected by hybridization with molecular probes and detection M. Ribases1, J. M. Mercader1, M. Gratacos1, M. Morell1, A. Badia2, L. Jimenez2, of polymorphic minisatellite and microsatellite DNA sequences (STR) R. Solano2, F. Fernandez-Aranda2, X. Estivill1; by PCR was performed. Nine genetic markers D1S7, D1S80, TPOX, 1Genes and Disease Program, Center of Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, D7S21, TH01, D12S11, PLA2A1, VWA and CYAR04 were analyzed. Spain, 2Psychiatric Service, Ciutat Sanitaria Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain. Quantitative studies were performed using radioactivity scanning of Several lines of investigation support a serotoninergic participation RFLP blots hybridized with molecular probes. The results of analysis in eating behaviour and body weight regulation and suggest its show that in four cases among 173 twins blood chimerism may be involvement in the aetiology of eating disorders (ED) and some related considered, which suggests that the influence of in vitro fertilization on psychopathological traits. To test this hypothesis we have analyzed early embryonic development requires further investigation. the -995G>A, -759C>T, -697G>C and Cys23Ser SNPs within the serotonin receptor 5HT2C gene by a population-based association P1109. Analysis of genetic variants of NOD2/CARD15 and DLG5 study in a total sample of 151 ED patients and 116 sex-matched gene in a Polish family with daughter suffering from Crohn`s unrelated controls. We also analyzed the potential involvement of disease the 5HT2C gene in different psychiatric symptoms measured by the M. Kaczmarek1, A. Dobrowolska-Zachwieja2, J. Hoppe-Golebiewska1,3, R. Ka- Symptom Checklist 90-revised (SCL90-R) questionnaire. The case- lak4, R. Slomski1,4; control study showed that the -995G/-759C/-697C/Ser23 haplotype 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, was associated to the purging ED categories of and binge-eating/ Poznan, Poland, 3Delta Pharma BV, Hengelo, The Netherlands, 4University of purging anorexia and bulimia nervosa (P = 0.01). We also observed Agriculture, Poznan, Poland. that bulimic patients carrying the -995A/-759T/-697C/Cys23 5HT2C Crohn’s disease (CD) belongs to inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) haplotype showed increased symptomatology for seven of the nine with growing frequency, especially a form involving the colon. Molecular subscales of the SCL90R questionnaire. These include somatization background is still unknown, although recent data suggest thatGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 322 mutations in NOD2/CARD15 gene and genetic variants in DLG5 gene capabilities were limited. are associated with the disease. In studied case the female patient’s We have generated the program easyLINKAGE that combines development was normal until the age of 19 years when symptoms of automated setup and performance of linkage analyses and simulation CD appeared. Main complains were: diarrhea without the presence of under an easy to handle graphical user interface for Microsoft RBC in bowel movements, cramp abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, Windows 2000/XP. The program can analyze microsatellite as well as lost of weight. On examination the painful tumor in abdominal right SNP data (Affymetrix 10k chip). easyLINKAGE supports single- point lower quadrant was still palpable. The abnormalities in laboratory linkage analyses (FastLink, SuperLink, SPLink), multi-point linkage tests and other parameters were detected. Ultrasound examination analyses (GeneHunter/-Plus, Allegro), and single-point simulation showed thickened wall of distal part of ileum and colonoscopy showed studies (SLink). In particular, Allegro can now be used for SNP chip narrowed lumen in ascending colon with the presence of ulcerations data because it is not limited by marker numbers. easyLINKAGE Plus and pseudo polyps. CD was confirmed histopathologicaly. tests for Mendelian errors prior subsequent linkage analyses based Molecular analysis of NOD2/CARD15 and DLG5 gene was performed on PedCheck. The program uses predefined marker databases on patient’s DNA and family members without any symptoms of disease, (Marshfield, decode, LDB, SLM1). The user can choose between five using screening methods and DNA sequencing. Analysis of patient different allele frequency algorithms plus additional allele frequency showed homozygous presence of two frequent sequence variants: reference values for Asian, Caucasian, African-American populations 802C>T (Pro268Ser) and 3020insC (1007fs). Variant 802C>T in both for SNP chip projects (data kindly provided by Affymetrix Inc.). alleles appeared in brother and father of affected girl as well, whereas easyLINKAGE provides genome-wide as well as chromosomal mother was heterozygous. The 3020insC was homozygous in patient graphical plots of LOD scores, NPL scores, P values, and many other sample only, whereas the other family members were heterozygous. parameters. The program generates input files for pedigree/haplotype The first conclusion is that complete disruption of NOD2-signaling drawing software such as HaploPainter. pathway may be crucial in development of the disease, but the other There is currently no other program available that offers the comfort factors, such as the others susceptibility genes as DLG5 or co-existing and versatility of easyLINKAGE at a comparable level. The design infection could also play important role. enables the use of the program for a wide audience. P1110. Glucokinase mutations and low triglycerides P1112. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) T. H. Lindner1,2, M. Berger2, D. Mönks2, H. Schmidt2, V. Krane2, C. Wanner2, U. association with the DAT1 core promoter -67 T-allele Walter1; A. Irani Shemirani1, M. R. Keikhaee1, E. Shirazi2, M. Tehranidoost3, M. 1Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry, Medical University Ehssani1, N. Moghimi1, H. Najmabadi1, M. Ohadi1; Clinic Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Division of Nephrology, Department 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- of Medicine, Medical University Clinic Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany. ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran University of Medical Sciences, Mutations in the glucokinase gene (GCK) lead to an impaired sensing of Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Psychiatry, Rozbeh Hospital, blood glucose by the pancreatic β-cell causing an autosomal dominant Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. form of type 2 diabetes, Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young type Association between attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 2 (MODY2). Usually, MODY2 patients present increased fasting and the 10-repeat allele of a polymorphism (a 40 bp variable number blood glucose levels (6-12 mM) from an early age on which should of tandem repeats) in the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) has been significantly increase their risk for diabetic complications. Whereas widely documented. In this study, we examined whether either allele other forms of diabetes lead to macrovascular complications, MODY2 of the DAT1 core promoter -67 polymorphism is associated with ADHD patients rarely develop those problems. in a case/control study. The allele and genotype frequencies of the In a family with autosomal dominant diabetes we identified a novel C polymorphism were studied in 100 patients and 163 controls, which to A substitution (A232D) in the GCK gene in all affected individuals. were matched on the basis of sex, age and ethnicity. The genotype Mutations around codon 232 cause a very low glucokinase activity and frequencies in the patients group were as follows: AA 15.5%; AT suggest a similar effect of A232D. 71.8%; TT 12.6% vs. the genotype frequencies in the control group: Elevated HbA levels should correspond with elevated triglycerides AA 49%; AT 41.8%; TT 9.2% [χ2=31.11, df = 2, OR = 2.15 (95% CI 1c since they indicate a disturbed metabolic control. However, despite 1.34-3.47, p ≤ 0.0001]. The T-allele of the -67A/T polymorphism off an elevated HbA affected subjects showed even lower fasting revealed a ~1.6-fold excess in the patients group comparing with the 1c triglycerides than the unaffected persons (affected/unaffected controls (χ2=18.45, df = 1, p ≤ 0.001). For the first time, these findings (n=7/13): Triglycerides 0.65/1.56±0.31/0.82 mM (P=0.025), HbA provide tentative evidence of the contribution of the DAT1 gene core 1c 6.63/5.40±0.26/0.28% (P=0.0000028)). We made the same observation promoter polymorphism to the etiopathophysiology of ADHD at least in another MODY2 family. in the Iranian population that we have studied. Replication studies GCK mutations should lead to lower triglycerides, even within the of independent samples and family-based association studies are normal range (0.35-2.30 mM), since they impair glycolysis which is necessary to further evaluate the significance of our findings. responsible for delivering glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate as the later glycerol backbone of triglycerides. Transgenic mice overexpressing P1113. Genetic predisposition for cardiac hypertrophy of GCK develop hypertriglyceridemia, therefore indicating a link between different origin glucokinase activity and triglyceride regulation. O. A. Makeeva1, K. V. Puzyrev2, M. V. Golubenko1, E. N. Pavlukova2, V. P. In conclusion, an impaired GCK activity could cause particularly Puzyrev1; low triglycerides. The contribution of low triglyceride levels to lesser 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Re- macrovascular complications in MODY2 patients remains a matter of search Institute of Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation. future investigation. Cardiac hypertrophy (CH) is a leading predictor of heart failure, it considered being adaptive response to a variety of stimulus P1111. easyLINKAGE Plus - Automated single-/multipoint linkage (excessive hemodynamic burden, endocrine abnormalities, mutations analysis for microsatellites and large scale SNP data in an user- in sarcomeric protein genes etc.). Nevertheless, common genetic friendly Windows environment mechanisms and common genes may exist for etiologically distinct CH K. Hoffmann1, T. H. Lindner2,3; forms. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Charité - Campus Virchow Klinikum, Humboldt We studied three groups of patients with diverse initial events for CH: University Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of Clinical Biochemistry and 136 - with essential hypertension (64% had left ventricular hypertrophy Pathobiochemistry, Medical University Clinic Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, (LVH)), 95 - with arterial hypertension, combined with diabetes mellitus 3Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Medical University Clinic type 2 (53% with LVH) and 32 - with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany. Analysis of 15 polymorphisms in 9 candidate genes (ACE, AGTR1, Most of linkage analysis software was traditionally developed for UNIX GNB3, NOS3, TNF, PPP3CA, GATA4, MYH7, MYBPC3) revealed that environments restricting calculations to experienced users. Input files the majority of genes (5 of 8) where associations with echocardiographic had to be generated in a time-consuming process and graphical output parameters were detected are common for two or three CH forms,Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 323 although individual effects varied considerably. Some distinctions Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with in genetic basis of different CH forms were found: while in essential abnormal inflammatory response of the lungs to noxious particles or hypertension ACE (A-240T and A2350G) and AGTR1 (A1166C) gases. Tumor Necrosis Factor -α (TNF-α) gene polymorphisms are genotypes accounted for 6,0-9,0% of variability of left ventricular suspected to play an important role in disease susceptibility. TNF-α mass index (LVMI), no substantial effect of renin-angiotensin system gene SNPs:-1031T>C, -863C>A, -857C>T, -308G>A, and -238G>A, genes was found in hypertensive patients with DM2. On the contrary, were examined in 95 Greek COPD patients diagnosed according to polymorphisms of NOS3 (C774T and G894T) accounted for 7,0-8,0% GOLD guidelines (FEV1/FVC < 70% and FEV1<80% of predicted of LVMI variability in DM2 group, while for essential hypertension were values) and compared to 96 Greek control subjects without evidence no associations with LVMI. In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy expression of COPD or other lung disease. Biotinylated primers specific for the of LVH depended on contractile protein gene polymorphisms (T15753C promoter sequence of the TNF-α gene were used for PCR. SNPs of MYH7 accounted for 14% of variance). The comprehensive approach were genotyped using the NanoChip™ Molecular Biology Workstation to CH genetic analysis has revealed features, which can remain hidden (Nanogen www.nanogen.com) using the amplicon down format. To when single forms of CH are studied. reduce the cost of the assay we developed a universal reporting system 3’ labeled with fluorescent dyes Alexa555 (wild-type) and Alexa647 P1114. Molecular genetic study for the prenatal diagnosis of (mutant). The target sequences on the 100 electronically addressable hemophilia B by linkage analysis sites were hybridized to specific oligonucleotide reporters in conditions E. Shin, J. Kyhm, C. Lee, Y. Cho; that allow discrimination between mutant, heterozygous and wild-type Hanyang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. samples. For the 5 SNPs studied no statistical significant difference Linkage analysis is a very useful method for prenatal diagnosis or carrier was found between COPD patients and controls. status evaluation of Hemophilia B, especially when a mutation was not COPD CONTROLS SNP posi- Statistical identified in a family. Eleven polymorphic markers were evaluated in genotype Genotype fre- Genotype fre- tion analysis Korean populations. We analyzed nine intragenic markers within the quencies quencies factor IX gene and two extragenic microsatellite markers in 100 healthy TT 0.6667 0.6042 Korean women (200 X-chromosomes). SalI, MseI, NruI, DdeI, XmnI, -1031 TC 0.3333 0.3646 P=0.2 TaqI, Mnl I and HhaI polymorphisms were detected by polymerase T/C CC chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) - 0.0312 method, DXS 102 and DXS 1232 microsatellite markers by DNA CC 0.7143 0.625 fragment analyses with GeneticAnalyzer, and T/C nucleotide variation -863 CA 0.2857 0.3438 P=0.14 at nucleotide 32770 in the poly-A region by flurescence melting curve C/A AA - 0.0312 analysis with real-time PCR machine. There was no polymorphism of DdeI, XmnI and TaqI markers in Korean population. There was complete CC 0.5555 0.5053 -857 linkage disequilibrium between SalI(+) allele and Mse(-) allele, and CT 0.3889 0.4210 P=0.75 C/T vice versa. The expected heterozygosity of SalI, NruI, MnlI, HhaI were TT 0.0556 0.0737 estimated to be 45.8%, 24.8%, 8.3%, 32%, respectively. The repeated GG 0.8737 0.8260 number of (AC) dinucleotide in DXS 102 and DXS 1232 ranged 13- -308 n GA 0.1158 0.1740 P=0.33 20 and 21-30 repeats, respectively, and expected heterozygosities G/A AA were 36.8% and 74.8% respectively. T/C Polymorphism at the poly-A 0.0105 - region (nt32770) showed expected heterozygosity of 15%. With the GG 0.9551 0.9674 7 informative polymorphisms together, the expected heterozygosity -238 GA 0.0449 0.0326 P=0.66 rate was improved to 95.86%. Therefore the prenatal diagnosis and G/A AA - - carrier detection in hemophilia B families can be achieved effectively and rapidly in Korean with these polymorphisms. P1117. Confirmation of psoriasis susceptibility genes on chromosomes 6p21 and 20p12 by linkage and family-based P1115. A gene causing cataract and hypogonadism maps to the association study in French families long arm of chromosome 2 F. Lesueur1, T. Oudot1, C. Lefevre1, F. Jobard1, S. Heath1, M. Lathrop1, J. E. Pras1, H. Resnik-Wolf1, M. Mendelblat1, M. Frydman1, Y. Zlotogora2, S. Alon- Prud'homme2, J. Fischer1; Shalev3; 1Centre National de Genotypage, Evry, France, 2Genethon, Evry, France. 1Danek Gartner Institute of Human Genetics, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 2Depart- Psoriasis is a common skin disorder affecting 1 to 4 % of the population ment of Community Genetics, Health Ministry, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 3Depart- worldwide. The trait is widely regarded to be multifactorial in origin ment of Human Genetics, Haemek Medical Center, Afula, Israel. including gene-gene and gene-environnement interactions. Genetic We have encountered an extended inbred Arab Muslem family in which and allelic heterogeneity, complex inheritance, and low penetrance of four members suffer from congenital cataract, developmental delay susceptibility alleles substantially complicate both study design and and hypogonadism. Laboratory tests indicated high levels of FSH interpretation of results. Genome-wide scans for disease susceptibility and LH and low levels of testosterone, findings indicative of primary have repeatedly demonstrated the existence of a major locus, hypogonadism. The disease segregates in an autosomal recessive PSORS1, which encompasses 3 genes (HLA-C, HCR and CDSN) mode and is consistent with previous descriptions of Martsolf's carrying psoriasis-associated SNPs. Subsequently, 20 additional loci syndrome. A genome wide search performed on DNA samples from have been suggested in the literature. With the aim of elucidating 15 family members, revealed initial linkage to chromosome 2q. A the genetics of psoriasis, a study was initiated at Généthon in 1996, maximal lod score of 3.51 was obtained with the marker D2S1334 at which led to the identification of 3800 families through a national media θ=0.00. Fine mapping with self constructed polymorphic CA repeats campaign. From this collection, 46 large families with over 8 affected confined the disease to 1 Mb interval betweens the genomic clones individuals and apparently autosomal dominant inheritance were AC012450 and AC112255. Sequencing of seven candidate genes pre-selected to carry out a genome-wide search. Our results confirm from the interval, expressed in the eye, brain and gonads failed to previous findings of linkage to PSORS1 and support the presence of disclose disease-associated mutations. Additional genes are currently a susceptibility locus on proximal chromosome 20p. Genotyping for being sequenced. HLA-C alleles and SNPs within genes HCR and CDSN demonstrates association with PSORS1 alleles HLA-Cw6, CDSN 971T (p=0.0001), P1116. Use of the NanoChip platform for genotyping TNFa gene HCR 325T (p= 0.0003), HCR 1723T (p=0.0001) and HCR 2327G SNPs likely to be involved in the pathogenesis of COPD. (p=0.0003). Using a dense SNP map to narrow the area of linkage A. Papatheodorou1, M. Tzetis1, P. Latsi2, C. Vrettou1, A. Dimakou2, D. Orphani- on chromosome 20p, we also identified a risk allele for the disease dou2, E. Kanavakis1; in a new candidate gene. Further studies are needed to evaluate the 1Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Sotiria Chest Disease Hospital, Athens, proportion of families linked to 6p21 and to 20p12, and to determine Greece. whether the 2 loci interact.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 324 P1118. A new player in the field of celiac disease? Results from the cause of these differences not only in the risk to develop breast fine-mapping the CELIAC4 region cancer but also in the appearance of other associated tumours. A. J. Monsuur, I. Lavrijsen, A. Zhernakova, L. Franke, C. Wijmenga; The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of the two p53 Complex Genetics Section, DBG-Department of Medical Genetics, UMC Utre- polymorphisms, 16bp insertion and Arg72Pro, as BRCA1/2 modifiers. cht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. For this purpose we investigated the possible association between Celiac disease (CD) is a complex genetic disorder. Besides the the two polymorphisms and disease status in 424 BRCA1/BRCA2 environmental factor gluten and the HLA-DQ2 and 8 proteins, other mutation carriers belonging to 170 breast and/or ovarian cancer unknown genetic factors are involved. Several genome-wide screens Spanish families. Genotype and haplotype analysis revealed that the have been performed to locate the regions with genes involved in CD. presence of a specific haplotype carrying the wild-type allele for the In the Dutch population this has led to the discovery of two susceptibility 16bpins and the variant allele for the Arg72Pro (WT-72Pro haplotype) regions, 6q21-22 and 19p13 (CELIAC4). The region on 19p13 is only was associated with an earlier age of onset in BRCA2 mutation carriers. limited to 3.5 Mb, but due to its high density of genes, it still contains 92 We found almost a three-fold increase risk to develop the first primary candidate genes. We set out to fine-map this region with microsatellite tumour (breast or ovarian) before 35 years of age considering all the markers and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to search for carrier women OR: 2.77 (95%CI: 1.05-7.31 p=0.039). Considering association between genes and CD. We started with a cohort of 216 index cases only, results were even more significant given that younger cases and 216 controls and expanded this to 311 cases and 540 cases were over-represented (OR:5.29 CI95% 1.48-18.8 p=0.001). controls. Association testing using microsatellite markers has revealed The finding of concordant and statistically significant results in both a small region of interest of around 450 kb. Further fine-mapping with analysis allow us to conclude that these polymorphisms in p53 modify SNP shows association in a 150 kb region, encompassing a limited BRCA2 penetrance. number of genes. Adding more SNPs led to the discovery of MYO9B as the gene on 19p13 most strongly associated to CD. This gene, which P1121. DIAPH2 is a susceptibility gene for Premature Ovarian is a single-headed motor myosin, shows association in its 3’ part. This Failure (POF part of the gene contains the most interesting domains, differentiating S. Bione1, C. Sala2, F. Rizzolio2, M. Goegan2, A. Marozzi3, W. Vegetti3, R. the role of this myosin from the other family members. The Rho-Gap Nappi4, D. Toniolo5; and Dag-Pe domains indicate that this gene is involved in signal 1IGM-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 2DIBIT.HSR, Milano, Italy, 3University of Milano, Milano, transduction. We are now elucidating the specific role of this gene in Italy, 4University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 5DIBIT-HSR, Milano, Italy. signal transduction and trying to incorporate it in our models for CD. Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is an heterogeneous genetic disorder characterized by lack of ovulation and elevated gonadotropin P1119. ABCA1 gene R1587K polymorphism and coronary artery level before 40 years of age. POF has a frequency of about 1% and disease in CAD probands and sibs from Russia with the increase of women reproductive age it has become a relevant P. A. Slominsky1, T. V. Tupitcyna1, Y. A. Yuefereva2, S. A. Limborska1; cause of infertility. The DIAPH2 gene in Xq22 is one of the two human 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian State homologues of the Drosophila dia gene, whose mutated alleles affect Center for Preventive Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation. fruit fly fertility. DIAPH2 was interrupted by a balanced X/autosome Coronary artery disease (CAD) is multifactorial disease, and its translocation in a familial case of POF. We performed a case-control progression is known to be influenced by different risk factors. Plasma study on a panel of 255 Italian patients and 404 matched controls to lipoprotein disturbances are among the most common biochemical identify allelic variants in DIAPH2 associated with the disorder. The abnormalities observed in patients with CAD. Among the lipoproteins, haplotypic structure of the gene was constructed using a pair-wise HDL-C level are strongly inversely correlated with CAD . Recently, maximun likelihood estimation method. Inside LD block 1, one SNP the ABCA1 protein was identified as an mediator of cholesterol (L2) showed a significant excess of heterozygotes (X-square test, 1df, efflux. A number of common polymorphisms have been reported in p=0,002) among patients, resulting in the definition of a risk-genotype the coding and promoter regions of ABCA1 gene. We have analyzed (O.R.=1,67; 95%CI: 1,2-2,3). The excess of heterozygotes at the L2 single-nucleotide polymorphism R1587K in a group of patients with locus may be the result of different genetic mechanisms. One possible angiography proven coronary artery disease and their sibs from explanation is that the risk-haplotype would be lethal in male embryos: Russian population. To assess the influence of R1587K polymorphism accordingly, the number of females and males in the offspring of on the clinical and biochemical characteristics in proband and sibs familial POF cases carrying the DIAPH2 risk-genotype demonstrated a groups non parametric gamma correlation analysis was performed. For significant excess of females (31 females/13 males; One-cell X-square probands with CAD the R1587K polymorphism does not influence the p=0,007). Our data demonstrated that the DIAPH2 gene is involved in main CAD clinical and degree of an coronary arteries atherosclerotic the pathogenesis of POF and that a functional variant in the LD block lesion. It is not revealed also effects of this polymorphism on a plasma 1 may be responsible for ovarian dysfunction. lipid spectrum. At the same time for CAD patient sibs the strong and very significant correlation between a R1587K CAD, myocardial P1122. Association of Glutathion-S-transferase M1, T1 and P1 infarction and angina is found. Thus the increased risk of CAD and Gene Polymorphisms with Autoimmune Hepatitis (AIH) its main manifestations is associated with R1587 allele - relative risk L. Alidoust Masouleh1, M. Agah1,2, M. Zafarghandi1, H. Sendi1,2, M. Zali1; of CAD development for genotypes RR and RK carriers is 4,88 (95 % 1Research center for gastroenterology and liver diseases, Tehran, Islamic Re- CI 4,14-7,62). This association of a R1587K polymorphism with risk of public of Iran, 2Karolinska institute, Stockholm, Sweden. CAD development in sibs group is not linked with its effect on a plasma Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a chronic inflammatory liver disorder of lipid levels. unknown etiology. GST (Glutathion-s-transferases) genes, enzymes P1120. Two p53 polymorphisms modify cancer risk in BRCA2 metabolizing carcinogens, drug, and foreign compounds, may play mutation carriers a role in susceptibility to autoimmune liver disease and its severity. A. Osorio1, M. Pollán2, M. Cuadros1, C. Torrenteras1, R. Rodríguez-López1, L. We determined the frequency of GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1 Melchor1, G. Ribas1, R. Salazar3, E. Velasco4, M. de la Hoya5, O. Díez6, B. Mar- polymorphisms in Iranian patients with AIH. METHODS: In a case- tínez-Delgado1, J. Benítez1; control study, we examined 64 AIH patients (49 female and 15 male), 1Spanish National Cancer Centre, Madrid, Spain, 2Instituto de Salud Carlos III, referred to RCGLD, and 100 healthy controls (70 female and 30 male), Madrid, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 4Uni- after obtaining an informed consent . The mean ages for cases and versidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 5Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, controls were 35.4 ± 13.4 and 32.1 ± 7.5, respectively. After DNA Spain, 6Sant Pau Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. extraction by salting out method, the genetic polymorphism analysis Germ-line mutations in the BRCA genes confer a high life-time risk for GST M1 and the GST T1 genes was determined in a single assay to develop breast and other cancers. Although these mutations are using a multiplex PCR approach. Also, PCR-RFLP method was used considered as highly penetrant, estimates of risks actually may vary for detection of GST P1 gene polymorphism. RESULTS: GSTM1 and from 36% to 70% to develop breast cancer at age 70, depending on GSTT1 null genotypes (deletions) were determined in 33(51.6%) and the family ascertainment and the population studied. Other genetic 15 (23.4%) patients with AIH, and 56(56%) and 22(22%) controls, and/or environmental factors, called “modifiers” are supposed to be respectively. Comparison of patients and controls relative to GSTM1Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 325 and GSTT1 genotypes revealed no significant difference between them. Regarding GSTP1 genotypes, 25(39.1%) heterozygotes, 7 Combination of alleles HH HFO HI (10.9%) homozygotes in the case group and 38(38%) heterozygotes, HSP70-2G p=7.58×10-4 p=5.32×10-4 p=8.81×10-3 14(14%) homozygotes in the control group were observed. The allele frequency of GSTP1 was 30.4 and 33 in patients and controls, TNF2 RAGE respectively showing no significant variation among cases and controls. p=8.02×10-5 p=2.39×10-5 p=3.82×10-5 -429C CONCLUSION: Our study dose not support any specific role for GST genotypes in AIH which may be because of the variation in ethnicity. HSP70-2G p=1.13×10-4 p=0.285 p=4.87×10-4 C4A*Q0 P1123. Investigation of common genetic factors in autoimmune (C4A<C4B) RAGE diseases p=5.63×10-6 p=0.00022 p=0.00086 -429C A. Zhernakova1, A. Monsuur1, P. Eerligh2, C. Wijmenga1, B. P. C. Koeleman1,2; 1Complex Genetics Section, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Department of Immu- p=6.08 HSP70-2G p=6.82×10-6 p=0.0767302 nohaematology and Bloodbank, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands. ×10-5 Different autoimmune diseases (AIDs) share part of their genetic MonoS-C4B background. T-cells are important mediators of AIDs, whereas RAGE p=7.17×10- p=3.13×10-6 p=1.81×10-6 cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA4) and protein -429C 15 tyrosine phosphatase (PTPN22) are both negative regulators of T-cell activation and proliferation. To establish the association of both genes Hungarian families affected with T1D with AIDs, we tested SNPs in CTLA4 and PTPN22 in three independent groups of AID patients. HLA-DQ2 HLA-DR17 TNF2 MonoS 350 Type 1 Diabetes (T1D), 309 Coeliac Disease (CD) and 153 Rheumatoid Arthritis patients (RA) were tested for association in a case/ control design with four SNPs in the CTLA4 gene region (MH30*G/C; -1149*C/T; CT60*G/A; JO37_3*G/A) and one coding SNP 1858C>T HSP70-2G p=2.82×10-10 p=1.57×10-9 p=3.7×10-9 p=1.57×10-5 in the PTPN22 gene. In addition, 218 T1D families were tested by the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT). The T1D group showed strong association to PTPN22 1858C>T, RAGE-429C p=6.93×10-11 p=1.07×10-19 p=1.69×10-15 p=5.36×10-6 both in the case/control design and by TDT (p=2x10-7 and p=9x10-9, respectively). The T1D group also showed association to the CTLA4 gene (p=0.003 and p=0.02 for the most associated SNP in the case/ Discussion: Our results indicate that there is strong LD between controls and TDT, respectively). We observed an association with the RAGE -429 C and HSP70 -2G alleles with alleles known to be PTPN22 in the RA group (p=0.003) but found no significant association members of the 8.1 AH. Therefore it can be assumed that RAGE -429 to CTLA4, although there was a trend towards an increase in the T1D- C and HSP70 -2 G alleles are new candidate members of the 8.1 AH. susceptible haplotype. No association between CTLA4 and PTPN22 was observed in the CD patients. We are now investigating the P1125. Absence of association between the IVS6+79G/A interaction of these two genes. polymorphism in PROZ and stroke We conclude the CTLA4 and PTPN22 genes are associated with an V. Obach1, X. Muñoz2, M. Revilla1, A. Chamorro1, N. Sala3, P. García de Fru- increased susceptibility to some AIDs. Investigating the co-association tos4; of various genes and using stratification protocols might provide clues 1Unitat d’Ictus, Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 2IDIBELL-Institut to understanding the genetic basis of AIDs. de Recerca Oncològica, Barcelona, Spain, 3IDIBELL-Institut de Recerca Oncològica, Centre de Genètica Mèdica i Molecular, Barcelona, Spain, 4IIBB- P1124. New candidate members of the HLA 8.1 ancestral CSIC-IDIBAPS; Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. haplotype (8.1 AH): RAGE -429C and HSP70-2G Plasma levels of Protein Z (PZ), a vitamin K dependent protein J. Laki1, P. Kiszel1, Á. Vatay1, B. Blaskó1, M. Kovács1, A. Körner2, L. Madácsy2, with both procoagulant and anticoagulant properties, show a wide L. Blatniczky3, Z. Almássy4, C. Szalai4, K. Rajczy5, É. Pozsonyi5, I. Karádi1, L. interindividual variation and different case-control studies have Romics1, N. Hosszúfalusi1, P. Pánczél1, G. J. Arason6, Y. Yang7, Y. L. Wu7, C. Y. revealed contradictory results on the association between PZ plasma Yu7, G. Füst1; levels and cerebral ischemia. Recently, an association between the 1Semmelweis University, 3rd Department of Medicine, Budapest, Hungary, IVS6+79G/A polymorphism in the PZ gene (PROZ), PZ plasma levels 2Semmelweis University, 1st Department of Pediatrics, Budapest, Hungary, and cerebral ischemia in young individuals has been described. The 3Buda Children’s Hospital, Budapest, Hungary, 4Heim Pál Children’s Hospital, proposal of our study was to confirm these results in our population of Budapest, Hungary, 5National Institute of Hematology and Immunology, Buda- patients with stroke. pest, Hungary, 6Landspítali University Hospital, Reykjavík, Iceland, 7Columbus The IVS6+79G/A polymorphism of PROZ has been analyzed in 549 Children’s Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United patients with ischemic (n=387) or hemorrhagic (n=162) stroke and in States. 127 healthy controls, with an average age of 66, 72 and 64 years- Introduction: The 8.1. AH is common in the Caucasian population. old, respectively. The analysis has been carried out through PCR This haplotype consists of the HLA-B8, HLA-DR3(17) and HLA-DQ2 amplification and subsequent HpaI restriction analysis. alleles, and in the MHC III region contains the TNF-α -308A (TNF2), The results obtained indicated that in the patients’ group neither the monomodular short RCCX module (MonoS) with a single C4B gene but frequency of the A allele of the PROZ IVS6+79G/A polymorphism no C4A gene. 8.1AH is found to be associated with many autoimmune (q=0.19) nor the genotype distribution (GG=0.667 , GA=0.291 and diseases such as type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D). AA=0.042) were significantly different (χ2 p>0.05) from those obtained Methods and materials: 93 healthy Hungarians (HH), 97 healthy in controls (frequency of the A allele=0.20; GG=0.635, GA=0.325 female Caucasians from Ohio (HFO) and 91 healthy Icelandic (HI) and AA=0.040). All the groups analysed were in Hardy Weinberg subjects were genotyped for TNF-α -308, HSP70 -2, and RAGE -429 equilibrium. There was also no statistical significance between both polymorphisms by PCR-RFLP, and for C4A and C4B polymorphisms ischemic (q= 0.20) and hemorrhagic (q=0.15) stroke patients and in the RCCX module (Blanchong et al, JEM, 2000), 196 Hungarian healthy controls. individuals from families affected with T1D were genotyped for the From these results we conclude that the A allele of the PROZ above mentioned regions, and for HLA-DR and DQ alleles by SSP- IVS6+79G/A polymorphism is not a protective factor for stroke in our PCR. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) coefficients were calculated by the population. Arlequin software. We thank ISCIII (01/1468 and C03/07) and MCYT (SAF 2001-1059- Results: C02) for grants.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 326 P1126. SDHD Variants Do Not Constitute a Risk Factor for Denmark, 3Department of Psychiatry, O-6234, University of Copenhagen, Bleg- Developing C-Cell Hyperplasia, or Sporadic Medullary Thyroid damsvej 9, 2100, Copenhagen, Denmark. Carcinoma There is increasing evidence from both animal and human studies A. Cascon1, A. Cebrian2, M. Pollan3, S. Ruiz-Llorente1, C. Montero-Conde1, R. that neuropeptide Y (NPY) plays a role in depression and anxiety. A Leton1, R. Gutierrez1, F. Lesueur2, R. L. Milne1, O. Gonzalez-Albarran4, T. Lu- polymorphism in the signal peptide of NPY that leads to substitution cas-Morante5, J. Benitez1, B. A. J. Ponder2, M. Robledo1; of leucine with proline (Leu7Pro) has previously been associated with 1Spanish National Cancer Centre, Madrid, Spain, 2University of Cambridge, hypercholesterolemia and alcohol dependence. The present study Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, examined the distribution of the Leu7Pro polymorphism in a Danish 4Hospital Ramon y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 5Clinica Universitaria Puerta de Hierro, population of patients with major depression (n=220) or panic disorder Madrid, Spain. (n=121) and in a group of ethnically matched controls (n=730). We also Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a tumor that arises from studied the polymorphism in a group of schizophrenic patients (n=275). parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland. MTC can occur sporadically The Leu7Pro polymorphism was found to occur at a significantly higher (75%), or as part of inherited cancer syndromes (25%). In most cases genotype frequency in patients with major depression (10.5%; p<0.05, hereditary MTC evolves from preneoplastic C-cell hyperplasia (CCH), chi squared test) as compared to the control group (6.4%). Frequency so early detection of this pathology would evidently be critical. A was also higher in panic disorder (8.3%) and schizophrenic patients recent study described a family with CCH as being attributable to the (8.7%), but this did not reach significance. In conclusion, the present variant c.149A>G (H50R) in SDHD. This gene codes for one of the study shows an association between the Leu7Pro polymorphism and mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase subunits and has been found depression, suggesting that the polymorphism could be involved in the altered, both in paraganglioma (PGL) and pheochromocytoma (PCC) patophysiology of depression in the Danish population. families. We firstly studied SDHD in two families with hereditary non- RET CCH, and found no alterations related to the inheritance of this P1129. Study for possible association of a polymorphism of disease. We then investigated whether the H50R variant could be a the interleukin-6 gene promoter and premature coronary artery risk factor in the sporadic development of MTC both in Spanish and disease in the Greek population English patients. We found no evidence that the presence of the H50R H. Arvaniti1, M. Vasilakou1, D. Hatzipanagi1, V. Votteas2, H. Kasparian2, N. is strongly associated with the risk of sporadic MTC, though we did Pantazopoulos2, K. Peste3, M. Spyropoulou-Vlahou3, A. Stauropoulou-Gkioka3, observe an association with age at diagnosis of MTC in Spanish H50R K. Lamnissou1; carriers that we did not find in English patients. Finally, we looked for 1Dept of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Dept of Cardiology, evidence of CCH or any other thyroid disease in a panel of germ-line "Laiko"Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Dept of Anosology, "G.Gennimatas" Hospital, SDH (B or D) mutation carriers, and found none. We conclude that Athens, Greece. SDHD variants do not constitute a risk factor for developing CCH, The interleucine-6 (IL-6) protein is a pleiotropic cytokine which play a or sporadic MTC. We also point to the necessity of confirming the central role in inflammation. The former was suggested to be involved pathogenicity of controversial variants, by means of analyze individuals in the pathogenesis of different diseases, such as atheroscrerosis and coming from distinct populations. coronary artery disease (CAD). In the present study we investigated the possible association between the -174G/C polymorphism of the P1127. CTLA4 alanine-17 polymorphism and spanish patients promoter of interleukin-6 (IL-6) on risk of premature CAD in the Greek with Graves disease population. In a prospective case-control study, 129 CAD patients, D. Valverde1, P. Alvarez2, L. Constenla2, R. García -Mayor2; documented by coronary angiography, aged under 58 years and 120 1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Xeral-Cies, Vigo, healthy controls were studied. To genotype the subjects we used the Spain. PCR-RFLPS method. The frequencies of GG, GC, CC genotypes were Graves disease (GD) is a pathology of autoimmune nature that is 0.66, 0.31, 0.03, respectively, in the patient group and 0.62, 0.31, 0.07, produced as result of a complex interaction among genetic and respectively, in the control group. The dada between the two groups environmental factors. In the last years innumerable efforts have been were analyzed by chi-square test. Our results showed that there was done to define the genes of genetic susceptibility of this disease, no patient/control significant differences and they suggest that there nevertheless in multiple occasions the results have been scanty and is no association of the IL-6 -174G/C promoter polymorphism with the even contradictory. Numerous studies have demonstrated the important risk of premature coronary artery disease in this Greek population. role of the polymorphism of the gene CTLA4 in the susceptibility of this disease. The gene CTLA4 is placed in 2q33 and codifies the T cell P1130. Genetic analysis of the hypothesis of altered receptor that modulates negatively the immune response disabling to oligodendrocyte function in schizophrenia the T-cells. The aim of the present work is to determine the contribution L. Georgieva, J. Wilkinson, G. Kirov, M. Owen, M. O'Donovan; of the A/G dimorphism at position +49 in exon 1 of the CTLA4 gene to Department of Psychological Medicine,Cardiff University, School of Medicine, the disease. Fifty patients with GD and 50 unrelated healthy subjects Cardiff, United Kingdom. from general population were analyzed as controls. The GD was Background: Oligodendrocyte abnormalities have been implicated in defined as the presence of hyperthyroidism analytical (T4L raised and schizophrenia by a diverse range of experimental approaches including undetectable THS) together with two or more of the following criteria. gene expression analysis, neuropathology, and neuroimaging. With Diffuse goiter, high titles of thyroid antibodies and the presence of the aim of establishing whether such abnormalities are of primary ophthalmopathy. Restriction enzyme digestion with BbvI of polymerase aetiological relevance to schizophrenia pathogenesis, we are currently chain reaction (PCR) amplified genomic DNA for the A/G dimorphism examining genes relevant to myelination and oligodendrocyte function was used to analyze the polymorphism. Preliminary results suggest for association with schizophrenia. Methods: Candidate genes are being differences in the allele frequencies between the two groups GD and examined in large case control and family based association samples controls. For the G allele we found 48% in GD patients and 35% in using a combination of direct association analysis based upon de novo controls. Our preliminary results show evidence of association of any of mutation detection and also by indirect association analysis based the CTLA4 gene polymorphism with the disease in Spanish patients. upon dense maps of database markers. Results: Nominally significant evidence (p<0.05) for association has been found for the OLIG2 gene coding for a transcriptional factor that plays a role in terminal P1128. The leucine to proline polymorphism at aminoacid 7 differentiation of oligodendrocytes. Discussion: So far, the evidence for (Leu7Pro) in prepro-neuropeptide Y is more frequent in patients association requires further analysis of more markers within the region with major depression in a Danish population. as well as a replication in independent laboratories. Nevertheless, our P. Koefoed1,2, D. Woldbye2, T. V. O. Hansen1, E. S. Hansen3, C. Lindberg1,2, E. data provide support for the hypothesis that oligodendrocyte function Mellerup2, J. F. Rehfeld1, T. G. Bolwig3; is relevant to schizophrenia pathogenesis. 1Department of Clinical Biochemistry, KB3013, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Laboratory of Neuropsychia- try, O-6102, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100, Copenhagen,Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 327 P1131. Linkage analysis in a family with autosomal dominant associated with differences in TNFalpha production. nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of differences in E. V. De Marco1, F. Annesi1, S. Carrideo1, D. Civitelli1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, P. asthma-related phenotypes with two biallelic polymorphisms: G to A Tarantino1, F. E. Rocca1, P. Spadafora1, A. Gambardella1,2, G. Annesi1; substitution at position - 308 and G to A substitution at position - 238 of 1Institute of Neurological Science, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), the TNFalpha gene promoter. Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy. METHODS: The regions of interest were amplified from genomic Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is a DNA by means of specific primers and PCR. The restriction enzyme distinctive epilepsy syndrome characterized by short, partial seizures digestion was used for genotyping individuals for the TNFalpha - 308 during non-REM sleep. Episodes often occur in clusters and localize and - 238 polymorphisms.A case-control analysis was performed for to the frontal lobe. ADNFLE is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait 83 asthmatic and 117 non-asthmatic unrelated children. with high penetrance. Mutations in the genes CHRNA4 (ENFL1 locus) RESULTS: TNFalpha -238A allele was present at a significantly and CHRNB2 (ENFL3 locus), encoding distinct neuronal nicotinic low frequency in the patients group (OR=0.21; P=0.03) In contrast, acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subunits, have been associated with an increased frequency of -308 A allele was found in the asthmatic ADNFLE and account for only a minority of cases. A third genetic locus group as compared to the control group (OR=2.5; P=0.03). It should (ENFLE 2) has been identified but mutations linked to this form of be noted, that the frequency of -308 A allele in the females from study the disease have not yet been found. Here we report on the results group was three time more, than in the female from control group (15% obtained by linkage analysis of the known loci performed on a family and 4% respectively). with ADNFLE coming from Calabria (Southern Italy). The affected CONCLUSION: -308A TNF promoter polymorphism might be suspected members, previously analyzed by sequencing all coding regions as genetic predisposition factor to asthma especially for females in and exon-intron boundaries, showed no mutations in CHRNA4 and childhood age. In contrast, -238A allele TNF promoter polymorphism CHRNB2 genes. The linkage analysis, performed on fifteen members has same protective effect to asthma. of the family, confirmed that these genes were not involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. Moreover, we tested the involvment of P1134. Linkage analysis of congenital motor nystagmus in the ENFLE 2 locus containing the CHRNA5/A3/B4 gene cluster and Russian family the data obtained allowed us to exclude any association between this S. Gudzenko1, V. Fedotov2, O. Evgrafov1, A. Polyakov1; locus and ADNFLE in our family. Currently, further linkage analyses are 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Diag- underway to determine whether genomic regions coding for additional nostic Centre, Voronezh, Russian Federation. nAChR subunits are associated to ADNFLE in the examined family. X-linked motor nystagmus is a common oculomotor disorder characterized by repetitive uncontrollable ocular oscillations with P1132. Associated transmission chromosomes 3+11 in onset typically at birth. X-linked, autosomal-dominant and autosomal- patients with autosomal recessive benign erythrocytosis from recessive inheritances have been described. The molecular defect of Chuvashia. the disorder is still unknown. S. Tverskaya, N. Vasserman, A. Polyakov; Three loci for X-linked nystagmus have been mapped to Xp11.4-p11.3 Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. and Xq26-q27. CDR1, SOX3, SLC25A14, SLC9A6 and FGF13 (Xq26- Several years ago we have demonstrated linkage of the autosomal q27) were studied as candidate genes, but no mutation was detected. recessive benign erythrocytosis that has a high incidence in To map and precise the genetic interval in which the gene of X-linked Chuvashia on 11q23 (Lod = 6.61) but gene of this disease was not nystagmus is placed we investigated 45 persons from five-generation found. Using genomewide searching Ang et al, (2002) determined Russian family with X-linked inherited motor nystagmus, in which 9 C598T change in VHL gene (3p26-25) which result in Arg200Trp individuals were affected (6 males and 3 females); 14 individuals, mutation in homozygosity in all individuals affected with Chuvash including 7 affected (4 males and 3 female) were involved in this polycythemia. VHL functions as a recessive tumor suppressor gene DNA-study. The penetrance among female carriers is incomplete. and most of mutations in this gene were found in von Hippel-Lindau Genotyping and haplotype analysis were performed using 20 syndrome in heterozygosity in all tissues but a second mutation found polymorphic microsatellite markers from X chromosome: NDPCA in tumor only. None of erythrocytosis patients who have homozygous (Xp11.4-p11.3) and DXS1062, DXS1192, DXS8093, DXS8044, Arg200Trp mutation in VHL gene and none of their heterozygous DXS1047, DXS8071, DXS1206, DXS8068, DXS994, DXS8074, relatives have not any symptoms of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. On DXS8050, DXS8038, DXS8094, DXS6789, DXS6805, DXS1001, the other hand we reviled the transmission disequilibrium between DXS1227, DXS1193, DXS8087 (Xq26-q27). The haplotype analysis chromosomes 3 and 11 in Chuvash polycythemia patients. We have revealed no evidence of linkage with marker NDPCA from the short investigated patients group, their healthy sibs and independent control arm of X chromosome in this family. Evaluation of haplotypes from group for associated transmission chromosomes 3 and 11 from the long arm of X chromosome showed that all affected individuals parents to offsprings by haplotype analysis at D3S1597 - D3S1263, had the same haplotype with markers DXS1047, DXS8068, DXS994, and D11S4111 - D11S4127 - D11S1356 markers. We determined DXS8071 and DXS8074. Multipoint linkage analysis using these four that in 75% cases affected patients get from their parents the same polymorphic markers estimated the maximum multipoint LOD-score of chromosomes 3 and 11. This value was only 44% (χ2=16.14; p<0.001) 2,6. Other markers from this region are in study for the fine mapping. for sibs and 43% (χ2=17.91; p<0.001) for control group. We concluded This work was support in part by President's RF grant MD- that 3p25 and 11q23 loci transmit not independently from each other in 2456.2004.4 patients group. This fact may be connecting with modification locus on chromosome 11, which influent in VHL gene mutation manifestation at P1135. Genotype / phenotype correlation in “atypical” CF clinical Chuvash benign erythrocytosis pictures L. Porcaro1, M. Marchi1, P. Capasso1, M. Travi1, D. Degiorgio1, R. Padoan2, C. P1133. Association of polymorphism within the tumour necrosis Colombo3, D. A. Coviello1, C. Corbetta4, L. Spaccini5, M. Seia1; factor gene and childhood asthma in the north-west region of 1Laboratorio Genetica Molecolare, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Mi- Russia. lan, Italy, 2Centro di supporto FC, Brescia, Italy, 3Centro Regionale Fibrosi T. Ivashchenko1, J. Ostankova1, L. Jelenina2, V. Baranov1; Cistica,Clinica De Marchi,ICP,Università di Milano, Milan, Italy, 4Laboratorio 1Ott's institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- screening neonatale,Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 5Genetica tion, 2Scientific Research Institute of Pulmonology, St.Petersburg, Russian Medica, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy. Federation. The clinical manifestations in Cystic Fibrosis are quite heterogeneous BACKGROUND:Tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) is a potent and descriptions of patients with atypical features have recently modulator of immune and inflammatory responses, and has been appeared. These patients are commonly Pancreatic Sufficiency, they implicated in a variety of autoimmune diseases, including asthma. show normal or borderline (40-60mMol/l) chloride levels in the sweat Interindividual variation in TNFalpha levels could be genetically test and they have symptoms involving a single organ. One of the two determined and polymorphism within the TNF gene have been CF mutations is in fact surely not severe, resulting in a residual CFTRGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 328 protein expression and function. The wide range of symptoms makes same age (control group). We have used PDRF and PDAF methods CF diagnosis more difficult and delayed. In this study we analysed for definition of the allele frequencies of several genes: PON1(R192Q), the genotype and phenotype in 117 cases with monosymptomatic AGT(M174T and M235T), ACE(I\D 287 bp, intron 16), AGTR1(A1166C), manifestations. The CFTR coding tract screening was performed using FVII(R353Q and -353 I\D 10bp), PAI(-675 4G\5G), MTHFR(C677T), DHPLC technique and direct sequencing. NOS3(T786C, 27 bp repeat, intron 4- 4a, 4b and E298D). The clinical presentation includes: 46 patients with respiratory The distribution of allele frequencies for each group was corresponding involvement, 26 CBAVD, 8 with idiopathic pancreatitis, and 37 cases to Hurdy-Weinberg equilibrium. The distinction of allele frequencies with clinical features not yet valuable (neonates with positive IRT and between SRNS and control groups was valued using χ2 criterion. with borderline sweat test). We have determined higher frequencies of alleles: M174 and M235 The molecular results led us to identify: (AGT); I (ACE); A1166 (AGTR1) and the lower frequencies of A2 (323 53/117 (45.3%) compound heterozygous ins 10bp) and Q353 in FVII gene in SRNS group. The differences of 57/117 (48.7%) heterozygous; 19 of them with IVS8- T5/TG12 frequencies are significant. haplotype We have also valued the association between genotypes and the 2/117 (1.7%) homozygous for mild mutations disease using odds ratio criterion. The positive significant association 5/117 (4.3%) none CFTR mutation; one of them with homozigous was found between the SRNS and several genotypes: T174\M174 and IVS8- T5/TG12 haplotype. T235\M235 for AGT; I\I for AGTR1; A1\A1 and R\R for FVII. The reliable The haplotype IVS8- T5/TG12 seems to be related to the pathogenesis difference between SRNS and control groups have not been found of CF when occurs in these genetic pattern. for another allele variants of genes associated with cardiovascular These data and recent publications seem to prove that the high degree disorders of the clinical heterogeneity in this pathology is related to the large spectrum of genetic variability which cause, rather than a loss of P1138. Refined mapping of autosomal dominant, adult-onset, protein function, a “gradient” of CFTR dysfunction. leukodystrophy (ADLD) in a Swedish kindred L. Marklund1, M. Larsson1, A. Melberg2, N. Dahl1; P1136. The glutation-S-transferaseT1 and M1 genes 1Dept. Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Dept. polymorphism and risk for early recurrent miscarriage. Neurology, University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. O. Bespalova1, O. Tarasenko1, I. Vasileva2, T. Ivashchenko1; The clinical physiopathology of autosomal dominant, adult-onset, 1Ott's institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- leukodystrophy (ADLD) is characterised by a slowly progressive tion, 2Diagnostic medical genetical Center, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. neurodegenerative disorder with a symmetrical, widespread myelin Objective: The pathogenesis of recurrent miscarriage is complex, loss in the white matter. The initial symptoms are recognized by bowel/ presumably involving the interaction of several genetic and environmental bladder dysfunction, loss of fine motor skills, ataxia, and the disease factors. The frequency of clinically recognized spontaneous abortion are lethal within ~20 years from onset. We have mapped the ADLD in the general population has been estimated to range between 15- gene to a small interval (3 Mbp, 1.6 cM) on chromosome 5q23-q31 20%. The aetiology of early recurrent miscarriage remains unclear, in a Swedish kindred, extending over five generations. This refined but it may be related to a possible genetic predisposition together mapping restrict the ADLD mutation to a region spanning 14 genes. with involvement of environmental factors. Polymorphisms in genes Further mapping is in progress using additional microsatellites, SNPs can lead to differences in the level of susceptibility of individuals to and DNA sequencing of affected and unaffected individuals. potentially adverse effects of environmental influences, such as chemical exposure, on prenatal development or male or female P1139. Gene polymorphisms of neuronal and endothelial nitric reproductive function. The glutathione-S-transferase genes responsible oxide synthases and colonization of Pseudomonas Aeruginosa for xenobiotic conjugating enzymes of Phase II detoxification system in patients with Cystic Fibrosis and have been implicated as risk factors for recurrent embryo loss in N. Kelembet1, T. Ivashchenko2, T. Gembitskaya1; early pregnancy. 1Scientific Research Institute of Pulmonology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- Materials and methods: Genetic polymorphisms of two genes GSTM1, tion, 2Ott's Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- GSTT1 in 205 patients with a history of two or more unexplained tion. first-trimester recurrent miscarriages and 76 women who had one or Objective: NO is endogenously produced by a group of enzymes, the more normal pregnancies and no obstetric complications or history of NO-synthases (NOSs). There are three isoforms of NOS encoded by miscarriage were studied by PCR. different gene: NOS1, iNOS, eNOS. These genes are constitutively Results: 35 of the 205 women with recurrent miscarriage (17,1%) and 5 expressed in cells of the respiratory tract. Patients with cystic fibrosis of the 76 control women (6,6%) were homozygous for the glutathione- (CF) have decreased concentrations of expired nitric oxide (FeNO) S-transferase T1 null and glutathione-S-transferase M1 null alleles as compared to healthy individuals. A number of factors, including (GSTT10/0/GSTM10/0). The relative risks of first-trimester recurrent viscous mucus as a diffusion barrier for airway NO, consumption of miscarriages in carriers of the GSTT10/0/GSTM10/0 was 2,92 (95% NO by bacterial enzymes, and decreased NO production have been CI=1,14-7,48). 28,7% of the women and 14,5% of the control have hypothesized to account for these low levels of FeNO. genotypes GSTT10/0/ GSTM1+ (relative risk, 2,38 (95% CI=1,14- Materials and methods: Genetic polymorphisms of the NOS1 gene 4,96). and of the gene eNOS were studied by PCR-based assays in 37 CF Conclusions: Both the genotypes GSTT10/0/GSTM10/0 and GSTT10/0/ patients and 69 healthy individuals. GSTM1+ are associated with first-trimester recurrent miscarriage. Results: We examined the relationship between the size of the AAT repeat polymorphism of the NOS1 gene, the 4a/4b polymorphism of P1137. Polimorphisms of genes predisposing to cardiovascular the eNOS gene and colonization of the airways with Ps.aeruginosa. disorders in group of patients with the steroid-resistant Colonization of the airways with Ps.aeruginosa was significantly nephrotic syndrome (p<0.05) more common in CF patients with high numbers of AAT N. Poltavets1, L. Prihodina2, N. Galeeva1, S. Tverskaya1, H. Zaklyazminskaya1, repeats in the NOS1 gene (≥12) and 4b/4b eNOS. A. Polyakov1; Conclusions: The results provide the evidence that the polymorphic 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re- variants of the NOS1 gene and the eNOS gene are associated with search Сenter of Pediatrics and Child Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. Ps.aeruginosa colonization of airways in CF patients. We could The steroid-resistant nephritic syndrome (SRNS) is autosomal suggest that production of NO is one of mechanisms of local lungs recessive disease with an early childhood onset of proteinuria, rapid protection. Because of this the decrease of NO production (FeNO) progression to the end-stage renal disease and focal segmental leads to decrease of antibacterial lungs protection and more favourable glomerulosclerosis. Mutaions in NPHS2 gene, mapped to 1q25-31, conditions for the colonization of Ps.aeruginosa could be formed. are the cause of the SRNS. We have examined 30 children with biopsy proven SRNS in age ranged from 9 to 17 years (SRNS group) and 50 healthy children of theGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 329 P1140. A Novel Locus for Recessive Syndactyly Maps to These results suggest a susceptibility locus on 9q31-q33 for affective Chromosome 17p13.3. disorder in this common ancestral region. S. Mailk1, E. F. Percin2, W. Ahmad3, N. A. Akarsu4, K. H. Grzeschik1, M. C. Koch1; P1142. SNP haplotype analysis of TPH2 in northern Swedish 1Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany, 2Gazi Uni- unipolar and bipolar patient/control populations. versity, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Besevler, Turkey, A. Van Den Bogaert1, J. Del-Favero1, S. De Zutter1, L. Heyrman1, R. Adolfs- 3Quaid-I-Azam University, Department of Biological Sciences, Islamabad, Paki- son2, C. Van Broeckhoven1; stan, 4Cumhuriyet University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Orthopaedics 1Applied Molecular Genomics Group, Department of Molecular Genetics VIB8, and Traumatology, Sivas, Turkey. Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), University of Antwerp Non-syndromic syndactyly is a common congenital malformation (UA), Wilrijk, Belgium, 2Division of Psychiatry, Department of Clinical Sciences, showing webbing of fingers and/or toes. The malformation can be University of Umeå, Umeå, Sweden. unilateral or bilateral, and the fusion within the web may be cutaneous Recently, Walther and colleagues (2003) identified the gene for a or bony. novel tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) isoform, TPH2 that is encoded on We revise the systematics of syndactylies. The majority of them show chromosome 12 and is exclusively expressed in the brain. TPH is the an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance except Cenani-Lenz rate-limiting enzyme for the production of serotonin from tryptophan. syndactyly which follows the recessive model. Serotonin is a key neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, and Previously we reported a novel syndactyly in a consanguineous dysfunction of the serotonergic system has been implicated in several Pakistani family segregating as an autosomal recessive entity with a psychiatric diseases. We have investigated the potential influence unique combination of clinical features: mesoaxial reduction of fingers of polymorphisms at the TPH2 locus on the development of unipolar with synostosis of 3rd and 4th metacarpal bearing single phalanges, affective and bipolar affective disorder. From the HapMap database clinodactyly of 5th fingers and preaxial webbing of toes. Three similarly we selected 6 htSNPs representing haplotypes with a minor allele affected patients with this distinguished phenotype were observed in frequency above 5%. These htSNPs plus one putative promoter SNP, a large inbred Turkish family. We now localize the phenotype in the (Kennedy et al. Neuropsychiatric Genet,, 2003), were genotyped in Pakistani and Turkish family to chromosome 17p13.3 (multipoint lod a sample of 136 patients with DSM-diagnosed unipolar affective score 5.23). disorder, 182 patients with DSM-diagnosed bipolar affective disorder The identification of a single locus for a similar complex hand-foot and 364 healthy individuals, all of northern Swedish descent. malformation in two families with distinct ethnical backgrounds gives Out of 7 genotyped SNPs, we identified one SNP that was significantly evidence for a new form of syndactyly. We propose to name this associated with unipolar affective disorder and one SNP with bipolar phenotype mesoaxial synostotic syndactyly with phalangeal reduction affective disorder. One SNP, located in the putative promoter region, (SDMS, type IX syndactyly, Malik-Percin type). showed a p-value of 0.027 (promSNP) in our unipolar affective sample The mapping of this novel locus contributes to the clinical and genetic and one htSNP (rs10748185) showed a p-value of 0.048 in our bipolar delineation of syndactylies. Recruitment of more families with this affective sample. Haplotype analysis provided supportive evidence for phenotype might help to narrow down the candidate region, and the an involvement of genetic variation at the TPH2 locus with unipolar cloning of the gene would provide insight into the complex process of affective disorder (p-value=0.031) and bipolar affective disorder (p- limb development. value=0.004). For both, unipolar and bipolar affective disorder, the significant haplotypes that we’ve found were consistent with protective P1141. Genomewide scan for affective disorder susceptibility factors. loci in families of a northern Swedish isolated population T. Venken1, S. Claes1,2, S. Sluijs1, A. D. Paterson3, C. van Duijn4, R. Adolfsson5, P1143. Abnormalities of ceruloplasmin gene expression in J. Del-Favero1, C. Van Broeckhoven1; mammary gland associated with structure of promoter region 1Applied Molecular Genomics Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, N. E. Gyulikhandanova, N. Platonova, N. Tsymbalenko, I. Evsyukova, L. Pu- Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), University of Antwerp chkova; (UA), Antwerpen, Belgium, 2Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital Ant- Institute of Experimental Medicine, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. werp (UZA), Antwerpen, Belgium, 3Program in Genetics and Genomic Biology, Copper is essential for growth and development of newborns and Hospital for Sick Children and Department of Public Health Services, University simultaneously it is a high toxic. In milk, copper is packed into tissue of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Department of Epidemiology and Biostatis- specific ceruloplasmin (Cp). Its concentration sharply drops during first tics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 5Department of month of lactation. Likewise that copper level in newborn diet intake is Clinical Sciences, Division of Psychiatry, University of Umeå, Umeå, Sweden. controlled by Cp gene activity in mammary gland. Milk Cp and copper We analyzed 9 multigenerational families with affective spectrum concentration in 5 days after postpartum and Cp promoter region disorders ascertained in the geographically isolated population of structure (genetic marker) were analyzed to detect Cp sequences that Västerbotten in northern Sweden. This northern Swedish population, effect in the CP gene expression regulation in mammary gland cells. The that originated from a limited number of early settlers approximately samples of 41 DNAs were analyzed by PCR-method using 17 pairs of 8000 years ago, is genetically more homogeneous than outbred overlapping primers to 5´-region 4000 bp from +192 bp. Simultaneously, populations. Therefore, its use maximizes the probability of detecting skimmed milk Cp and copper concentration at the 1st and 5th days after genes by genetic approaches. postpartum were measured by rocket immunoelectrophoresis and atomic In a genomewide linkage analysis we identified three chromosomal absorptive spectrometry respectively. Two cases of abnormalities of Cp loci with multipoint LOD scores (MPLOD) ≥ 2 at 9q31.1-q34.1 (MPLOD gene expression were revealed. In a one case milk Cp concentration 3.24), 6q22.2-q24.2 (MPLOD 2.48) and 2q33-q36 (MPLOD 2.26) under did not decrease during 5 days and even doesn’t change after 1.5 year a recessive affected-only model. Follow-up genotyping applying a 2 cM lactation. At the same time blood Cp concentration corresponded to density STR map confirmed linkage at 9q31.1-q34.1 (MPLOD 3.22), average value. A substitution 1996A/C in site for transcription factor C/ 6q23-q24 (MPLOD 3.25) and 2q33-q36 (MPLOD 2.2) and resulted in EBPbeta was found by automatic sequencing. In another case very candidate regions of 10 cM, 3 cM and 23 cM respectively. high Cp concentration in skimmed milk was found (40 versus 14 In an initial analysis aiming at identifying the underlying susceptibility mg/100 ml). Sequencing indicated 90(bp)-insertion in (-1639)-(-2294) genes, we focused our attention on the 9q locus. We finemapped this bp region, which included coterminous of estrogen receptor site and region at a 200 kb STR density resulting in a MPLOD of 3.70. The site for binding YY1 protein. candidate region further decreased to 4 cM. Genealogical studies showed that 3 families linked to chromosome 9q descended from P1144. Polymorphisms of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase common founder couples 10 generations ago. These families enabled gene in placentas with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). the identification of an identical by descent (IBD) haplotype in patients O. Tarasenko, O. Bespalova, T. Ivashchenko, V. Baranov; reducing the 9q candidate region to 1.6 Mb. Further, the shared Ott's institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. haplotype was observed in 4.2% of BPI patients but not in control Objective: Intrauterine growth restriction is a syndrome involving individuals in a patient-control sample from the Västerbotten isolate. dysfunction of vascular endothelium and imbalance betweenGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 330 endothelium derived constricting and relaxing factors. Recent influence on various phenotypes. We studied ACE I/D polymorphism evidence suggest a major role endothelium-derived nitric oxide (NO) and hypertension in the general Croatian population, where we found plays in the regulation of vascular resistance during normal pregnancy the homozygous deletion genotype is associated with hypertension. and pregnancy with IUGR. NO is a potent vasodilator generated by This influence seems to be specially pronounced in men younger then the catalytic action of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) in 40 years. These results are compared with the results of testing the placenta. Mutations in the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) ACE I/D association with hypertension in one of the Croatian isolates gene may be associated with abnormal nitric oxide (NO) production. - the island of Vis, which is characterized by a high prevalence of The 4a/4b genotype is know to be associated with reduced levels of hypertension as well as high levels of inbreeding. NO metabolites (25% decrease). Materials and methods: We collected and performed PCR the 4a/4b P1147. Genetic analysis of Bartter and Gitelman Syndrome in the polymorphism of the eNOS gene in placentas of 33 patients with IUGR Italian population and 35 women with one or more normal pregnancies and no obstetric N. Borsa1, M. L. Syrèn1,2, C. Mattiello1, D. A. Coviello1, M. Travi1, A. Bettinelli3, complications. S. Tedeschi1; Results: The frequencies of alleles among samples with IUGR and 1Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics and controls were 86,3% and 82,8% respectively, for allele 4b (wild Neonathology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, San type), and 13,7% and 17,2%, respectively, for allele 4a (mutant). No Leopoldo Mandic Hospital, Merate, Lecco, Italy. association between allele 4a and IUGR was found (P>0.05, OR 1.31). Bartter’s syndrome includes a group of autosomal recessive disorders The distribution of genotype were not significantly different between caused by loss of function mutations in one of four genes: SLC12A1, the studied groups (4b/4b: 72,7%; 4b/4a: 27,3%; 4a/4a: 0%) and the KCNJI, CLCNKB and BSND encoding respectively: the sodium control group (4b/4b: 68,6%; 4b/4a: 28,6%; 4a/4a: 2,8%) (P>0.05). potassium-chloride cotransporter NKCC2 (Bartter type I), the inwardly Conclusions: The 4a/4b polymorphism of the eNOS gene is not rectifying potassium channel ROMK (Bartter type II), the basolateral implicated in increased risk of intrauterine growth restriction. chloride channel ClC-Kb (Bartter type III) and the Barttin protein, an essential subunit of ClC-Kb. The latter phenotype is associated with P1145. The study of the β 2-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms sensorineural deafness (Bartter type IV). All of them are expressed in in asthma patients and healthy donors from the Volga-Ural the thick ascending limb of the Henle loop. Gitelman’s syndrome is a region of Russia variant of Bartter’s syndrome, and is caused by mutations in the gene A. S. Karunas1, A. Izmaylova2, S. Z. Zagidullin2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; SLC12A3, encoding the sodium-chloride cotransporter NCCT. This 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Russian Acad- protein is expressed in the distal convoluted tubule of the nephron. emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir Medical State University, The aim of our study is the characterisation of the molecular defects Ufa, Russian Federation. of patients without sensorineural deafness, clinically defined as Bronchial asthma (BA) is a complex disorder, the development of which Gitelman/Bartter syndrome. Our patient population includes a cohort of is determined by the interaction between genetic and environmental 91 subjects. On the basis of the mutations identified in the SLC12A1, factors. To date, numerous DNA-loci and candidate genes have been KCNJI, CLCNKB and SLC12A3 genes, 55 patients showed mutations reported to show linkage and association to asthma. The human β- on both alleles (22 homozygous and 33 compound heterozygous 2 adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) is a target of β-agonist drugs used for mutations). On the basis of detected mutations we could define that 2 bronchodilatation in asthma and ADRB2 gene may be examined as 6 patients were affected with Bartter type I syndrome, 4 with Bartter potential asthma-susceptibility gene. type II, 13 with Bartter type III, and 32 with Gitelman syndrome. The This study reports the results of the investigation of the β-adrenergic complete clinical phenotype and the genotype-phenotype correlation 2 receptor Arg16Gly and Gln27Glu polymorphisms in asthma patients will be discussed. and healthy donors from Volga-Ural region of Russia. The asthma group consisted of 140 patients; the control group included 203 P1148. Polymorphism of the glutation-S-transferase P1 gene and unrelated nonasthmatic subjects. We have determined that the early recurrent miscarriage. frequencies of Gly16 allele and Gly16/Gly16 genotype were noticeably I. Vasileva1, O. Bespalova2, O. Tarasenko2, T. Ivashchenko2; higher in patients with atopic asthma (67% and 48%, respectively) in 1Diagnostic medical genetical Center, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott's comparison with 57% and 27% for infection-dependent asthma. The Institute of obstetrics and gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. frequency of Glu27 allele was significantly greater in patients with Objective: The clinical management of repeated early pregnancy atopic asthma (51,7%) compared with infection-dependent asthma wastage focuses on several etiologic factors (i.e., genetic, medical, (40%). The proportion of Glu27 homozygotes was 27,6% in atopic immunologic, endocrine, psychogenic, environmental, occupational, asthma group and 16,2% in infection-dependent asthma group. Strong infectious, and uterine), which have been noted to result in repeated allelic association was observed between Gly16 allele and Glu27 allele pregnancy wastage. Genetic variability in biotransformation enzymes and between Arg16 allele and Gln27 allele (p<0,05). The combination could be associated responsible for predisposition differences to of Gly16/Gly16 and Glu27/Glu27 genotypes occurred more frequently recurrent miscarriage. The glutatione-related detoxification system in atopic asthma patients (27,6%) than in control group (15,2%). plays an important role to ensure an uncomplicated pregnancy OR=1,8 (95%Cl 0,79-3,64). outcome. The components of the glutatione-related detoxification The data of this study revealed differences in the distribution of system are equally distributed among the different cotelydons in the polymorphic alleles and genotypes of the ADRB2 gene between human placenta. asthma patients and healthy donors and between different clinical Methods: Polymorphisms in the genes of glutation-S-transferases P1 forms of bronchial asthma. were assessed in 94 nonpregnant women with a history of early (≤ 16 weeks gestation) recurrent miscarriage (two or more spontaneous P1146. Association of ACE I/D polymorphism with hypertension abortions) and 76 healthy control women. in Croatia and an isolate Results: The frequencies of alleles in women with recurrent miscarriage M. Barbalić1, T. Škarić-Jurić1, N. Smolej Narančić1, I. Rudan2, S. Turek3, P. and controls were 73.4% and 70.4%, respectively, for the A allele (wild Rudan1; type), 18.1% and 22.4%, respectively, for the B allele (mutant), and 1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2School of Public 8.5% and 7.2%, respectively, for the C allele (mutant). The distribution Health “Andrija Štampar”, University Medical School, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Croatian of the genotypes for the glutation-S-transferase P1 gene was not Health Insurance Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. significantly different between the study group and the controls. The angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) takes part in the renin- Conclusions: We conclude that the presence of mutant alleles of angiotensin system that is one of the main regulatory systems in blood glutation-S-transferase P1 gene is not a risk predictor in women with a pressure homeostasis. Its influence on hypertension has been widely history of early recurrent miscarriage. explored in various populations, but the results are still conflicting. The insertion/deletion polymorphism (ACE I/D) in intron 16 of the ACE gene is easily detectable and seems to be a good marker for ACEGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 331 P1149. Immunogenetic studies in Hungarian patients with P1151. Renin Angiotensin System polymorphisms and breast idiopathic inflammatory myositis cancer risk A. Ponyi1,2, A. Kapitány3, T. Constantin2, L. Gergely1, K. Dankó1; A. M. Gonzalez-Zuloeta Ladd, A. Arias Vasquez, F. A. Sayed-Tabatabaei, J. 1Division of Clinical Immunology, 3rd Department of Internal Medicine, Medical W. Coebergh, A. Hofman, O. Njajou, B. H. C. Stricker, C. M. van Duijn; and Health Science Center, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 22nd Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Buda- Angiotensin II has growth factor properties and may be involved in the pest, Hungary, 3Regional Immunology Laboratory, 3rd Department of Internal etiology of breast cancer. The Insertion/Deletion (I/D) polymorphism Medicine, Medical and Health Science Center, University of Debrecen, Debre- in the Angiotensin-Converting-Enzyme (ACE) gene determines levels cen, Hungary. of ACE and the M235T polymorphism in the Angiotensinogen (AGT) Objectives Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIM) are rare systemic gene accounts for the variability of AGT plasma concentrations autoimmune diseases, characterized by progressive weakness of and may produce an increase in Angiotensin II levels. These two the skeletal muscles. As in other autoimmune diseases, the immune polymorphisms were genotyped in 4117 women participating in the process seems to be induced by environmental factors in genetically Rotterdam Study, including 144 patients with breast cancer. At baseline, susceptible individuals. Our aim was to extend the knowledge of information concerning risk factors was obtained by an interview. First, ethnogeographic studies about HLA association of myositis. We we performed a logistic regression analysis to assess the risk of breast investigated the presence of the HLA-DRB1, -DQA1 and DQB1 alleles cancer yielding an odds ratio (OR) of 1.86 (95% Confidence Interval in Hungarian patients with different forms of myositis. [CI] = 1.06-3.27, p-value = 0.03) for ACE DD carriers and 2.01 (95% CI: Patients and Methods 93 patients with myositis and 54 healthy 1.34-3.01, p = 0.001) for TT carriers of the AGT M235T polymorphism. unrelated controls were enrolled in the study. HLA genotyping was Second, a Cox survival model was fitted and showed that breast performed by polymerase chain reaction with sequence specific cancer free survival by ACE genotype was significantly reduced in DD primers technique to determine different allelic groups (Olerup-SSP). compared to II carriers (HR = 1.80; 95% CI: 1.07-3.01, p-value = 0.03). We also assessed the relation with phenotypic features, e. g. clinical We observed a similar effect for TT carriers (HR =1.80 95% CI: 1.21- manifestations, autoantibodies and clinical course. 2.65, p-value = 0.002). These findings were independent of known Results Among all patients with any forms of myositis, frequency risk factors. Our results suggest that the ACE and AGT proteins and of HLA-DRB1*0301 and the linked -DQA1*0501 were significantly perhaps the Renin Angiotensin System in general, play a role in breast increased compared to controls. HLA-DQB1*05 alleles were also cancer risk in postmenopausal women. found to be increased. A significantly increased frequency of DRB1*01 and DRB1*07 were observed in patients with myositis in overlap with P1152. The locus for ichthyosis prematurity syndrome is another systemic autoimmune disease. The HLA-DRB1*12 appeared restricted to 231 kb on chromosome 9q34.11 to provide protection against myositis. We did not found alleles that M. Larsson1, J. Klar1, T. Gedde-Dahl Jr.2, M. Pigg1, A. Vahlquist3, N. Dahl1; predispose for systemic manifestations. Patients with the myositis 1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, specific Jo-1 autoantibody carried DRB1*03 and DQB1*04 in higher 2Dermatological DNA Laboratory, Department if Dermatology, Rikshospitalet frequency. According to the clinical course significant differences in the University Hospital, and Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, genotype could not be detected. Norway, 3Department of Medical Science, Uppsala University Hospital, Up- Conclusion Concerning the most important genes that provide psala, Sweden. susceptibility to myositis, we found similar associations of HLA Class II Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) is a group of alleles in Hungarian patients to other Caucasian populations. keratinisation disorders, where ichthyosis prematurity syndrome (IPS) is included. IPS is rare and almost exclusively present in a restricted P1150. A genome-wide search of Late-Onset Alzheimer's disease region in the middle of Norway and Sweden, which indicates a using homozygosity mapping shows evidence of a new locus on founder effect for the disorder. We recently reported linkage of IPS chromosome 3. to chromosome 9q34 and we present here the subsequent fine- A. Arias1, K. Sleegers1, F. Liu1, P. J. Sanchez-Juan1, Y. S. Aulchenko1, G. mapping of this region with known and novel microsatellite markers. A Roks2, R. Rademakers3, M. Cruts3, C. V. Broeckhoven3, B. A. Oostra4, C. M. haplotype associated with IPS was identified within the linked region van Duijn1; on chromosome 9q34. This haplotype spans approximately 3.4 Mb 1Dept. of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, and support previously suggestions of an ancient founder mutation. The Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, Elisabeth Hospital, Tilburg, The Based on the average length of the haplotype in IPS patients, we Netherlands, 3Dept. of Molecular Genetics (VIB8) Neurogenetics Group, Uni- calculated the age of a founder mutation to at least 1500 years. The versity of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Eras- haplotype contain a core region of 231 kb consisting of three marker mus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. alleles shared by 95% of the affected individuals. This core haplotype Alzheimer’s disease (AD) often segregates as a dominant trait restricts a region with seven known genes of which six are expressed in families but a recent study, performed in an inbred community, in mature epidermal cells. suggested a recessive mutation (Farrer LA, et al, 2003). We studied 10 individuals affected with probable late-onset AD from 5 inbred P1153. Association of some vascular genetic markers with families coming from a recently genetically isolated Dutch population. different forms of preeclampsia These individuals could be connected to a common ancestor in 8 G. S. Demin1,2, T. E. Ivashchenko1, E. V. Mozgovaia1, O. V. Malysheva1, V. S. generations, suggesting the presence of a recessive mutation involved Baranov1, V. S. Baranov1; in the onset of the disease. In order to identify genes implicated in the 1Ott Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa- pathophysiology of AD, we performed a genome screen of AD using tion, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. 420 markers on these 10 individuals and mutations on APP, PSEN1 Preeclampsia is a multifactorial disease with unknown genetic and PSEN2 genes were excluded by direct sequencing. All probands compound. One of the most important clinical parameters of carried the APOE ε3/4. Homozygosity mapping of the 10 individuals preeclampsia is increased blood pressure. There are some major yielded two peaks on chromosome 3 with multipoint LOD scores of 3.1 genes, which products regulate vascular tone. In this study an analysis (from marker D3S3681 to D3S1569) and 3.4 (from marker D3S3626 of the association between polymorphism of some vascular genes and to D3S1262) respectively. After fine mapping these regions with 10 the development of preeclampsia was carried out. extra markers, the first peak could be narrowed down from ~50 to I/D polymorphism of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), 19 cM with a maximum LOD score of 3.9 (from marker D3S1292 to 4a/4b polymorphism of the endothelial NO-synthase (eNOS), I/D D3S1549) and the second peak could be narrowed down from ~30 polymorphism of the tissue plasminogen activator (PLAT) and 4G/5G to 5.8 cM with a maximum LOD score of 3.2. This region included the polymorphism of the plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) gene Butyrylcholinesterase (BCHE). Direct sequencing of the coding genes were studied by PCR-RFLP assay. region of this gene showed no variants that could explain the presence There was no significant difference between preeclamptic patients of the disease. These findings suggest the presence of a new locus on (n=117) and control group (n=79) in frequencies of genotypes and chromosome 3, which may involve a recessive mutation. alleles of the ACE, eNOS, PLAT and PAI-1 genes. However theGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 332 frequency of genotype I/I of the ACE gene significantly increased in P1156. Association of protein-tyrosine phosphatase N1 gene preeclamptic women with background arterial hypertension (27.5%) polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance as compared to controls (10.3%, p<0.05). The frequencies of 4G D. W. Bowden, J. L. Bento, N. D. Palmer, J. C. Mychaleckyj, C. D. Langefeld, allele of the PAI-1 and 4b allele of the eNOS gene were significantly B. I. Freedman; higher in patients with mild (75.8%) and severe (100%) uncomplicated Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, United States. preeclampsia, respectively, as compared to control group (58.2%, Protein-tyrosine phospatase-1B (PTP-1B) protein is encoded by the p<0.05 and 80.4%, p<0.05). Moreover the frequency of D allele of PTPN1 gene on 20q13. PTP-1B negatively regulates insulin signaling the PLAT gene was significantly higher in the group of patients with by dephosphorylating the insulin receptor. We have carried out an preeclampsia (67.5%) as compared to population (54.2%, p<0.005). association analysis of 35 noncoding SNPs spanning the 161 kb The differences in polymorphic variants of particular genes could be an genomic region including the PTPN1 gene. SNPs were assessed for evidence of the presence of several different disorders, joint by generic association with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) in two independent collections term “preeclampsia”. of Caucasians with T2DM and two matching control groups. Significant evidence for association is observed, especially SNPs spanning the P1154. Analysis of insertion/deletion polymorphisms of 3’-end of intron 1 of PTPN1 through intron 8 (P-values 0.043-0.004 angiotensin converting enzyme and bradykinin receptor genes in one case-control set and 0.038-0.002 in a second case-control (ACE and BKR2) in children and adolescents with arterial set). Analysis of combined case-control data increased the evidence hypertension from North-West region of Russia. of association with T2DM (P=0.005-0.0016). All associated SNPs A. S. Glotov1, T. V. Stepanova2, G. I. Obraztsova2, T. E. Ivashchenko1, V. S. lie in a single 100 kb haplotype block that encompasses the PTPN1 Baranov1; gene. Haplotype analyses identified a significant difference between 1Ott's Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, cases and controls (P=0.0035-0.0056) with one common haplotype 2Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Academy, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federa- contributing strongly to the evidence for association with T2DM. Odds tion. ratios are approximately 1.3 for risk haplotypes. PTPN1 was also Renin-angiotensin-bradykinin system (RABS) is a regulator of evaluated for association with measures of glucose homeostasis arterial (blood) pressure and water-salt balance in human. Genetic in 811 Hispanic subjects in the IRAS Family Study. All SNPs with polymorphism of this system is associated with cardiovascular minor allele frequencies > 0.1 are significantly associated with insulin diseases. The main aim of our investigation was to study the distribution sensitivity index (SI; P-values=0.044-0.003) and fasting glucose (P- of frequencies of RABS genes in children and adolescents with arterial values=0.029-<0.001); there was no evidence of association with acute hypertension (individuals of 9-18 age, N=176) and in population group insulin response (a measure of β-cell function). In haplotype analysis, (7-17 years, N=117) of North-West of Russia. On the basis of blood the diabetes risk haplotype is associated with lower SI and higher pressure load we have subdivided group with arterial hypertension into fasting glucose (P=0.005 and P=0.00003, respectively). These results three groups: 1) without confirmed hypertension (<25%), 2) with labile suggest that PTPN1 is a significant contributor to T2DM susceptibility hypertension (25-50%) and with stabile hypertension (>50%). and insulin resistance. The polymorphisms of the ACE gene (I/D) and the BKR gene (I/D) were studied by PCR analysis. Distribution of genotype frequencies P1157. SLC22A4 and SLC22A5 variants are associated with between groups were compared by F-test. The distribution of relevant perianal Crohn’s disease in Belgian patients. frequencies of polymorphisms for the ACE and the BKR genes was C. Libioulle1, J. Thyse1, F. Farnir1, O. Dewit2, J. Belaiche1, M. Georges1, E. similar in children and adolescents with hypertension compared to Louis1; population group. The division of groups by sex was not found out 1Université de Liège, Liege, Belgium, 2Université Catholique de Louvain, Lou- any significant differences in distribution of genetic polymorphisms vain, Belgium. between patients with hypertension and population group. Functional variants of the SLC22A4 (1672C→T) and SLC22A5 (- Interestingly that patients with labile hypertension had significantly 207G→C) genes coding for cation transporters, were recently shown lower frequency of DD genotype of ACE gene compared to children to be associated with Crohn disease (CD). A study of Armuzzi et and adolescents without confirmed hypertension (22% and 50%, al.(2003) presented evidence suggesting that the association might be respectively; p=0.04) and population group (22% and 38%, respectively; specific for a CD subtype, namely the perianal form. In this study, we p=0.03) but there was no difference as compared to patients with test the association of these 2 variants with clinical CD subtypes in a stabile hypertension (22% and 33%; p=0.27). cohort of Belgian patients. It might be speculated that I/D polymorphism of ACE gene could be We studied a cohort comprising 619 CD patients including 209 trios. associated with labile hypertension in children and adolescents. Untransmitted parental chromosomes from the trios were used as controls in addition of 94 ethnically matched controls. Genotyping was P1155. Multipoint linkage analysis for a very dense set of done by using the Taqman technology. Allelic frequencies in cases markers and controls were compared using a one-sided chi-squared test. S. Bacanu; Maximum likelihood haplotype frequencies were estimated using an University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States. EM algorithm. We found no evidence for association of C1672T and G- Multipoint linkage methods are powerful tools that are often employed 207C with CD neither when considering each marker alone (p= 0.235; as the first means to discover alleles affecting liability to diseases. p= 0.113 respectively), nor when considering them as a haplotype. With the advent of dense marker maps, linkage disequilibrium (LD) However, when we classified patients according to perianal disease between markers is inevitable and it comes at the cost of bias and at the time of diagnosis (n= 72), the corresponding analysis yielded increased rate of false-positive findings for linkage analyses that strong evidence for an association with both markers considered assume alleles of different markers are independent. I propose a separately (p= 0.009 for C1672T; p= 0.011 for G-207C) as well as “multipoint on subsets” method that avoids this issue by partitioning jointly (p= 0.0025). The association was also strongly present in the the markers into interlaced and non-overlapping subsets. Each subset perianal subgroup of CD diagnosed after 5 years disease evolution is analyzed separately, their statistics are then averaged, and the (n= 77; p= 0.047 for C1672T; p= 0.009 for -207G/C; p= 0.017 for TC resulting average is normalized by its estimated standard deviation. haplotype).This study confirm and refine the association previously In addition to being robust to the challenges induced by dependent found between perianal CD and the IBD5 locus . marker alleles, data simulated under linkage equilibrium show that the proposed method does not suffer any loss of power when compared to traditional methods.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 333 P1158. L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: identification of novel P1160. Preliminary MSX1 gene analysis results in patients with mutations in the gene C14orf160 (duranin) cleft lip with/ without cleft palate J. Fischer1, M. Topçu2, F. Jobard1, H. Omran3, L. Cimbalistiene4, M. Tabache5, I. Dundure, B. Lace; S. Cure1, L. Sztriha6, M. Bataillard7, V. Kemmerich8, C. Grolik9, N. Al-Sannaa10, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. J. O. Sass11; BACKGROUND MSX1 is a key factor for the development of teeth 1CNRG Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France, 2Hacettepe University and craniofacial skeleton and has been proposed to play the main role Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Child Neurology, Ankara, Turkey, in terminal cell differentiation. Therefor non-syndromic cleft lip with/ 3Zentrum für Kinderheilkunde, Klinik für Neuropädiatrie und Muskelerkrankun- without cleft palate (CL/P) may be very closely conjugated with changes gen, Freiburg, Germany, 4Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of in MSX1 gene function. Several studies show us that mutations in the Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 5Praxis für Allgemeinmedizin, gene can influence the formation of orofacial clefts. These particular Lamspringe, Germany, 6Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department mutations are causal and they appear to contribute about to 2% of all for Pediatrics, UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates, 7Centre Hospit- cases CL/P OBJECTIVES The aim of our study was to establish role alier Inter-Communal, Department of Neurology, Montbéliard, France, 8Praxis of the gene MSX1 in the formation of cleft lip and/or palate. MATERIAL für Kinder und Jugendmedizin, Weinstadt, Germany, 9Kliniken der Stadt Köln, AND METHODS 50 DNA samples were collected in collaboration Kinderkrankenhaus, SPZ, Köln, Germany, 10Clinical Medicine Department, with Riga Stradins University Institute of Stomatology, State Cleft Pediatric Services Division, Dhahran Health Center, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, center. The collection of data was performed according to Central 11Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, Zentrum für Kinderheilkunde und Jugendmed- Ethical Committee regulations. All the participating families signed izin, Stoffwechsellabor, Freiburg, Germany. an informed consent form. We obtained questionnaire, containing L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (L-2-HGA) is a rare neurometabolic detailed information: complete genealogy, possible exposure to disorder with autosomal recessive transmission (MIM 236792). It is teratogens during pregnancy, the course of pregnancy and delivery characterized by progressive deterioration of central nervous system and associated anomalies. The referent gene sequence was obtained function including epilepsy and macrocephaly in 50 % of cases from Internet date base http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/Blast. and elevated levels of L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid in urine, blood, and cgi. The methods used included DNA extraction, PCR, agarose gel cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Around 75 cases of L2-HGA have been electrophoresis, sequencing and blasting of the result. RESULTS We reported from different parts of the word. We have recently reported have found one mutation in the intron at the position 1831where T->A, the identification of the gene C14orf160 (duranin) for L-2-HGA using and one SNP in the second exon at the position 3969 A/G. homozygosity mapping in 18 Turkish families (Topçu et al, 2004), and a second group has confirmed these results genetically and P1161. A common haplotype in the 5' region of the SCN5A gene biochemically in three other families (Rzem et al, 2004). is associated with ventricular conduction impairment Here we report the results of the mutation analysis in another large A. Pfeufer1, C. Bezzina2, S. Jalilzadeh1, T. Koopmann2, S. Perz3, J. C. Mueller1, series of 11 additional families with different ethnic and geographic P. Yang4, D. Roden4, A. A. Wilde2, H. E. Wichmann3, S. Kääb5, T. Meitinger1; origins, from France, Germany, Iraq, Lithuania, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia 1TU Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group, and Turkey. Three of the mutations previously described in Turkish Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3GSF Research Cen- patients, were found in patients from Germany, Iraq and Turkey. We ter, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, identified seven novel mutations including 4 different deletions and two TN, United States, 5LMU Munich, Munich, Germany. different nonsense mutations; one missense mutation (R251X) was Background: The SCN5A gene encodes the alpha-subunit of the the same in patients from Turkey, France and Pakistan. The functional cardiac voltage dependent sodium channel. Coding region mutations role of this enzyme in intermediary metabolism in humans remains to cause Brugada Syndrome and other familial conduction disturbances. be established. Recent studies have suggested SCN5A promoter mutations may also contribute to arrythmias.Aim: We investigated the influence of P1159. Association between CAG repeat number in the androgen common SCN5A promoter and gene variants on ECG parameters in a receptor gene and male infertility in Macedonian males central European general population sample. Methods: We genotyped D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, T. Plaseski2, C. Dimitrovski2, B. Kocevska2, G. D. 702 individuals from the population based KORA S2000 survey for 55 Efremov1; SNP markers. Haplotypes were inferred by the Haploview software 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic En- package.Results: We identified a block of high linkage disequilibrium gineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Mace- extending from 10 kb upstream of noncoding exon 1 to 10 kb into donia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolic Disoroders, intron 1. Within the block the third most frequent haplotype (hap3, AF= Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. 16.8%) was significantly associated with the width of the QRS complex The exon 1 of the androgen receptor (AR) gene contains a polymorphic (p=0.0075; QRS 93.4 ms in wt/wt (n=474), 96.3 ms in wt/hap3 (n=201) CAG repeat that codes for polyglutamine tract. The number of CAG and 100.8 ms in hap3/hap3 (n=18)). The association was confirmed repeats among normal population varies between 10-36 repeats. in the entire sample of the KORA S2000 survey (p=0.0021). Is was Several reports indicated an association of the high CAG repeat stronger in older individuals and in those with preexisting cardiac and numbers and male infertility. The aim of this study was to evaluate cardiovascular disease. These data support the concept that variability the possible effect of long CAG repeats in the AR gene on male in channel expression by polymorphisms in the regulatory region of infertility in Macedonian men. A total of 196 infertile/subfertile males the gene influences cardiac conduction even in unselected individuals were studied. The patients were divided in six groups: azoospermia from the general population. (n=70), severe oligozoospermia (n=33), moderate oligozoospermia (n=25), mild oligozoospermia (n=12), normozoospermia (n=39) and P1162. A high density SNP panel in the MHC region. known cause of infertility, such as AZF deletions, XXY and XX males L. M. Galver, A. Oliphant, S. Shaw Murray; (n=17). The control group consisted of 111 proven fathers. The CAG Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, United States. repeat number was determined by fluorescent PCR amplification The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a ~4 Mb gene- of exon 1 of AR gene followed by capillary electrophoresis on ABI dense region of the human genome on chromosome 6p21. There PRISM 310 Genetic Analyzer. CAG repeats ranged from 13 to 32 in are over 120 expressed genes in this region of which ~40% encode infertile/subfertile men and from 14 to 30 in the control group, with proteins involved in immune defense including the human leukocyte the most common allele of 21 in both groups. No difference in mean antigen (HLA) membrane glycoproteins involved in recognition of CAG number was found between infertile men (22.2+2.9) and proven T lymphocytes. Since the classical HLA loci represent a minority of fathers (22.3+2.9). A significantly longer CAG repeats were found only genes found in the MHC region, it is likely that many disease-causing in men with mild oligozoospermia (24.6+3.0) when compared to the mutations may actually reside outside one of the classical HLA fertile males (p=0.022). These data indicate an association between genes. Therefore, since almost every autoimmune and inflammatory CAG repeat length and mild oligozoospermia among Macedonian disorder is studied in this genomic region, we have developed a panel men. of approximately 3,000 SNPs that can be used as a cost-effective, efficient method for fine mapping in the region for identification ofGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 334 genes associated with disease phenotypes. In addition, this panel can gene polymorphisms in both groups were no significantly different. be used to discriminate between causal alleles and variation that is in Thus our results showed that in Tatars the -308A/G TNFA gene linkage disequilibrium (LD) with causal alleles. The panel consists of polymorphism was associated with CAD and genetic variation in or two multiplexes, each with ~1,500 SNPs that are designed for use with near the TNFA locus may predispose to CAD. Illumina’s GoldenGate® assay and can be used either independently or in conjunction with one another. The first multiplex is “exon-centric” and P1165. Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 gene (PLA2G7) contains SNPs within 10 kb of coding sequences of genes in the MHC and multiple sclerosis in Italian patients region spanning from ret finger protein (RFP) to motilin (MLN). The M. Gomez-Lira1, G. Malerba1, L. Provezza1, C. Terranova1, M. D. Benedetti2, S. second multiplex consists of SNPs evenly spaced across the region Ottavini2, A. Salviati2, P. F. Pignatti1; with an emphasis on tag SNPs. With these two panels combined, the 1Section of Biology and Genetics, Dept of Mother and Child, and Biology-Ge- average spacing between SNP loci is less than 2 kb. netics, Univ of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Dept of Neurological Sciences, Verona, Italy. P1163. Identification of the 208-2A>G "AMN" mutation in a non Several studies suggest that a pre-existing Lp-PLA2 deficiency may be Jewish MGA Tunisian patient a risk factor for several diseases having an inflammatory component C. Bouchlaka1, S. Abdelhak1, C. Maktouf1, T. Sfar2, A. Ayadi2, A. M’kaour3, M. such as multiple sclerosis (MS). We have evaluated the association Sioud3, N. Gueddich4, A. Belhadjali5, K. Dellagi1; of PLA2G7 gene polymorphisms with susceptibility to MS in a study 1Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis Belvédère, Tunisia, 2C.H.U. Tahar Sfar, including 95 MS patients and 114 healthy controls. A total of six single Mahdia, Tunisia, 3Hôpital d’enfants, Tunis, Tunisia, 4C.H.U, Monastir, Tunisia, nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) throughout the gene were examined: 5C.H.U. Aziza Othmana, Tunis, Tunisia. three missense polymorphisms (Arg92His, Iso198Thr, and Val379Ala), Megaloblastic anemia 1 (MGA1) (MIM 261100), also known as the a deletion polymorphism (1190-20_23delGATT) in intron 11, and two Imerslund-Gräsbeck syndrome (I-GS) is a rare autosomal recessive polymorphisms (-402T>C and -209C>G) in the 5’-flanking region. condition that is characterized by a selective intestinal vitamin B12 Single SNP frequency analysis showed a significant association of the malabsorption and proteinuria. SNP -209C>G with MS (p=0.003; OR= 2.4, CI:1.29-4.5. Fisher exact Currently, more than 250 MGA1 patients have been identified worldwide, test). Haplotype reconstruction revealed seven common haplotypes but the disease was prevalent in Finland, Norway and several Eastern accounting for >80% of the chromosomes observed. Logistic regression Mediterranean regions. I-GS is genetically heterogeneous. It has been analysis showed the association of a haplotype cointaining the allele recently shown that the disease can be caused by mutations in either -209G with MS (p=0.018 ; OR: 2.48, CI: 1.58-3.58). No other haplotype the cubilin (CUBN) or the amnionless (AMN) gene. revealed any significant association. This preliminary result suggests In the present study, we investigated the molecular defect underlying an association of -209C>G SNP with increased susceptibility to MS. IG-S in 9 Tunisian patients belonging to six unrelated consanguineous The genotyping of a larger set of individuals may indicate possible families. Haplotype and linkage analyses, using the appropriate interaction effects among the SNPs. microsatellite markers surrounding both CUBN and AMN genes, demonstrated that 4 out of 6 families were likely linked to CUBN P1166. Linkage analysis in a large nonspecific X-linked Mental gene. The patients from these familes have been screened for the Retardation (MRX) family. Mediterranean already published mutations by direct sequencing of L. Spizzichino1, A. Terracciano1, I. Zito1, A. Feraco1, L. Ciocca1, M. Rosati1,2, R. the corresponding genomic DNA regions. No one of the screened Fischetto3, P. Chiurazzi1, G. Neri1; mutations was observed in our population. One family showed a 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Roma, Italy, 2Os- linkage analysis to AMN gene. Direct screening for the already pedal San Giacomo, ALS RMA, Rome, Italy, 3Divisione di Malattie Metaboliche reported of AMN mutations allowed the identification of the 208-2A>G, e Genetiche, Azienda Ospedaliera “Di Venere-Giovanni XXIII”, Bari, Italy. previously described in Jewish Israeli patient from Tunisian origin. This X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is a clinically heterogenous set observation suggests that the 208-2A>G mutation may derive from a of conditions responsible for a large proportion of inherited mental single Mediterranean founder ancestor, consequence of population retardation. XLMR conditions were subdivided into specific (MRXS) migration flows. For the latest family, haplotype analyses excluded and nonspecific (MRX) forms, depending on their clinical presentation. both CUBN and AMN genes suggesting the presence of a third gene MRX families, whose only phenotypic manifestation is mental delay, locus that can cause I-GS. can only be distinguished by their positional mapping, eventually leading to gene identification. We here report on linkage analysis in a P1164. Cytokine gene polymorphisms and risk coronary artery large family including 4 affected males with MRX and 4 obligate carrier disease in Tatars females. Linkage analysis using 30 polymorphic markers spanning the I. R. Timacheva1, G. H. Tuljakova1, T. R. Nasybullin1, K. I. Gubaev1, A. N. Za- entire X chromosome defined a candidate region between DXS1003 kirova2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1, O. E. Mustafina1; (Xp11.3) and DXS1216 (Xq13.1). LOD scores are significant (›2). We 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkirian also studied the X inactivation pattern in this family with the methylation State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. test of the AR gene. We found skewage of X inactivation in an obligate Cytokines are considered to be key players in the chronic vascular carrier, her carrier daughter and in a sister whose carrier status is inflammatory response that is typical of atherosclerosis. Their genes uncertain. Her carrier aunt, mother of an affected individual, showed are thus worthy candidates in studies of the genetic basis of coronary random X inactivation. This latter finding suggests that skewage of X artery disease (CAD).We aimed to investigate whether tumor necrosis inactivation is not always an indicator of carrier status in XLMR families. factor alpha (-308A/G TNFA), interleukin-1 beta (-511T/C IL1B, We are currently screening candidate genes in the approximately 20 +3954C/T IL1B) and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL1RA, 86-bp Mb region delimited by DXS1003 and DXS1216, including 6 genes repeated sequence in intron 2) gene polymorphisms are associated whose mutations have already been described in other MRX families. with CAD in Tatars from Bashkortostan. Polymorphisms were detected in unrelated males without symptoms of cardiovascular diseases (127 P1167. Association study of Estrogen receptor-alpha gene with Tatars) and CAD patients (115 Tatars) by the PCR or PCR-RFLP mineral bone density in a group of unrelated Italian females technique. Genotypes and allelic frequencies for these polymorphisms E. Petrelli1, G. Malerba1, A. Sangalli1, L. Xumerle1, V. Braga2, P. F. Pignatti1, M. in both groups were compared using the Fisher’s exact test. The Mottes1; strength of an association was expressed in the terms of relative 1Section of Biology and Genetics, Dept of Mother and Child, and Biology-Ge- risk, calculated as odds ratio (OR). We found genotype frequency netics, Univ of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Rheumatology Unit, Univ of Verona,, distribution of TNFA gene in the group of patients differed from that Valeggio S/M, Italy. in control group. The frequency of GG genotype was 86.96% in CAD Estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) gene variants have been widely vs. 74.80% in control (OR: 2.25, P=0.022), correspondently in these investigated for their putative role in influencing bone mineral density. In groups frequencies of AG genotype were 13.04% and 23.62% (OR: a recent multipoint analysis with variance component that we performed 0.49, P=0.047) and frequencies of AA genotype were 0% and 1.57% on 118 Italian families recruited through an osteopenic/osteoporotic (P=0.499). Frequencies of alleles and genotypes for IL1B and IL1RA member, we found a weak linkage with ESR1 PvuII/XbaI haplotype atGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 335 three densitometric sites. In a family based association study (TDT), polymorphism frequencies. The frequency of factor VII Arg353Gln we found that the T/A-PvuII/XbaI haplotype was preferentially non heterozygotes in the control group was 29% (16/55) versus 11% transmitted to affected sibs (p<0.01). An association was observed (6/54) in the study group (p=0.019; OR=3.28; 95% CI=1.17-9.18). between C/G or C/A haplotypes with low BMD at spine and femur No significant differences in frequencies of genotypes of other tested (Sangalli et al., submitted). We decided therefore to investigate further coagulation factors and the occurrence of RSA were observed. a putative association of ESR1PvuII/XbaI haplotypes with BMD in a Our findings implicate that Arg353 allele of coagulation factor VII might sample of 182 peri and postmenopausal Italian women. Association be a protection factor against RSA. Further studies comprising of larger analysis of the single markers with BMD values at spine and femur did numbers of women with RSA are needed to confirm our findings. not show any significant association. Haplotypes were reconstructed and no significant association with BMD values at the 2 distinct sites P1170. First evidence that a rare genetic polymorphism with high was observed. Genotyping has been extended to a larger set of penetrance may be involved in the aetiology of endometriosis females. K. T. Zondervan1, J. Lin2, G. Dawson3, D. Zabaneh3, V. Smith3, S. Bennett3, A. Carey3, S. A. Treloar4, L. Cardon1, I. J. Mackay3, J. Mangion3, S. Kennedy2; P1168. Genetic variability of mu-opioid receptor and 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Nuffield anaesthesiological implication: preliminary study Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Oxagen A. Marolla1, A. De Capraris2, D. Sforza2, D. Sabato2, G. Cinnella2, L. Tullo2, L. Ltd, Abingdon, United Kingdom, 4Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Gesualdo3, M. Dambrosio2; Brisbane, Australia. 1Department of "Scienze Chirurgiche", University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy, 2De- Background - Endometriosis (the presence of endometrial-like partment of "Scienze Chirurgiche",division of anesthesia, University of Foggia, deposits outside the uterus) is a common complex disease associated Foggia, Italy, 3Department of "Scienze Biomediche", University of Foggia, Fog- with pelvic pain and subfertility in women of reproductive age. Its gia, Italy. aetiology remains largely unknown, although familial aggregation of There is interindividual variability in pain perception and sensitivity to the condition has been demonstrated in humans as well as non-human analgesic agents. The opioids drugs are widely used in management primates. of perioperative pain, but individual differences in the effectiveness Methods - In a recently conducted genome-wide linkage study, and adverse effects of these drugs have been described. 256 Caucasian families each containing at least 2 sister-pairs with The μ receptor, encoded by OPRM1 locus, is the major target for endometriosis were recruited; 52 of these families were found to endogenous and exogenous opioids. OPRM1 is a candidate gene for contain 3 or more affected members (41 families with 3 cases; 10 with pain tolerance and differences in individual responses to opioids. 4; and 1 with 5). Non-parametric genome-wide linkage analyses in the The most frequent SNP, about 10-20% is a adenine substitution to 52 families were conducted in Merlin, using sex-specific recombination guanine at position 118 resulting in aminoacid change at position information from the Rutgers linkage-physical map. Parametric linkage 40 of aspartate into asparagine (ND40). In vitro, ND40 substitution analyses were conducted using GeneHunter. displays three-fold enhanced binding of beta-endorphin that common Results - Six LOD score peaks with Kong & Cox LOD scores greater allel. SNPs have not been studied in relation to intraoperative and than 1 were found. One of the peaks, on chromosome 7, reached postoperative response.18 healthy women who gave birth undergoing a LOD of 3.49 (simulation-based genome-wide significance value: elective cesarean section under epidural anesthesia were randomized p=0.007). Subsequent parametric analyses provided a heterogeneity to receive either Levobupivacaine alone or levob. plus Sufentanil. Basal LOD of 3.92, using a model of a low frequency (0.002), highly penetrant conditions were assessed on T0, every 5 minutes until T45min, on T6h (0.85 for heterozygotes; 1 for homozygotes) disease allele. Results and T24h, with measurement of physiological parameters. The post- of haplotype analyses using additional markers in the region, and of operative pain was estimated on T6h and T24h by means of scale VAS further phenotypic analyses exploring the presence of subfertility and (visual analog scale). IL-6 and IL-10 measurement were performed on pelvic pain, will be presented. T0, T45min, T6h and T24h blood samples. The coding and flanking Conclusion - A rare genetic polymorphism with high penetrance may intron region of μ receptor gene was screened using DHPLC method. be involved in the aetiology in a subgroup of women with endometriosis. In our cohort we found 5 heterozygous patients for N40D change. Finding this polymorphism and its function may provide a first insight in Ours preliminary results suggest a possible correlation between ND40 the pathologic pathway of this condition. change and pain control: lower increase of anti-inflammatory cytokines and lower VAS value are present in heterozygous subjects. P1171. Evaluation of Nyholt's Procedure for Multiple Testing Correction P1169. Coagulation factor polymorphisms in women with D. Y. Salyakina1, S. R. Seaman1, B. L. Browning2, F. Duidbrige3, B. Müller-Myh- recurrent spontaneous abortion (RSA) sok1; M. Volk1, B. Peterlin1, H. Meden-Vrtovec1, J. Vojtaššák2, S. Ostojič1, K. Geršak1; 1Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 2GlaxoSmithKline, Re- 1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Uni- search Triangle Park, NC, United States, 3MRS Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge´, versity of Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Medical United Kingdom. Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Comenius University Bratislava, A simple method for accounting efficiently for multiple testing of many Bratislava, Slovakia. SNPs in an association study was recently proposed by Nyholt (2004), Maternal coagulation factor mutations and gene polymorphisms have but its performance was not extensively evaluated. The method been associated with adverse pregnancy outcome. We conducted a involves estimating an `effective number' of independent tests and case-control study to determine the association between the G20210A then adjusting the smallest observed p-value using Sidak's formula prothrombin and G1691A factor V point mutations, the factor VII based on this number of tests. We sought to carry out an empirical and Arg353Gln and factor XIII Tyr204Phe gene polymorphisms and the theoretical evaluation of Nyholt's method. risk of RSA. Nyholt's method was applied to a sample of 31 genes typed at a total Of a total of 54 Caucasian women with a history of three or more of 291 SNPs and permutation used to determine the type-I error rate consecutive spontaneous abortions before the 20th week of gestation, for each gene. 51 of them attended the Division of Medical Genetics, University of The nominal 5% type-I error rate varied from under 3% to over 7%, and Medical Center Ljubljana and three of them were ascertained at the was dependent on linkage disequilibrium. Theoretical considerations Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine show further that the method can be very conservative in the presence Comenius University Bratislava. As a control group, 55 age and of haplotype block structure. ethnicity matched controls with at least two live births and no history Although Nyholt's approach may be useful as an exploratory tool, it is of pregnancy loss were included. Polymerase chain reactions were not an adequate substitute for permutation tests. performed to analyze the point mutations of G20210A prothrombin and G1691A factor V, and the gene polymorphisms of factor VII Arg353Gln and factor XIII Tyr204Phe. We found statistically significant differences in factor VII geneGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 336 P1172. Familial secundum atrial septal defect maps to was divided according to the age of surgery into the <=65 and >65 chromosome 15 years old. In the older group (n=43) the frequency of MTHFR 1298 H. Matsson; AC genotype (59%) was higher as compared to that in the younger Uppsala university, Uppsala, Sweden. (n=25) group (34%) (p=0,02, Fischer exact test). Also the frequency of Atrial septum defect (ASD) is a common congenital heart defect affecting the MTHFR 677C>T/1298A>C combined heterozygotes (CT/AC) was 4 in 100,000 individuals. ASD of the secundum type is characterised by higher in the older group of non-DM AAA patients (36%) as compared an incomplete coverage of the ostium secundum resulting in a left-to to that in the younger group (17%) (p=0,04, Fischer exact test). The right shunting. The effects of the ASD range from subclinical to severe frequency of MTHFR 677 CT genotype in the older group (46%) did symptoms including pulmonary hypertension, arrhythmias and heart not differ from that in the younger group (45%). We conclude that the failure. ASD is mostly sporadic but several familial cases have been age of the aneurysm development as well as the DM co-occurrence reported. We describe two extended Swedish families with isolated may influence the assessment of the role of the the MTHFR gene autosomal dominant ASD. Using polymorphic microsatellite markers, polymorphisms in pathogenesis of AAA. The finding of the increased we performed a genome wide scan in search for chromosomal regions frequency of the MTHFR 677C>T/1298A>C double heterozygous linked to ASD. Linkage to the previously described candidate loci genotype CT/AC in the older patients group expands also the earlier including the COMP and GATA4 genes were excluded for the two finding of the association between the AAA occurrence and the MTHFR families. We identified a 23 cM region on chromosome 15 (15p11-q13) 677CT genotype (Strauss, 2003). which is linked to the disease phenotype. The region is restricted by recombination events between the markers D15S165 and D15S659 P1175. Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1 4G/5G polymorphism and we calculated a maximum cumulative LOD score for the two and cardiovascular disease in Iran families of 3.6 assuming full penetrance. Candidate genes are now S. Zare-Karizi1,2, S. M. Seifati3, S. M. Hosseini-Mazinani2, N. Hoseinpur-No- investigated in the linked region for structural mutations from affected bari2, F. Soheilifar2, M. J. Hashemi4, H. Azarnik4, J. Koochmeshgi2,5; family members. 1Azad University, Science and Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Research Center for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Teh- P1173. Analysis of influence of genes involved in control of bone ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Maybod Genetics Center, Yazd, Islamic Republic and cartilaginous metabolism on pathogenesis of idiopathic of Iran, 4Sh. Rajaie Heart Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Research osteoarthritis of knee-joint Institute for Life, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. M. V. Aseev1, M. V. Moskalenko1,2, N. N. Kornilov1; Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) molecule is primarily known 1Ott's Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian for its role in counteracting plasminogen activation andimpairing Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- fibrinolysis. It has been observed that high plasma PAI-1 levels are tion. associated with an aggravated prognosis of myocardial infarction We studied an association of polymorphic allelic variants of genes, in the acute phase. On these bases, PAI-1 has been implicated involved in control of bone and cartilaginous metabolism with clinical in thrombotic events and has been considered as a risk factor for course and severity of idiopathic osteoarthritis of knee-joint (IOKJ). cardiovascular disease. PAI-1 also plays a role in several patho- Study group included 112 patients with idiopathic osteoarthritis of knee- physiological processes, presumably independent of plasminogen joint. Patients were diagnosed according to clinical and radiographic activation: The link between PAI-1 and the metabolic syndrome has data. According to disease anamnesis, intensity of functional been long established. During the last decade, strong association abnormalities, efficiency of conservative methods of treatment and has emerged between plasma PAI-1 levels and parameters of the successfulness of clinical effect patients were divided onto three metabolic syndrome (Body Mass Index, visceral fat, blood pressure, groups with different kind of IOKJ progression: slowly, moderately and plasma levels of insulin or proinsulin, triglycerides, LDL particles, free rapidly progressive. Also all patients were subdivided onto three groups fatty acids, and HDL cholesterol). One line of research has focused by stages of degenerative-dystrophic lesion of knee-joint according to on genetic polymorphisms of PAI-1, particularly the 4G/5G insertion/ clinical and radiographic classification by Kossinskaya. deletion in the promoter region of the gene. This polymorphism affects The comparision of genotypes frequencies of the vitamin D3 receptor transcription rates. 4G/5G polymorphism has been investigated in (VDR), collagen type I (COL1A1), collagen type II (COL2A1), calcitonin connection with cardiovascular disease in association studies in various receptor (CALCR) and osteocalcin (BGLAP) genes in patients with populations with varying results. Here, we report preliminary results of IOKJ and in controls revealed an association between the TT genotype our ongoing case-control association study in Iran, which point to a of the CALCR gene and rapidly progressive osteoarthritis of knee-joint possible link between PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism and cardiovascular and also an association of the hh genotype of the BGLAP gene with disease in this population. mild IOKJ. Conducted analysis of genotypes association of the VDR, COL1A1, P1176. Haplotype analysis of tumor necrosis factor alpha / CALCR and BGLAP genes taking into account the interaction of alleles lymphotoxin alpha, interleukin 1, -10, and vitamin D binding of these genes allowed to reveal an association of the TT Tt genotype protein in COPD patients from Russia (CALCR and VDR) with rapidly progressive OA and the hh SS genotype D. G. Yanbaeva1, G. F. Korytina1, S. Z. Zagidullin2,3, T. V. Victorova1,2; (BGLAP and COL1A1) with severity of disorder. Thus all the genes we 1Institute of biochemistry & genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir Medical have studied which control bone and cartilaginous metabolism direclty State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Department of Pulmonology, Ufa, or indirectly involved in pathogenesis of osteoarthritis on different Russian Federation. stages of disease. Inflammation plays an important role in the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It has been suggested that the P1174. The MTHFR 677C>T/1298A>C double heterozygous inflammatory mediators’ imbalance play a role in chronic inflammation. genotype CT/AC occurred in higher frequency in the older group We investigated a panel of polymorphisms: interleukin 1b(-511C/T and of abdominal aortic aneurysm patients +3953C/T) and the IL-1 receptor antagonist (VNTR 86 bp in intron E. Strauss1, K. Waliszewski2, A. L. Pawlak1; 2), tumor necrosis alpha (-308G/A) and lymphotoxin alpha (252A/G), 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, interleukin 10 (-592A/C and -627C/A) and vitamin D binding protein 2Department of General and Vascular Surgery; University Hospital nr 1, (416Glu/Asp and 420Thr/Lys in exon 11) genes in patients with COPD Poznan, Poland. to determine whether haplotypes of these genes are linked to a genetic In a group of 83 males with abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA), treated susceptibility to COPD. with trans-abdominal surgery, the two polymorphisms of the MTHFR Gene polymorphisms were examined in 282 individuals affected gene (677C>T and 1298A>C) were determined. The group has been COPD and compared with a healthy control group of 227 subjects. characterized for the diabetes mellitus (DM) co-occurrence and age Polymorphisms were examined by a PCR-RFLP method. Haplotype of the aneurysm development to diameter of more than 50 mm (at frequencies were estimated with EH software program (Rockefeller which the surgery was performed). The age range was 51-81; DM University; NY). was diagnosed in 15 patients. The group of non-DM AAA patients The likelihood ratio test showed a significant linkage between theGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 337 alleles of the TNF/LTA gene family, IL1 and IL10 polymorphisms both and although the study-design of some studies may be questionable in patients and controls. For IL10 haplotypes differences in frequencies and therefore result in contradictory wrong findings, the findings of the between cases and controls reach significance (x2=18.58, p<0.001). different studies, especially the larger ones, will be complementary The frequency of -592C/-627A haplotype was higher in COPD patients and their findings should be interpreted in that context. An overview (21% versus 14% in controls, x2=6.39, p=0.01, OR=1.6, 95%CI of the findings, limitations and recommendations of CF association 1.10-2.33), thus, another haplotype -592C/-627C was significantly studies will be given. decreased (13% in controls versus 6% in COPD). In case of VDBP, statistically powered linkage between exon 11 polymorphisms was P1179. Molecular analysis of eotaxin gene SNPs in Italian observed only in COPD patients group. children with atopic dermatitis Our results provide new insights on a possible involvement of IL10 L. Rigoli1, C. Di Bella1, E. Canfora1, V. Procopio1, G. Pajno1, R. A. Caruso2, C. gene in susceptibility for COPD even though further investigations are D. Salpietro1; necessary to clarify findings. 1Department of Paediatrics, University School of Medicine, Messina, Italy, 2De- partment of Human Pathology,University School of Medicine, Messina, Italy. P1177. The G2019S LRRK2 mutation in autosomal dominant Atopic dermatitis (AD) is often associated with a family history of atopy. European and North African Parkinson’s disease is frequent and Two types of AD have been identified: the extrinsic (EAD), or allergic its penetrance is age-dependent form, and the intrinsic (IAD), or non allergic form.. In our study, the S. Lesage1, P. Ibanez1, E. Lohmann1,2, P. Pollak3, F. Tison4, A. L. Leuteneger1, prevalence of genotypes at -426 C>T, M. Tazir5, J. Guimaraes6, A. M. Bonnet2, Y. Agid1,2, A. Dürr1,7, A. Brice1,7, and the -384 A>G and 67 G>A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) sites of French Parkinson’s Disease Genetics StudyGroup; eotaxin gene have been investigated in EAD and IAD children and in 1INSERM U679 (former U289), Neurologie et Thérapeutique Expérimentale, their relatives. Seventy and seven children (44 females and 43 males) Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France, 2Fédération de Neurolo- (age range 3 months-12 years) suffering with AD were selected from gie, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Département de Neurologie, 31 nuclear families (Department of Paediatrics, University of Messina, CHU de Grenoble, Pavillon de Neurologie, Grenoble, France, 4Service de Neu- Sicily, Italy). The severity of AD was measured through the SCORAD rologie, Hôpital Haut-Lévèque, CHU de Bordeaux, Pessac, France, 5Service de Index. Genotyping was carried out by the PCR-RFLP method. We Neurologie, CHU Mustapha, Alger, France, 6Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital de amplified three regions of the eotaxin gene, each of which included Egas Moniz, Lisboa, Portugal, 7Département de Génétique, Cytogénétique et a SNP site, Embryologie, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France. -426C>T, -384A>G, 67G>A. As regard the -426 SNP genotype, a Parkinson’s disease (PD), the second most common degenerative significant difference was found between EAD children (p<0.05) and disorder of adulthood, is characterized clinically by rigidity, bradykinesia, EAD relatives, and nonatopic control ( p<0.05 ); as well between EAD resting tremor, and postural instability with good initial response to and IAD children (P<0.01).The frequency of this SNP was no different levodopa. between the IAD relatives and the control group. No significant Mutations in LRRK2 (PARK8) were recently identified in autosomal association was observed between the 67G>A and-384A>G SNPs and dominant Parkinson’s disease (ADPD), including the G2019S mutation EAD children in respect to control group; as well between IAD children that was found in different populations. In order to evaluate its frequency, and controls. Similar results have been found in their relatives. Our we analyzed 200 index cases with ADPD, mostly from Europe and data underline the possible role of some specific SNPs of the eotaxin North Africa. Surprisingly, the frequency in North African families (41%; gene in the development of extrinsic atopic dermatitis in the children CI 18.4-67.1) was much greater than in those from Europe (2.8%; CI with a familial occurrence of AD and/or other allergic diseases. 0.9-6.5) (p<0.001). The clinical features in 21 patients, including one with an homozygous mutation were those of typical PD but with later P1180. Analysis of genetic polymorphisms in elitè Sardinian onset and lower Mini Mental scores (MMSE). There were also 15 still (Italy) athletes. unaffected mutation carriers, aged 32 to 74, indicating the existence of E. M. Ghiani1, C. M. Calò2, I. S. Piras1, M. I. Cireddu2, M. Massidda2, G. Vona2; age-dependent penetrance. LRRK2 mutations appear to be a common 1Department of Experimental Biology, Anthropology Section, University of Ca- cause of ADPD, particularly in North Africa. gliari, Monserrato, Italy, 2Inter Faculty of Sport Science, University of Cagliari, Monserrato, Italy. P1178. CF modulating genes In human endurance performance capacity is characterized by a large H. Cuppens1, J. Yarden1, D. Radojkovic1, M. Jaspers1, R. Vlietinck1, C. De degree of inter-individual variation in the general population and even in Boeck2, M. Macek Jr.3, V. Vavrova3, D. Zemkova3, P. Lebecque4, J. J. Cassi- well-trained, athletic individuals. There is a little doubt that performance man1; is influenced by environment, as the effects of diet and training on 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2De- athletic ability have long been known, if not completely understood; partment of Pediatrics, UZ Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 3School of Medi- however, the contribution of an individual’s genetic make up is less cine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Departments of Pediatrics clear. The dominance of particular nationalities, ethnic groups, or and Medical Biology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université Catholique families in various sporting events is often perceived as evidence that de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. heritage (biological or cultural), plays a role in the development of Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a lethal genetic disease caused by mutations in athletic skills. Numerous researchers have attempted to elucidate the the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) gene. Pulmonary effects of genetic background on physical performance and to identify disease in CF patients, the main cause of morbidity and mortality the specific genetic variants that contribute to performance. In order of these patients, is variable and influenced by secondary genetic to contribute to estimate the importance of the genetic on endurance factors as well as environmental factors. Individual genes were initially performance capacity, we used molecular biology and genetic advanced investigated in a considerable number of studies for a modulating methods through the study of polymorphic genes in elitè athletes. The effect on the CF phenotype. More lately, larger association studies examined polymorphisms have a correlation with the physiological have been set up aiming at the study of many genes for their potential parameters that are involved in endurance performance capacity. modulating effect on the CF phenotype. We performed a study in 37 elitè Sardinians (Italy) athletes (10 males and 27 females) were Belgian and Czech CF patients, aiming at the analysis of 51 genetic studied. They practised hockey, soccer, rhythmic gymnastic, artistic variants from 22 genes. We focused on proteins that are part of the gymnastic, and track athletic. The samples were analyzed for one Alu host defense/protection system and proteins that directly or indirectly polymorphism (ACE) and six RFLP markers (APOE, FGB HindIII, FGA interact with CFTR. It was found that genetic variants from seven TaqI, FBG BclI, PAI HindIII, GpIIIa TaqI). The results were compared genes involved in the host defense/protection system and two genes with a control samples from Centre and South Sardinia. Preliminary encoding proteins that interact with CFTR influence CF pulmonary results showed a relevant significant correlation between elitè athletes function, indicating that a more efficient immune system is beneficial and ACE and GpIIIa genotypes. to CF patients. However, when looking at all CF associationstudies performed for any gene, a 100% consensus of a gene being a CF modulator or not, is not obtained. Most studies use different designs,Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 338 P1181. Interleukin 1 Alpha Gene 5’- Regulatory Region diseases, which are associated with the same HLA variant, or ancestral Polymorphism in Alzheimer's Disease HLA haplotype. We propose that our approach to dissecting population E. Dursun1, D. Gezen Ak2, T. Ertan2, B. Bilgic3, H. Gurvit3, M. Emre3, E. Eker2, LD from disease-based association should be broadly applicable for F. Engin2, S. Yilmazer1; the genetic mapping of other HLA loci. 1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Department of Geropsychiatry, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Behavioral and Movement Disorders Unit, Istanbul, P1183. Genetic predisposition to atletic performance: analysis of Turkey. ACTN3 R577X polymorphysm by real time pcr. Interleukin-1 is a pluripotent immunomodulatory cytokine that has V. Romano-Spica, A. Paparini; an initiating role in cellular and humoral immunity in the periphery. It IUSM, Rome, Italy. is reported that a polymorphism in the 5’-flanking regulatory region Athletic performance is influenced by training, environmental factors at -889 of the interleukin-1 alpha (IL-1alfa) gene may cause an over and genetic predisposition. Independently by the individual attitude expression of IL-1 alfa, which is also shown to be associated with and skills, muscle and sarcomer proteins represent the fundament of inflammatory diseases and Alzheimer’s disease. In this preliminary an effective movement. Alpha-actinins (ACTN) are a family of actin- study, our aim was to determine if there is an association between binding proteins related to dystrophin. A premature stop codon in IL-1 alfa gene and late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. We collected blood ACTN3 gene (11q13-14) in position 1.747 on exon 16 (R577X) has samples from 52 cases of dementia of Alzheimer type and from 35 been shown to play a role in sport performance, even though it seems age-matched controls (mean ages 75.1±5.7, and 72.7±7.3, years not involved in human myopathies. ACTN3 is present only in type II respectively). Patients are clinically diagnosed by Istanbul University, fibres and congenital deficiency involves about the 16% of the world Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Department of Geropsychiatry population, suggesting that its absence at the Z lines of scheletal and Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of muscle fast fibres can be compensated by other factors. Neurology, Behavioral and Movement Disorders Unit according to We have developed a real time pcr procedure to simultaneously type DSM-IV criterias. Salting-out method with 5M NaCl is used for DNA R577X and Q523R polymorphisms and evaluated their distribution isolation. We used polimerase chain reaction-confronting two-pair in the general population (n= 102) and in a sample of athletes. Data primers (PCR-CTPP) to test for an association between Alzheimer’s were compared with previous studies and confirmed the presence of disease and a polymorphism at -889 of the IL-1 alfa gene. After genetic a large percentage of homozygote subjects deficient in ACTN3 in the analysis of the IL-1 alfa gene, we found 63.5% genotype C/C, 32.7% general population. In this Italian population sample we observed the genotype C/T, 3.8% genotype T/T for patients, and 48.6% genotype following R577X polymorphism distribution: 22% XX homozygote, C/C, 45.7% genotype C/T, 5.7% genotype T/T for healthy control. 47% RX heterozygote, 31% RR homozygote. Allelic frequencies did When the control and patitents were compared for C/C, C/T and T/T not significantly differ in the endurance athletes even if variations genotypes we saw that the distribution of genotypes and alleles did not were observed. Haplotype distribution confirmed the presence of differ according to Chi-square test (p=0.39). Our preliminary results an interesting linkage disequilibrium. Analysis of polymorphisms at show no significant increase in the risk for the T/T or C/T genotype in sarcomeric proteins opens up promising perspectives not only for late-onset cases. Thus, we were unable to find an association between understanding the rehabilitation process in myopathies, but also for the C -889T transition on IL-1 alfa gene and late-onset Alzheimer’s shedding light on the role of genes in sport excellence predisposition. disease. P1184. Angiotensin I-Converting Enzyme (ACE) and Low-density P1182. A Comparison of Disease-Based linkage disequilibrium in lipoprotein Receptor-related Protein-Associated Protein 1 HLA haplotypes of multiple sclerosis and narcolepsy patients: A (LRPAP1) gene polymorphisms in a population of northern Italy novel approach for dissecting HLA associations A. Santovito1, C. Bulgarello2, M. DelPero1, M. P. Bigatti1, P. Cervella1; J. P. Rubio1,2, M. Bahlo1, R. K. Burfoot1, S. Huxtable1, J. Stankovich1, L. John- 1Human and Animal Biology Department, Turin, Italy, 2Casa di Cura Hospital, son1, H. Butzkueven2, L. Lin3, B. Taylor4, T. P. Speed1, T. J. Kilpatrick2, E. Mi- Lecco, Italy. gnot3, S. Foote1; In light of the significant impact of the Angiotensin I-Converting Enzyme 1The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Department of Ge- (ACE) and Low-density lipoprotein Receptor-related Protein-Associated netics and Bioinformatics, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 2The Howard Florey Protein 1 (LRPAP1) gene polymorphisms on genetic susceptibility to Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 3Center For Narcolepsy, Stanford Univer- cardiovascular diseases, the present work attempts to determine the sity School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 4Royal Hobart Hospital, frequencies of ACE and LRPAP1 allele polymorphisms in a control Hobart, Tasmania, Australia. populations of Nord-West Italy (525 unrelated individual aged between Multiple sclerosis (MS) and narcolepsy are distinct neurological 1 and 100 years, mean age 48±22.2 years). In order to analyze the disorders, which are both associated with the HLA-DRB1*1501- relationship between ACE and LRPAP1 gene polymorphisms and age, DQB1*0602 (DR15) haplotype. For MS, however, strong evidence the sample was subdivided in 3 age groups: 1-30 (n = 146); 31-50 (n = exists for another risk locus at the telomeric end of HLA complex. 199) and 51-100 years old (n = 117). Thirteen microsatellite markers (D6S2236-G51152), and the DRB1/ ACE genotype frequencies were: 6,10% for Alu insertion genotype (I/ DQB1 genes, were genotyped in 166 MS simplex families from the I), 38,10% for genotype without Alu insertion (D/D) and 55,80% for I/D Australian State of Tasmania, and 153 Narcolepsy simplex families genotype. Allele frequencies were 43,52% for the I allele and 56,48% from the USA. Allelic association was observed for three microsatellite for the D allele. Differences in D/D genotype frequency between age markers; MOGCA (p=0.002), HLA-FCA (p=0.03) and D6S265 groups were significant, with the lower value in the more aged group (p=0.05) at the telomeric end of the classical class I region only in (χ2 test, 0.01<p<0.02). This result could suggest a selective advantage MS families. We compared haplotype-specific linkage disequilibrium for I/I genotype. In the case of LRPAP1 gene, the genotype frequencies (LD) for the extended 7.1 (HLA-A*0301-B*0702-DR15) haplotype were: 1,15% for the normal genotype (I/I), 63,79% for the 25 bp double in MS and narcolepsy patients to map the telomeric MS risk locus. deleted genotype (D/D) and 35,06% for the I/D genotype. Allele Haplotypes were inferred using MERLIN, and a novel algorithm frequencies were 26.31% for the I allele and 73.69% for the D allele. (HAPLOCLUSTERS) was used to determine haplotype association No sex differences were found. For LRPA1P1 gene the more aged across 6.79 Mb of the HLA complex. Long-range haplotype association group showed a significant higher value in D/D genotype frequency was observed in MS families across the entire region, and association (0.001<p<0.01). No significant differences between groups were found was strongest (p<0.00001) from MOGCA to G51152. Telomeric of in ACE I/I-LRPA1P1 D/D double genotype frequency. MOGCA, association decreased gradually across the extended class I region, and D6S105 was identified as the distal boundary of the disease risk interval. In narcolepsy families, haplotype association was confined to a genomic segment centromeric of D6S265 and distal of G51152. There are a number of pathologically distinct common humanNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 339 P1185. Cystic Fibrosis is not a frequent disease in Cyprus P1187. The epidemiology of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy except for a village with founder effect and very high carrier (LHON) in Finland frequency of 1/14 A. Puomila1,2, S. Kivioja1, M. Savontaus1, E. Nikoskelainen1, K. Huoponen1; V. Neocleous1, P. Yiallouros2, M. Zeniou2, M. Tzetis3, E. Kanavakis3,1, C. Del- 1University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Turku Graduate School of Biomedical Sci- tas4; ences, Turku, Finland. 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Makarios Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) has been estimated to be one Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Athens University, Athens, Greece, 4University of of the most common mitochondrial disorders, with a prevalence of 3.22 Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus. of 100 000. In Finland, among a population of 5.2 million individuals, Cystic Fibrosis is a common autosomal recessive condition in we have identified 36 genealogically unrelated LHON families with Caucasians, with average carrier frequency of 1/25. In the Greek- at least one affected family member. During the 25-year research Cypriot population of about 650000 we diagnosed during the past 12 period, we have identified large families, collecting information mainly years, 27 patients, 24 of whom are alive. Thus, about 1/83 people is by going through Finnish parish records. The three primary mutations a carrier of a CF mutation. The most frequent mutation is F508del, in the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and mtDNA haplogroups were accounting for 43.8% of mutant alleles. The second most frequent is determined in all families; in addition, entire mitochondrial genomes L346P (12.5%), carried by 6 patients in heterozygosity. Apparently this were sequenced in some patients. Heteroplasmy was detected in is a Cypriot mutation, as it has not been reported in other populations, 14% (5/36) of the families. Penetrance values were determined for to our knowledge. It is found in compound heterozygosity with other all pedigrees separately and combined; and for instance, for different severe mutations, and we reckon it is a mild mutation dominating over primary mutations and genders. the severe one, since all patients carrying it have milder phenotypes. The total penetrance of LHON was notably higher among males (32%) Other mutations are: 1677delTA (6.2%), 3849+10kbC>T, (4.2%), than among females (10%). The male-female ratio was 3.2:1 which S549N (4.2%), N1303K (4.2%), M348K (2.1%), 2789+5G>A (2.1%), is in accordance with previous studies. A combined penetrance value W1282X (4.2%), G542X (2.1%), Unknown (12.5%). Interestingly, in calculated for all families varied only slightly between different primary Athienou, a village of 4500 people, we located a large family with two mutations. affected siblings, presently deceased. In an epidemiological study involving more than 800 people, 1/14 was a carrier of F508del, most P1188. Sao Miguel: the genetic history of an Azorean island probably as a result of founder effect, dating back to the times that the described by HLA Class I and Class II genes Ottomans conquered Cyprus. The legend has it that after the Ottomans P. R. Pacheco1,2, C. C. Branco1,2, A. Lismond1, L. de Fez1,2, R. Cabral1,2, B. R. conquered Famagusta at the Southeast coast, some noble Francs Peixoto1,2, L. Mota-Vieira1,2; who escaped the massacre, moved to a region close to Athienou. 1Hospital Divino Espirito Santo, Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciên- Interestingly, most of our patients, >70%, presented with dehydration cia, Oeiras, Portugal. and electrolytic disturbance during summer months. During the past Sao Miguel is the biggest and most populated island (131,609 years we performed 8 prenatal diagnoses. inhabitants) of the Azores archipelago (Portugal). Here, we present the frequencies of alleles and haplotypes for Class I (A, B and Cw) and P1186. Y-chromosome bi-allelic and STR markers in the three II (DRB1, DQB1, DPA1 and DPB1) at the DNA level in Sao Miguel. main ethnic groups of modern Bosnia-Herzegovina Blood samples were taken, after informed consent, from 106 unrelated D. /. Marjanovic1, S. Fornarino2, N. Bakal1, S. Montagna2, R. Hadziselimovic1, blood donors, whose parents were born in the same locality. HLA D. Primorac3, S. Vidovic4, N. Pojskic1, V. Battaglia2, A. Achilli2, A. Torroni2, S. typing was carried out using PCR-SSP from Olerup SSP. Statistical Andjelinovic5, K. Drobnic6, A. Santachiara-Benerecetti2, O. Semino2; analysis was performed with Arlequin v.2.0. and phylogenetic trees 1Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and were constructed by using the genetic distances between populations Herzegovina, 2Dipartimento di Genetica e Microbiologia “A Buzzati-Traverso”, (DA) with the DISPAN software. Our data shows that the gene diversity Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Medical School at Split University,, Split, Croa- at the seven loci is high (0.9997) and that all genotype frequencies tia, 4Faculty of Medicine, University of Banjaluka, Banjaluka, Bosnia and Herze- are in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. We identified 16 HLA-A alleles, govina, 5Medical School at Split University, Split, Croatia, 6Forensic Laboratory 24 HLA-B alleles, 13 HLA-C alleles, 6 HLA-DPA1 alleles, 22 HLA- and Research Center, Ministry of the Interior, Ljubljana, Slovenia. DPB1 alleles, 5 HLA-DQB1 alleles and 13 HLA-DRB1 alleles, of The variation at 28 Y-chromosome bi-allelic markers was analysed which the most frequent are, respectively, A*02 (GF=0.2500), in 256 males (90 Croats, 81 Serbs and 85 Bosniacs-Muslims) from B*44 (GF=0.1557), Cw*07 (GF=0.3113), DPA1*01 (GF=0.4623), Bosnia-Herzegovina. In addition, 100 individuals (35 Bosniacs, 31 DPB1*0401 (GF=0.3161), DQB1*03 (GF=0.3208) and DRB1*07 Serbs, 34 Croats) have been also analyzed at twelve Y-chromosomal (GF=0.1698). The most frequent three-locus haplotype in S. Miguel short tandem repeats loci. An important shared feature between the is of West European origin, HLA-A*01-B*08-DRB1*03 (HF=0.0802). three ethnic groups is the high frequency of the “Palaeolithic” European- We also found the Iberian-North African haplotype HLA-A*30-B*18- specific haplogroup (Hg) I, a likely signature of a Balkan population re- DRB1*03 (HF=0.0047), the Iberian-Berbers haplotype HLA-A*02- expansion after the Last Glacial Maximum. This haplogroup is almost B*51-DRB1*13 (HF=0.0047) and a Mongol haplotype HLA-A*02-B*44- completely represented by the sub-haplogroup I-P37 whose frequency DRB1*04 (HF=0.0142). These observations suggest an important is higher in the Croats (~71%) than in Bosniacs (~44%) and Serbs mixture of alleles from geographically distinct areas, which agree with (~31%). Other rather frequent haplogroups are E (~15%) and J (~7%), the history of settlement and molecular data from Y-chromosome. The together with R-M17 (~14%). Hg E, almost exclusively represented by HLA data presented here will be useful to study the molecular basis its subclade E-M78, is more common in the Serbs than in Bosniacs of autoimmune diseases in Azores. (paularpacheco@hdes.pt) Funded and Croats; Hg J observed in only one Croat, encompasses ~9% by DRCT-Azores. of the Serbs and ~12% of the Bosniacs, where, it shows its highest differentiation. Differently, Hg R-M17 harbours similar frequencies in P1189. Demographic and baseline clinical data of 638 patients all three groups. Overall, the three main Bosnia-Herzegovina groups, with Fabry disease: latest analysis from FOS - the Fabry in spite of some quantitative differences, share a large fraction of the Outcome Survey same ancient gene pool. At the STR analyses, 81 different Y-STR A. Mehta1, M. Beck2, G. Sunder-Plassmann3, U. Widmer4; haplotypes were detected, 69 of them were unique. Six of twelve not 1Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2University of Mainz, Mainz, singleton haplotypes were shared by different population groups: two Germany, 3Medical University, Vienna, Austria, 4University of Zurich, Zurich, of them by Croats and Bosniacs, two by Bosniacs and Serbs and Switzerland. the last two by Serbs and Croats, thus testifying recent gene flows Background: Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage between groups. disorder caused by deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme α- galactosidase A. Progressive accumulation of the enzyme substrate in cells throughout the body leads to organ failure and premature death. Treatment for this disease has recently become available in the form of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). To determine the efficacy andNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 340 safety of ERT with agalsidase alfa, FOS - the Fabry Outcome Survey Informed Consent, confidentiality, anonymity of personal data, and - was established. The present analysis of the FOS database aims abandonment in case of expressed will. DNA was isolated from blood to provide demographic information and baseline data on the natural samples, coded and immediately stored in a locked refrigerator. The history of Fabry disease. identifiable DNA bank has self-reported data concerning sex, age, Methods: The FOS database was analysed in terms of patient birth, current place of living, and parental birthplaces. The samples are demography and baseline manifestations of Fabry disease. representative of all the island’s municipalities (r=0.995, p<0.01). The Results: As of November 2004, 638 patients (387 receiving majority (87%) of the participants are male, with mean age of 36.3 y agalsidase alfa and 251 currently untreated) were enrolled in FOS (18-64y). Birthplace analysis reveals that 902 (90%) have both parents from 11 European countries. For the first time since FOS was initiated born in São Miguel. Moreover, 477 (54%) have their parents born in in 2001, there are more female patients (n=324) than males (n=314); the same locality, confirming high rate of consanguinity in rural area. 59 of the female and 48 of the male patients are under 18 years of To date, this DNA bank was used to assess the Y-chromosome age. Approximately one-third of these children have significant signs phylogeny and diversity in Azorean population (Pacheco PR, Ann Hum and symptoms before 10 years of age. A severity score, based on the Genet, 2005, in press). Now, we are analysing autosomal STRs for Mainz Severity Score Index, confirms the progressive nature of Fabry the better understanding of the gene pool and genetic structure of the disease with age in both male (r=0.53; p<0.001) and female (r=0.48; archipelago’s population. (lmotavieira@hdes.pt). Funded by DRCT, p<0.001) patients. Azores. Conclusion: FOS is providing valuable information on Fabry disease not only in men, but now also in women and children. The baseline P1192. Haplogroup distribution and Polymorphism in the non- data available will allow the effects of ERT with agalsidase alfa to be coding region of human Mitochondrial DNA in persian patients quantified. harboring LHON primary G11778A, G3460A, T14484C and G14459A mutations P1190. Genetic diversity of the Azorean population revealed by M. Shafa Shariat Panahi1, M. Houshmand1, A. Tabassi2, M. H. Sanati1; 13 short tandem repeats 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, C. C. Branco1,2, P. R. Pacheco1,2, R. Cabral1,2, L. de Fez1,2, B. R. Peixoto1,2, L. Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Farabi Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Mota-Vieira1,2; Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a maternally inherited 1Molecular Genetic and Pathology Unit, Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta form of retinal ganglion cell degeneration leading to optic atrophy in Delgada, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. young adults. It is caused by four primary point mutations including The knowledge of population history, demography and genetic structure G11778A, G3460A, T14484C and G14459A in the mitochondrial has proven to be fundamental to address research in human genetics. genome (mtDNA).The mutation rate for mtDNA is about 10 times Here, we describe the genetic diversity of Azorean population and its more than nuclear DNA. The D-loop region is a hot spot for mtDNA affinity with other populations by the analysis of 13 microssatelite loci alterations and it contains two hypervariable regions (HVS-I and HVS- (TPOX, D3S1358, FGA, CSF1PO, D5S818, D7S820, D8S1179, TH01, II). In order to identify polymorphic sites, genetic background and also vWA, D13S317, D16S539, D18S51 and D21S11) in 257 unrelated to find out any possible association between LHON primary mutations blood donors. These short tandem repeat (STR) markers were typed and mtDNA haplogroups (hg), the complete non-coding region of by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) with fluorescently labelled mitochondrial DNA from 25 unrelated LHON patients harboring one of primers. Allelic frequencies were statistically analysed using Arlequin the primary mutations was sequenced.Any differences with cambridge v.2.0, and phylogenetic trees based on Nei’s genetic distance were sequence recorded as single base substitution (SBS), numerical constructed with the DISPAN software. changes in C-tract (PCT), insertions and deletions.Our results showed Analysis of microsatellite loci shows that the Azorean population that majority of our patients belonged to hg J, T and HV rather than presents a very high gene diversity (1.000). For each marker, gene hgs U1, U3, U4, U5 and W, which found only in one patient(4%). diversity range between 0.661 for TPOX and 0.8812 for D18S51. Nucleotide substitutions make up the majority of the mutations. (94.5%) Heterozigosity values calculated for each STR varies from 64.2% for We have predominantly found transitions (79.2%) and a significantly TPOX to 87.1% for D18S51, although the majority of markers show lower frequency of transvertions (15.3%) whereas insertions (5.5%) values superior to 80%. Moreover, allele frequencies are similar to as well as deletions (0%) are rather rare. Ten polymorphisms were those obtained for mainland Portugal and other European populations. newly identified in this study not published in the mitomap database. This result is corroborated by the dendrogram, in which Azores Also PCT changes were present in all of our samples. The analysis clusters with Italians, Belgians, Portuguese and Spanish, apart from presented here for the first time provides evidence that there is Moroccans and Cabo Verdeans. association between G3460A with hg W and U5 and also between Taken together, these data indicate that the gene pool of the Azorean G14459A with hg U1. population is very diverse and are consistent with our previous results on Y-chromosome (Pacheco PR, Ann Hum Genet, 2005). Moreover, P1193. Nijmegen breakage syndrome - inherited syndrome of the major affinity with Portuguese and other European populations is chromosomal instability in the population of Slovakia. primarily guided by the settlement history of the Azores archipelago. K. Melterova, V. Pohanka, M. Patrik, J. Melter; (claudiacbranco@hdes.pt). Funded by DRCT (Azores). Srobar Institute for Children's Respiratory Diseases, Dolny Smokovec, Slovakia. Molecular genetic method was establish for simply screening detection P1191. The DNA bank from the population of Sao Miguel Island of slavic mutation 657del5 of NBS1 gene on both alleles. We have (Azores): a resource for genetic diversity studies investigated 724 samples of dry blood blots of newborns from north L. Mota-Vieira1,2, P. R. Pacheco1,2, M. L. Almeida3, R. Cabral1,2, J. Carvalho3, C. Slovakia, 427 samples DNA of oncologic patients, 32 persons of 7 C. Branco1,2, C. Matos3, L. de Fez1,2, M. Loura3, B. R. Peixoto1,2, A. L. Araújo3, families within 4 probands were detected as homozygots and 4 P. Mendonça3; probands as heterozygots, 4 of 10 siblings were heterozygot-carriers 1Genetics and Molecular Pathology Unit, Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 2Instituto of the mutation. Immunological and oncological parameters such as Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 3Haematology Department, Hospital IgA, IgG, IgM, IL2, IL4, IFN, TNF, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD16, CD19, Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta Delgada, Portugal. CD64 and AFP, B2MG, CEA, Ferritin were investigated in patients and The peopling of São Miguel Island in the 15th century was made by carriers of NBS1 gene mutation. Portuguese and settlers of foreign origin (Flemish, Jews, Moorish Incidence of the slavic mutation of NBS1 gene in the group occurred prisoners and black slaves). There is a signature of admixture in the 1:181. The mutation of 657del5 was find also in gipsy ethnicum. settlement history of São Miguel, thus to unravel the population genetic No slavic mutation of NBS1 gene was detected in the group of background, we decided to establish a human DNA bank in order to oncologic patients.The most frequent defects of immunity was IgA characterize the population’s polymorphisms. (a)hypogammaglobulinemia (IgA<0.08g/l, accompanied with the Here, we describe the construction of the DNA bank, and analyse reduction of CD19+ B-Lymfocytes (BLyCD19+ <70cells/ul <10.9%, the information of 1000 samples obtained from healthy blood donors. TLyCD3+ <695cells/ul <67%, TsLyCD8+ <330 cells/ul <29,4%, The bank follows the international ethical guidelines, which include ThLyCD4+ <378cells/ul <44.2%). No significant differencies inNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 341 immunity were detected in heterozygot-carriers. compared two techniques for their identification: measurement of the High incidence of 657del5 mutation of NBS1 gene in Slovakia enzymatic activity or that of the percentage of erythrocytes without correspond with other slavic countries. Detection of 657del5 mutation activity (cytochimic analysis). The sample comprised 105 "obliged" of NBS1 gene by used PCR method is usefull to confirm diagnosis heterozygous (G6PD B+/G6PD B-) having at least one normal son of NBS and also for the screening to find carriers of the mutation to (G6PD B+; mean activity = 9.3 ± 1.0 U/gHb; 0.0% erythrocytes prevent of NBS. While homozygot-patients suffer immunodeficiences without activity), and a G6PD B- Med deficient son (G6PD B- Med; and malignancies, heterozygot-carriers are well compensated with electrophoretic mobility = 100/100; activity < 5% of 9.3 U/gHb; 99.6% physiologic allele. ± 1.7 of erythrocytes without activity) or G6PD B- non-Med deficient The research project was sponsored by Slovak Science and Technology son (G6PD B- non-Med; electrophoretic mobility = 100/100; activity > Assistance Agency. 5% of 9.3 U/gHb; 74.1% ± 19.6 of erythrocytes without activity). The heterozygotes were subdivided into 49 G6PD B- Med, and 56 G6PD P1194. FSHB gene polymorphisms and haplotype patterns in non-Med with mean activities of 5.8 ± 2.3 U/gHb and 5.6 ± 1.8 U/gHb, European, African and Asian populations respectively, compared with 9.6 ± 1.0 U/gHb in the normal women. The M. Grigorova, M. Laan; subsamples showed 51.1% ± 33.6 of erythrocytes without activity and Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. 31.2% ± 27.3, respectively, compared with 0.0% of the normal women. Follicle-stimulating hormone (follitropin, FSH) belongs to gonadotropin By measurement of activity, 9/56 G6PD B- Med deficient heterozygotes hormones family. Like all gonadotropins follitropin consists of α- and β- and 11/49 G6PD B- non-Med heterozygotes, mimicking normal activity, subunits. α-subunit is common in all gonadotropin hormones. β-subunit were not identified. Test sensitivity was 80.9%. By cytochimic analysis, is hormone specific. Follicle-stimulating hormone β-subunit plays the 2/49 G6PD B- non-Med heterozygotes and 3/56 G6PD B- Med important role in human sexual development and reproduction. Gene heterozygotes were not identified. Test sensitivity was 95.2%. In mass expression pattern is time and tissue specific. FSHB gene has highly screening, the cytochimic analysis is a reliable technique to identify conserved structure and function, and little non-synonymous variation. G6PD deficient heterozygotes showing the G6PD Med or G6PD non- Nowadays all identified coding changes give rise to infertility. This Med phenotype. circumstance is asserting follitropin β-subunit gene strong negative selection. Non-coding changes have high frequency in population and P1197. Finding the needle in the haystack: Selecting Ancestry this circumstance refers either to polymorphisms evolutionary old-age Informative Markers through bulk analyses. or strong evolutionary selection. Despite of importance of FSHB gene P. Kersbergen1,2, J. K. van Duijn3,2, W. J. F. de Leeuw2, J. T. den Dunnen4, A. in human reproduction, the general population variation and haplotypic D. Kloosterman2, M. Kayser3, P. de Knijff1; structure of FSHB has not been investigated. 1Leiden University Medical Centre (Forensic Laboratory for DNA Research), This research project aims to (a) survey FSHB variation world-wide by Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Netherlands Forensic Institute, The Hague, The resequencing and RFLP analysis strategy and (b) investigate whether Netherlands, 3Department of Forensic Molecular Biology, Erasmus MC - Univer- the identified gene variants have functional consequence. In all studied sity Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 4Leiden University populations (Estonia, Mandenka, Han, Korea, Czech, CEPH panel) Medical Centre (Leiden Genome Technology Centre), Leiden, The Netherlands. the majority of identified single nucleotide polymorphisms are frequent In our search for Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs), we utilised the variants (30% minor allele frequency). Only one major haplotype (A) is Affymetrix Mapping 10K array, which enables the typing of more than present in all studied populations. However, in European populations 10,000 Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) per individual. Only also other major haplotype (B) was found, which coincides with 250 nanograms of DNA are sufficient enough to obtain the genotypes chimpanzee FSHB gene sequence. The tests for selective neutrality via restriction digest, anchor-primed PCR and hybridisation. In a showed that this two haplotypes (A and B) have been favoured by screening of 76 cell lines, representing humans from six different selective pressure. Genotype data and allelic distribution of FSHB geographical areas, we successfully scored over 10,000 out of 11,560 gene have shown that haplotype B is more prevalent in women with SNPs (i.e. a call rate of approximately 95%). minimum (<3 months) time to become pregnant. SNPs that were typed in less than 90% of the individuals were removed from the final dataset. Further analyses were performed on the P1195. The structure and the load of hereditary diseases in remaining 8650 assorted SNPs. The statistical program STRUCTURE Seversk, Russia. was used in order to obtain an unbiased estimate of the number of L. Minaycheva, O. Salyukova, L. Nazarenko, J. Kotalevskaya; genetically distinct human sub-groups. To assess which specific SNPs Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. could differentiate between sub-groups, F -values were calculated ST The results of medical-genetics investigation Seversk’s population via different approaches (estimators) in a biased (six sub-groups) and are represented in this article. Seversk city are situated in region of unbiased (four sub-groups) fashion. AIMs were identified by different influence of large nuclear-chemical complex - Siberian Chemical Plant. F ST-estimators under pre-set restrictions, which resulted in virtually no The number of investigative population was 117 thousand people. SNPs in the biased, and 47 SNPs in the unbiased classification. The The 26 nosological forms of autosomal dominant diseases with 68 47 SNPs have a between SNP physical distance of at least 20 Mb. patients were revealed, and more often was the group of hereditary On the basis of these 47 SNPs STRUCTURE analysis was repeated, syndromes. Autosomal recessive pathology includes 26 nosological resulting in an identical result as obtained when using the 8650 SNP- forms with 60 patients. The group of neurological diseases and the set. group of hereditary syndromes had the same number of nosological Our analyses indicate that it is not possible to identify the most optimal forms. X-linked diseases are represented 4 nosological forms, 10 set of SNPs by means of a single F ST estimator. However, AIMs could affected persons were found. The load of autosomal dominant, be successfully identified by means of a multifactorial approach. autosomal recessive, X-linked pathology was 0.89; 0.89 per 1000 individuals respectively and 0.29 per 1000 men. The hereditary P1198. Language and genes of the greater Himalayan region pathology spectrum in the populations studied was described. The T. Kraayenbrink1, E. J. Parkin2, D. R. Carvalho-Silva3, G. L. van Driem4, J. R. total load of hereditary diseases in Seversk’s population was 2.07 per M. L. Opgenort4, .. Karma Tshering of Gaselô4, G. Barbujani5, I. Dupanloup5, G. 1000 individuals and was comparable with other Russian populations Bertorelle5, N. M. Tuladhar6, C. Tyler-Smith3, M. A. Jobling2, P. de Knijff1; located in the radionuclide purity regions. 1Leiden University Medical Center (Forensic Laboratory for DNA Research), Leiden, The Netherlands, 2University of Leicester (Department of Genetics), P1196. A reliable technique to identify G6PD-deficent Leicester, United Kingdom, 3The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, heerozygous subjects showing the Mediterranean or non- United Kingdom, 4Leiden University (Himalayan Languages Project), Leiden, Mediterranean phenotypes The Netherlands, 5University of Ferrara (Department of Biology), Ferrara, Italy, A. Tagarelli, A. Piro, F. Condino, L. Bastone, G. Tagarelli; 6Tribhuvan University (Centre for Nepal and Asian Studies), Kirtipur, Nepal. Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy. The greater Himalayan region includes the highest land barrier on the Differential expression due to cellular mosaicism in heterozygotes face of the Earth and displays a very complex socio-cultural system. for G6PD deficiency is the basis for unreliable identification. We It is known that populations separated by barriers (both geographicalNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 342 and cultural) tend to undergo both linguistic and genetic change and, 8/144 of the cases were homozygous for the HFE C282Y mutation, indeed, the greater Himalayan region is the area of the greatest all 8 cases were male and 6 had been previously diagnosed with phenotypic and linguistic diversity in the Eurasian continent. hereditary haemochromatosis. The frequency of this genotype was Linguistic and archaeological studies of this region have provided 13.1 times higher in the male hepatocellular carcinoma cohort than in strong evidence that prehistoric population movements throughout the control cohort. For this cohort, we estimate that the penetrance of the Eurasian continent have been strongly influenced by topography. the HFE C282Y homozygous genotype, with respect to hepatocellular However, there are several models for the peopling of Eurasia which carcinoma, was between 1.31 % and 2.1% for males and was zero for are still debated and, unfortunately, few genetic data are available from females. the greater Himalayan region. In this population, individuals who are homozygous for the HFE In an attempt to shed some light on these issues, we have sampled C282Y mutation have a small but significantly increased risk of being about 1000 individuals from Nepal and 1000 from Bhutan, representing diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma. some 35 to 40 different groups (based on language, geography and/ or caste). These samples are currently being analysed for genetic P1201. Investigation for D-loop variations, haplogroup polymorphisms on the autosomes, the mitochondrial genome, and the association and mitochondrial deletions in Iranian patients with Y chromosome. This will enable us to compare and test alternative Friedreich's Ataxia models for the peopling of the Himalayan region. M. Rostami Kalkhoran1, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi1, M. Houshmand1, M. H. Preliminary results (on 21 autosomal- and 24 Y-chromosomal STRs) Sanati1, S. Nafisi2, A. Soltanzadeh2; support the categorisation of Himalayan populations into a Tibeto- 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, Burman (TB) and an Indo-European-speaking (IE) family. Based on Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Neurology Department, Shariati Hospital, Tehran, the current results, subdivision of the TB branch is more apparent in Islamic Republic of Iran. Bhutan than in Nepal. Friedreich's ataxia (FA) is one of the commonest genetic cause of ataxia and is associated with the expansion of a GAA repeat in intron 1 P1199. Micro-differentiation among different sub-populations in of the frataxin gene.Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) could be considered a Corsica. candidate modifier factor for FA disease, since mitochondrial oxidative G. Sole1, V. Latini1, L. Varesi2, M. Memmi'2, G. Vona3, P. Mascia1, A. Cao1, M. stress is thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of these diseases. S. Ristaldi1; The Displacement loop(D-loop),which is 1124 bp in size is a noncoding 1INN-CNR, Selargius - Cagliari, Italy, 2University of Corte, Corte, France, 3Uni- region contains two HyperVariable Segments( HVS-I and HVS-II). versity of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. We studied 15 Iranian patients (9 females and 6 males) from 7 unrelated It is well known that genetic isolates have a great potential for the families.In order to identify polymorphic sites, genetic background identification of genes involved in the pathogenesis of multifactorial and also to find out any possible association between FA and mtDNA diseases. In these populations the disease allele reveals Linkage haplogroups(hg),the complete non-coding region of mitochondrial DNA Disequilibrium (LD) with markers over significant genetic intervals, from 15 unrelated FA patients harboring GAA trinucletide expansions therefore facilitating disease locus identification. We have already was sequenced. Alignment were made upon the Cambridge Reference shown a high degree of LD in populations of Corsica. In the present Sequence (CRS) and any differences recorded as single base substitu study we have examined the amount and decay of LD with distance tion(SBS),insertions,deletions and numerical changes in C-tract(PCT) in some sub-populations of Corsica (Corte, Niolo, Bozio, Ajaccio) and PCT changes were present in all of our samples.One polymorphisms in the general population of Corsica to verify if there are differences (C16176A) was newly identified in this study population,not recorded in between these subgroups . the human genome database.(Mitomap) Our results also showed that We have studied the Xq13.3 genomic region that has been widely used none of our patients had association with D-loop haplogroups.Deletions as a measure of general LD in a given population and to compare the were present in 75% of our patients representing mtDNA damage that levels of LD between populations. may be due to Iron accumulation in mitochondria and hypersensitivity We have found an extreme variability of amount of LD: Bozio and to oxidative stress.The results indicate that increased levels of HVS-I Niolo show an high degree of LD while Corte, Ajaccio and the general and HVS-II substitutions may be an indicator of mitochondrial DNA population of Corsica show low degree of LD. The same variability instability. Furthermore, mtDNA mutations may play an important role characterizes the pattern of disequilibrium: distance can explain from in pathogenesis of FA. less than 2% up to 50% of the total LD variation in these different sub-populations. These results are likely due to a different genetic P1202. Relation between isolated orofacial clefts and maternal structure in these isolates: number of founders, expansion rate, diseases in Hungary amount of immigration are factors that could affect the observed micro- M. Szunyogh1, E. Puhó1, J. Metneki1, J. Sandor1, A. Czeizel2; differentiation and LD extension. 1National Center for Epidemiology, Department of Human Genetics and Epi- Our results stress the importance of choosing the proper sub-populations demiology, Budapest, Hungary, 2Foundatoins for the Community Control of to carry out association studies, because different demographic history Hereditary Diseases, Budapest, Hungary. of the isolated populations could affect the validity of results. The objective of the study was to evaluate the possible association between all maternal diseases and isolated orofacial clefts (OFC) in P1200. The penetrance of HFE C282Y mutations with respect to Hungary. hepatocellular carcinoma is low in a U.K. population The occurrence of acute and chronic maternal diseases was compared B. A. Jennings1, V. Bardsley2, I. W. Fellows2, R. Lonsdale2, J. Z. Wimperis2, G. among different types of OFC, in addition between cases with OFC and Willis2; population and patient controls, multiple logistic regression was used. 1UEA, Norwich, United Kingdom, 2Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, The data set of the large population-based Hungarian Case-Control Norwich, United Kingdom. Surveillance of Congenital Abnormalities, 1980-1996, was evaluated Although most patients with hereditary haemochromatosis have HFE which includes 1,975 cases with isolated OFC (1,374 cases with cleft C282Y mutations, the risk to HFE C282Y homozygotes of developing lip ± cleft palate (CL±CP) and 601 cases with posterior cleft palate fatal diseases such as hepatocellular carcinoma is uncertain. Our (PCP)), 38,151 matched population controls (without defect) and aims were to determine the proportion of diagnosed hepatocellular 20,868 patient controls with other defects. Data collection was based carcinoma patients who are homozygous for the HFE C282Y mutation on medical records, maternal data by a self-reported questionnaire and to estimate the penetrance of this genotype with respect to and home visits in nonrespondent families. hepatocellular carcinoma in East Anglia. Our study showed an increased risk for (CL±CP) in mothers with Tissue biopsies were analysed from 144 cases of hepatocellular influenza, common cold, orofacial herpes and gastroenteritis and for carcinoma for HFE C282Y mutations. Data were retrieved from the posterior cleft palate in mothers with influenza, sinusitis and bronchitis East Anglian Cancer Intelligence Unit, from appropriate life tables and during the critical period of these defects. Among chronic maternal from our publications describing the frequency of HFE mutations in a diseases, epilepsy and angina pectoris showed a higher prevalence in large sample of the local population. the mothers of cases with OFC.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 343 Some maternal diseases are risk factors for the pathogenesis of P1205. Investigation of Mitochondrial haplogroups among isolated OFC. It is worth considering the prevention of possible harmful Iranian patients affected with pulmonary tuberculosis effect (e.g. fever) of acute maternal diseases, such as influenza, B. Hooshiar Kashani1, M. M. Banoei1, M. Houshmand1, M. Mirsaeidi2, L. common cold and others. Zargari2, P. Tabarsi2, M. Amiri2, S. Mansouri2, M. H. Sanati1; 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic P1203. The elongation factor 2 - a candidate gene for the aging Republic of Iran, 2National Research Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Dis- process in man? ease, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. S. Schulz1,2, C. Gläser2, N. Teichert1, I. Hansmann2, K. Werdan1, U. Müller- Introduction: Werdan1; Tuberculosis is one of the most common infectious diseases in the 1Dep. of Internal Medicine III, Halle, Germany, 2Inst. of Human Genetics, Halle, world. Host genetic factors play a main role in the susceptibility to Germany. infectious diseases such as this disease. Also many studies have The aging process is characterized by an imbalance of a variety of been published about relation between mitochondrial haplogroup and different metabolic processes including e.g. overall protein synthesis. disorders. The EF2, catalyzing the last step of peptide chain elongation, is Method and Material: moreover considered to be a candidate gene of the aging process. We studied mtDNA haplogroups M, N, J and K among Iranian patients However, up to now it is unclear whether genetic variants of EF2 affected with pulmonary tuberculosis. 54 patients with smear positive might influence its biological activity. Therefore, we screened the EF2 tuberculosis have been chosen randomly. All of patients were chosen gene for novel genomic variants (SSCP-analysis) in 470 longstanding based on having an Iranian nationality, age above 15 yrs and confirmed healthy volunteers of Central Germany (mean age: 42,5+11,2 y, male: smear positive pulmonary TB. Also 261 healthy controls have been 63%). Four novel genomic variants were identified in the promoter chosen regards to ethnicities and location of patients. region (PM: c.- 61C>T), in exon10 (PM: c.1632T>C, mutation: Results: c.1677G>A) and in exon12 (mutation: c.2109T>C) by use of SSCP- Our studies showed haplogroups M and N had similar frequencies analyses. The two mutations (c.1677G>A, c.2109T>C) are rare and between patients and normal control, so that 1.85% and 72.2% for in each case only one heterozygous carrier was identified. Genotype haplogroup M and N, 2.44% and 83.3% for haplogroup M and N in frequencies of both the promoter-PM (CC/CT/TT: 0,63/0,32/0,05) and patients and normal control, respectively. the PM in exon 10 (CC/CT/TT: 0,89/0,09/0,02) are in Hardy-Weinberg- While frequencies of haplogroups J and K showed significantly different equilibrium. An evaluation of the two polymorphisms in relation to among patients and healthy control. These results indicated 5.5% and the age of the blood donors revealed significant differences in the 16.6% for haplogroups J and K in patients whilst we observed 9.39% distribution pattern only for the PM in exon 10. Homozygous carriers and 7.14% for haplogroups J and K in controls respectively. of TT- (38,2+12,8y) were significantly younger than CT- (41,2+10,5y) Discussion: and CC-carriers (43,2+11,2y) (one-way-anova; p<0.047). Because of So far any results have been published about role of mtDNA haplogroups the higher frequency of CC-carriers at higher age, this PM could be in susceptibility to infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, so this considered to be a protective factor in the aging process. Although this might be the first study to realize relation between haplogroups and PM does not result in an amino acid substitution, this genomic variant susceptibility to diseases. Results show haplogroups J and K may might influence the biological activity of EF2 possibly due to a change involve in this susceptibility, but more patients should check for in expression on transcriptional and/or translational level. haplogroups J and k others. P1204. Thymidylate synthase (TS), 2T gene polymorphism is a P1206. The analysis of associations of mitochondrial DNA risk factor for acute leukemia polymorphism with cardiovascular system function in Tuvinians C. G. Ekmekci1, R. Bu2, S. Tuncer1, M. Gutierrez2, K. Bhatia2, U. Ozbek1; S. V. Buikin1,2, M. V. Golubenko1, V. P. Puzyrev1,2; 1Instıtute For Experimental Medical Research, Istanbul, Turkey, 2KFNCCC&R, 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Clinical and pathologic aspects of leukemia are well documented but In studying of the widely spread diseases, one of the possible we still need to know more about the genes that influence disease. Role approaches is to investigate genetics of normal organism functioning. of the folate pathway in leukemia susceptibility have been reported. Among others, energy production might be one of the key factors in One of the branch of folate metabolism is thymidylate synthase and defining function of cell. Cardiovascular system which is frequently it plays critical role in supplemantation of deoxynucleotides required involved in multifactorial diseases may response to deviations for DNA synthesis. TS gene located on choromosome 18p11.32 and in mechanisms of energy production. We studied population it has unique tandem repeat in the 5’UTR and this area shown to be polymorphisms in mitochondrial DNA encoding for proteins of polymorphic containing either 2 or 3, 28-bp repeats and was shown to respiratory chain in association with some parameters of cardiovascular affect gene expression in vitro- in vivo studies. system (blood pressure measures and electrocardiography data) in We aimed to research the affect of TS polymorphism in the development ethnically pure population of Tuvinians (people from South Siberia of acute leukemia. Therefore we examined thymidylate synthase(TS) region). 203 inhabitants of Teely village were investigated (102 males, 28 bp repeats gene polymorphism in childhood ALL (n= 110) and in 101 females). For mitochondrial DNA, data on HVS-I sequence pediatric and adult AML samples(n= 126). We get DNA from each (frequent polymorphic sites), T16519C polymorphism (+HaeIII16517) samples white blood cell and made PCR using with specific primers. and restriction-based haplogroups were used as possible influencing Amplified PCR products were visualized on a 4%agorase gel with factors. One-way analysis of variance was used for detection of ethidium bromide. Results were compared with results of healty control associations, and all variables were adjusted by age. The association group (n=133). Statistical analysis were made on Fisher’s exact test by was found for blood pressure measurements on both arms in males SPSS for windows software. with HaeIII16517 polymorphism as well as with substitution in positions Table 1: TS gene polymorphism in Turkish ALL, AML, control group 16092 or 16093 (P<0.05). There were no significant associations with ECG parameters. In addition, using abundant haplogroups as factors Genotype ALL(n=110)(%) AML(n=126)(%) Control(n=133)(%) (haplogroups B, C, D, M) did not reveal any association either. This 2T/2T 22 (%20) 17 (%13,5) 22 (%16,5) fact suggests that the polymorphisms in noncoding regions of mtDNA can be considered as involved into mtDNA function and, in turn, in 2T/3T 47 (%42,7) 72 (%57,1) 67 (%50,4) cardiovascular system function. The study was supported by RFBR 3T/3T 41 (%37,3) 37 (%29,4) 44 (%33,1) grant 04-04-48792. 2T/2T polymorphism was found statistically significant for the P1207. Investigation of vitamin D receptor gene variants in development of ALL (p=0.048, 2-sided). On the other hand, we couldn’t Iranian patients affected with pulmonary tuberculosis find any relation in between other genotypes and acute leukemia. S. Amri1, M. M. Banoei1, B. Hooshiar Kashani1, M. Houshmand1, M. Mirsaeidi2, P. Tabarsi2, L. Zargari2, M. Amiri2, S. Mansouri2, M. H. Sanati1;Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 344 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic showed that the presence of ESR1 PP and/or XX genotypes together Republic of Iran, 2National Research Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Dis- with APOE e*4 allele confers an elevated risk for AD (O.R. = 12.8, ease, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 95%CI 1.7-98.0, p=0.01) three times higher than that associated with Environmental and host genetic factors involve in susceptibility to the presence of e*4 only (O.R.= 3.9, 95%CI 2.3-6.5, p<0.00001). In infection disease such as tuberculosis. Host genetic factors including both AD patients and controls APOE plasma levels were determined vitamin D receptor gene (VDR) shows influence in susceptibility to as well. AD patients carrying e*4 showed significantly lower APOE several disease like pulmonary tuberculosis. Interaction between concentrations (3.0 ± 1.2 mg/dl,) compared with non-e*4 carriers (4.1 vitamin D receptor and vitamin D, 1, 25 dihydroxyvitamin D3 as an ± 2.0 mg/dl). Considering ESR1 genotypes, PP and XX homozygotes important immunoregulatory hormone appear on human monocytes showed significantly reduced APOE concentrations (3.0 ± 1.4 and 3.1± and activated T and B lymphocytes. Variations in the vitamin D receptor 1.5 mg/dl respectively). Patients carrying both APOE e*4 allele and gene influence in susceptibility to in fectious diseases. ESR1 PP or XX genotypes showed the lowest APOE concentrations It was studied to find out variants of polymorphism of this gene. Bsm (2.7± 1.2 and 2.8 ± 1.32 mg/dl) suggesting an addittive effect of the I, Taq I and Fok I polymorphisms of VDR gene were studied in PTB two genes on APOE levels. Since in brain APOE has a neuroprotective patients (n= 54) and normal population who examined clinically to action, we suggest that the increased risk for AD associated to the exclude any disease. All of patients were chosen based on having presence of ESR1 PP and/or XX genotypes together with APOE e*4 Iranian nationality, age above 15 yrs, confirmed smear positive allele could be explained by the remarkable reduction of APOE levels pulmonary TB and all of healthy controls were matched in nationality associated to them. and age with samples. DNA was extracted from whole blood and PCR- RFLP technique used to determine variants of mentioned P1210. The frequency of CCR5 - Δ32 in Western Anatolia polymorphisms of VDR gene. S. Pehlivan1, M. Cilek1, M. Pehlivan2, A. Ozcan1, E. Karaca3, F. Ozkinay3, G. Our studies showed a significantly difference in two Taq1 and Bsm1 Itirli1, C. Ozkinay3; polymorphisms between patients and healthy controls, so that the 1Ege University, Faculty of Science, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ataturk Education and Re- frequencies for TT, tt and BB, bb were 53.3%, 7.6% and 50%, 7.6% search Hospital, Department of Internal Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege Univer- in patients, while these frequencies were 12.9%, 31.4% and 22.2%, sity, Genetic Diseases Research and Application Center, Turkey, Izmir, Turkey. 33.3% in controls, respectively. Fok1 polymorphism hasn’t showed It has been shown that a 32 base pair deletion in the C-C Chemokine any different among samples and controls. Our results showed that Receptor 5 (CCR5) gene plays an important role in determining homozygocity in two Taq1 and Bsm1 polymorphisms can play a main susceptibility to infection by human immune deficiency virus type I (HIV- role in susceptibility to tuberculosis in our patients. 1). In this study, we aimed to asses the frequency of the CCR5-Δ32 allele in healthy Turkish population living in Western Part of Turkey. P1208. Genetic diversity and differentiation of Y-chromosomal The mutation was investigated in 515 noninfected unrelated (ages lineages in North Eurasia between 13-40, male to female ratio 1.1/1) individuals from related V. Stepanov, V. Kharkov, M. Spiridonova, A. Marussin, V. Puzyrev; area. Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. The frequency of the CCR5-Δ32 in study group was found to be 6.4%. Composition and frequency of Y-chromosomal haplogroups, defined This frequency was detected to be around ≅10% in European Countries by the genotyping of 36 biallelic loci in non-recombining part of Y- whereas it was 0 -4% in Southern Asia and Africa. The frequency found chromosome, was revealed for native population of Siberia, Central in Turkish population is between the frequencies described in Northern Asia and Eastern Europe. Slavonic ethnic groups, which geographically Countries and Southern Countries and supports the historical and represent Eastern Europe, are characterized by the high frequency of geographial distribution of Δ32 allele of CCR5 proposed by different R1a1, I*, I1b, and N3a clades and by the presence of R1b3, J2, E, authors. and G. Most frequent haplorgoup is R1a1, which comprises 44-51% This is the first study investigating Δ32 allelic frequency in Western of Y-chromosomes. The distinguishing peculiarity of Central Asian Part of Anatolia and shows a correlation with the study covering Ankara Caucasoids is the high frequency of Caucasoid clades R1a1, J*, J2, (Middle Anatolian) population. Further studies covering the other parts and the presence of R1b3 and G. Twenty-five haplogroups were found of Anatolia will contribute to demonstrate the regional differencies or in gene pool of native Siberian populations. Only 7 of them have the correlations in Turkey. frequency higher than 3%. In sum these 7 clades comprise 86% of Siberian samples. In populations of Southern Siberia the most frequent P1211. Markedly high frequency of SMNt deletion in the Iranian haplogroup is R1a1. The high frequency of N3a is characteristic for population Eastern Siberians, and in Yakuts its frequency is almost 90%. Koryaks, T. Parsa1, M. Montazer Haghighi1, A. Ghamari1, K. Kahrizi1, M. Shahmoradgoli1, Buryats and Nivkhs have the highest frequency of C3* lineage among Y. Riazalhosseini1, A. Motamed Tehrani1, A. Urtizberea2, H. Najmabadi1; investigated populations. Haplogroup O* revealed with variable 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation frequency in most of Siberian. Highest frequency of Q* was found in Kets Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2AFM, Institut de Myologie, Hospital and Northern Altayans (85% and 32%, respectively).The high level of de la Salpetriere, Paris, France. genetic differentiation of North Eurasian population on Y-chromosomal Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a hereditary neurodegenerative lineages was revealed. The proportion of inter-population differences disease often causing death in early childhood. This disease is caused in the total genetic variability of region’s population according to the by anterior -horn-cell death in the spinal cord leading to paralysis and analysis of molecular variance is 19.04%. Genetic differences between skeletal muscular atrophy. The candidate gene for this disease is territorial groups took 6.9% of total genetic variability, whereas 12.8% survival motor neuron gene (SMN) that exists in two nearly identical is the inter-population differences within groups. copies; telomeric SMN (SMNt) and centromeric SMN (SMNc). Because of gene deletion or conversion, exon 7 of SMNt gene is homozygously P1209. The involvement of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) in absent in approximately 94% of typical SMA patients. SMA affects Alzheimer ‘s disease is mediated by apolipoprotein E (APOE). approximately 1 in 10,000 live births with a carrier frequency of R. M. Corbo1, G. Gambina2, M. Ruggeri3, E. Broggio2, R. Scacchi4; approximately 1 in 50. In this study we decided to determine the 1La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 2Verona Hospital, Verona, Italy, 3S. carrier frequency of this disease which is extremely common in Giovanni Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4CNR Institute of molecular biology and pathol- Iran. Two hundred unrelated individuals were selected from different ogy, Rome, Italy. ethnic populations of Iran. In all individuals, exon 7 of SMN gene was In the present investigation we studied the role of ESR1 in the amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and PCR products were susceptibility to sporadic Alzheimer’s disease (AD), its interactions digested by DraI restriction enzyme and then electrophoresed on 8% with APOE gene polymorphism, and its effect on APOE plasma levels. polyacrylamide gel. In all steps, control samples which were normal Genotype and allele frequencies of ESR1 polymorphisms PvuII and for SMN alleles, heterozygote and homozygote for the deletion of XbaI did not differ between AD patients ( n=279) and controls (n=212). exon 7 were used. To differentiate carriers and normal individuals, the The interactions between ESR1 and APOE polymorphisms in AD intensity of digested fragments was analyzed by LabWorks software susceptibility were evaluated by logistic regression analysis which to calculate the ratio of telomeric to centromeric portion of SMN gene.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 345 Surprisingly, the carrier frequency of this disease seems to be around aetiopathogenesis of CD and UC is largely unknown. Several lines 12%, and not evenly distributed among the ethnic subgroups that is of evidence have suggested they are multifactorial diseases in which much higher than the carrier frequency of 1/40 to 1/60 that has been both genetic and environmental factors appear to play a role in disease reported before in the West. development. CARD15 gene (MIM *605956) has been identified as the first determinant of susceptibility for CD in populations of European P1212. Are the recommendations on the prevention of neural descent and in particular, three mutations (Arg702Trp, Gly908Arg and tube defects working? Leu1007fsinsC) have been strongly associated with CD younger age at C. Stoll; onset, ileal location and a fibrostenotic or fistulizing disease behaviour. Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France. We therefore investigated the presence of Arg702Trp, Gly908Arg Many studies showed that reduction by an estimated 80% or more of and Leu1007fsinsC in an Italian IBD population (166 and 92 patients neural tube defects (NTD) by consumption of folic acid from before with CD and UC respectively) Allele frequencies were compared to conception is achievable. those observed in a control population (164 individuals). Gly908Arg The objectives of this study were to evaluate the effectiveness of and Leu1007fsinsC were significantly more frequent in CD patients recommendations on folic acid aimed at reducing the occurrence of compared to healthy controls (p<0,05 and p<0,001 respectively). NTD in our region. Estimated risks (OR) for the two mutations were calculated by a logistic Cases of NTD were ascertained among liveborn infants,stillbirths,and regression analysis (IC 95%) and data demonstrated an increased terminations of pregnancy.Incidences and trends in rates of NTD risk of developing CD in Gly908Arg and Leu1007fsinsC carriers [OR= before and after 1992(the year of the first 4.78 (CI 1.15-19.8); OR= 7.79 (CI 1.96-31.0) respectively]. As far as recommendations)and before and after 1995(the year of local concerns genotype-phenotype correlation we found association with recommendations)were obtained.The results showed that the issuing ileal location and a fibrostenotic or fistulizing behaviour. We finally of recommendations on folic acid was followed by no detectable confirm the significant association of CARD15 gene mutations and improvement in the trends of incidence of NTD.The rates of NTD per CD. 10,000 were before 1992 9.7,from 1993 to 1995 10.1,and after 1995 13.6,respectively. P1215. Lack of association between the polymorphisms In conclusions new cases preventable by folic acid continue to Glu298Asp and 4VNTR of ENOS gene and premature coronary accumulate.Recommendations alone did not influence trends in NTD artery disease in the Greek population in our region up to nine years after the confirmation of the effectiveness K. Lamnissou1, M. Vasilakou1, C. Odiatis1, G. Dedousis2, H. Kasparian3, N. of folic acid in clinical trials.New strategies are needed. Pantazopoulos3, N. Sakarellou4, V. Votteas3; 1Dept of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Charocopeio University P1213. Azorean ancestry assessed by Alu insertion of Athens, Athens, Greece, 3"Laiko" Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4"Elpis" Hospital, polymorphisms Athens, Greece. R. Palla1,2, S. Lino1,2, C. C. Branco1,2, P. R. Pacheco1,2, R. Cabral1,2, L. de Fez1,2, Genetic polymorphisms in the gene for endothelial nitric oxide B. R. Peixoto1,2, L. Mota-Vieira1,2; synthase (ENOS) have been considered as a potential risk factors 1Molecular Genetic and Pathology Unit, Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta for the development of coronary artery disease (CAD) in some Delgada, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. populations. We studied two polymorphisms of the ENOS gene, the Alu insertion polymorphisms have been extensively used to unravel Glu298Asp and the 4VNTR, in a total number of 269 individuals of the the origins of populations, since they reflect both maternal and paternal Greek population. The patient group was consistent of 187 subjects, history of a population. The Azores, an Atlantic archipelago, had no aged under 58 years presenting with symptomatic CAD, documented native population and were mainly populated by the Portuguese people. by coronary angiography. The frequencies for GG (Glu/Glu), GT(Glu/ African slaves, Moorish prisoners, French and Spanish also contributed Asp), TT(Asp/Asp) of the Glu298Asp polymorhism were 0.56, 0.38, to the initial settlement during the 15th century. In order to characterize 0.06, respectively, for the patient group and 0.49, 0.46 , 0.04, for the the population admixture we typed 7 Alu (TPA-25, ACE, APO, B65, control group. The frequencies for bb, ab and aa genotypes of 4VNTR PV92, FXIIIB and D1) in 95 unrelated Azorean blood donors. Allele polymorphism were 0.66, 0.29, 0.04, respectively, in patients compared frequencies were calculated by direct counting. Statistical analysis to 0.73, 0.24, 0.03 in controls. The statistical analysis of these results was performed using Arlequin v.2.0, and Nei’s genetic distance trees show that there are no significant differences in the frequencies of the were constructed with DISPAN software by Neighbor algorithm. genotypes between patients and controls, for these two polymorhisms Hererozigosity values ranged from 0.084 for APO to 0.484 for ACE of ENOS gene. Thus, in contrast to some earlier findings by others and all markers were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Average gene from other populations, we have found no evidence for an association diversity varied from 0.1196 for APO to 0.4985 for B65. Considering all between the a allele of the 4VNTR polymorphism, or between the T loci, gene diversity was 0.9658 indicating high variability in the Azorean allele of Glu298Asp polymorphism and the risk of premature coronary population. In addition, allele frequencies are similar to those obtained artery disease, in the Greek population. for European and North African populations, except for FXIIIB which shows a much higher value (0.774). These results are corroborated by P1216. Genescape of India, as Reconstructed from Polymorphic the dendrogram where Azores branches with Catalans, Andalusians, DNA Variation in the Y chromosome Morrocans and Algerians. Interestingly, Azores is located apart from S. Sengupta1, P. A. Underhill2, L. L. Cavalli-Sforza2, P. P. Majumder1; other European populations, such as French and Germans. Moreover, 1Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India, 2Stanford University, Stanford, CA, the distinctive position of the archipelago also suggests that, despite United States. the high similarity with European and North African populations The contemporary male gene pool of ethnic India largely comprises explained by the historical data of settlement, the Azores presents haplogroups that originated indigenously, in southeast Asia, and in a unique genetic signature. (claudiacbranco@hdes.pt). Funded by west and central Asia. The indigenous haplogroup is predominant DRCT (Azores). among the tribal group . The southeast Asian influence is largely on the male gene pools of Tibeto-Burman speaking tribals and Austro- P1214. Analysis of CARD15 Mutations in Italian Inflammatory Asiatic and Dravidian. The west and central Asian influence is primarily Bowel Disease (IBD) patients on caste groups - both Indo-European and Dravidian. V. Bianchi1, C. Caligara1, B. Brambilla1, G. Maconi2, S. Ardizzone2, E. Colom- The haplogroup diversity within the various tribal groups is lower than bo2, M. Malcovati1, G. Bianchi Porro2, M. L. Tenchini1; that within the caste groups. Analyses of molecular variance showed 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, Milan, Italy, 2Chair higher genetic variability among populations within linguistic clusters of Gastroenterology “L. Sacco” University Hospital, Milan, Italy., Milan, Italy. of tribals compared to castes. Moreover, the between group variability Crohn’s disease [CD (MIM #266600)] and Ulcerative Colitis [UC in the Indo-European caste cluster is higher than that in the Dravidian (MIM #191390)] are the two major forms of chronic inflammatory caste cluster. This may be a reflection of diverse ancestries, antiquities bowel disease (IBD) with a combined general prevalence of and isolation of the tribals, coupled with subsequent cultural (linguistic) approximately 100-200 of 100,000 people in Western countries. The homogenization. Lesser between group genetic variability in casteNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 346 groups may be a reflection of their recent founding history. P1219. Maternal and paternal lineages in ancient and modern The complete congruence of the patterns of Y-chromosomal and Hungarians mitochondrial DNA differentiation may be indicative of inflow of both E. Bogácsi-Szabó1, B. Csányi1, G. Tömöry1, K. Priskin1, Á. Czibula1, A. Csősz2, male and female genes from similar source populations. The rank order B. Mende2, P. Langó2, I. Raskó1; of FST values showed that tribes and castes are most differentiated, 1Biological Research Center of Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hun- followed by upper and middle caste, upper and lower caste and middle gary, 2Institute of Archaeology of Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, and lower caste. Hungary. Hungarian language represents the westernmost group of the Finno- P1217. Genetic polymorphism of xenobiotics metabolism Ugric language phylum, surrounded entirely by Indo-European- enzymes and susceptibility to COPD and lung cancer speaking populations. Their linguistic isolation in the Carpathian basin I. Kalina1, J. Židzik1, J. Šaalagovič1, R. Tkáčová2, V. Habalová1, B. Fleischer1; suggests the possibility that they might also show a significant genetic 1Department of Medical Biology, Medical School, University P.J. Šafárik, Košice, isolation. Slovakia, 2The Clinic for Tuberculosis and Respiratory Medicine, Faculty Hospi- According to historical data at the end of the 9th century Hungarian tal, Košice, Slovakia. conquerors from the west side of the Ural Mountains settled down Objective: Cigarette smoking is the major risk factor for the into the Carpathian Basin and took the hegemony. To determine the development of both chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and genetic background of Hungarians we examined mitochondrial and Y bronchogenic carcinoma, but only 10-20% of heavy smokers develop chromosomal DNA from ancient `conquerors` from Hungary, originated the diseases, which suggests the presence of genetic susceptibilty. from the 10th century and from modern Hungarian-speaking adults The genetic susceptibility to lung cancer and COPD might depend on from today's Hungary and Transylvanian Seklers (Romania). variation in antioxidative enzyme activities that detoxify cigarette smoke DNA was extracted from 35 excavated ancient bones and hair products such as microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH) and glutathione samples of 125 and 80 modern Hungarians and Seklers, respectively. S-transferase M1 (GSTM1). Mitochondrial haplogroups were determined with HVS I sequencing Methods: The polymorphisms in GSTM1 and mEH genes were and RFLP typing. examined in 156 lung cancer patients, 148 patients with COPD and The mtDNA HVS I sequences were compared with 2615 samples from 150 healthy control subjects using PCR and PCR-RFLP methods. 34 Eurasian populations retrieved from published data. ARLEQUIN The genotype frequencies of mEH and GSTM1 genes were compared 2.001 Software was used to estimate genetic distances between between patients and controls. populations. The resulting matrix was summarized in two dimensions Results: We suggest that the presence of at least one mEH ,,slow by use of Multidimensional Scaling. allele“ significantly increases lung cancer risk (OR=1.71), especially The M46 biallelic Y chromosomal marker (TAT, often called Uralic among smokers (OR=1.83). Moreover, carriers of both slow alleles with migration marker) was also investigated from 2 ancient, 34 modern very low mEH activity have increased lung cancer risk (OR=2.14), but Hungarian and 60 Sekler samples. Our results suggest that the significantly only among nonsmokers. The odds ratio of individuals with modern Hungarian gene pool is very similar to other central European both potentially risk genotypes: homozygotes for slow allele in mEH ones concerning the mitochondrial and Y chromosomal markers, while gene and for null allele in GSTM1 gene versus that of other genotypes the ancient population contains more Asian type elements. combined was 3.53. The risk of development of COPD in lung cancer patients was associated only with GSTM1 0/0 genotype (OR=2.98). P1220. HFE mutations in the Sao Miguel’s population: genetic Conclusions: Lung cancer risk is associated with the presence of frequencies and geographic distribution. slow mEH allele and GSTM1 0/0 genotype and that in patients with L. de Fez1,2, P. R. Pacheco1,2, C. C. Branco1,2, R. Cabral1,2, B. R. Peixoto1,2, L. lung cancer the presence of at least one active allele in GSTM1 has a Mota-Vieira1,2; protective effect against the development of COPD. 1Molecular Genetics and Pathology Unit, Hospital Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada (Azores), Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. P1218. DNA degradation studies on human tooth samples from Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH, OMIM 235200) is an autosomal different periods of time. recessive disorder characterized by increased iron absorption. Three F. Stanciu1, G. Duta - Cornescu1, N. Miritoiu2, A. D. Soficaru2, V. Stoian1; main mutations in the HFE gene (6p21.3) are implicated in HH: C282Y, 1Department of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Labo- H63D and S65C. Here, we estimated the frequencies and geographic ratory of Paleoanthropology, “Franciusc I. Rainer” Anthropological Research distribution of these mutations in São Miguel’s population (131,609 Centre, Bucharest, Romania. inhabitants, 2001 Census). In total, 469 blood donors from the six We propose in our study to investigate time factor influence on DNA municipalities of the island were analysed by PCR/RFLP method. The degradation of several human tooth samples from different periods of allele frequency was 5.01% for C282Y, 22.28% for H63D and 3.20% time - Neolithic period, Bronze Age, First Iron Age, Romano-Byzantine for S65C. We found twelve genotypes: wild/wild (49.89%), wild/H63D period, the 8th-10th century and 21th century. The samples, with (29.64%), wild/C282Y (7.68%), H63D/H63D (5.54%), wild/S65C the exception of the most recent ones, were obtained from several (2.35%), H63D/S65C (1.71%), C282Y/H63D (1.49%), S65C/S65C archaeological sites belonging to the same geographic area (South- (0.64%), C282Y/S65C (0.43%), and C282Y/C282Y, H63D-S65C/ East of Romania). The DNA degradation degree of all of them was S65D and H63D-S65C/H63D all three with a frequency of 0.21%. The estimated quantitative by spectophotometric readings (informative six municipalities of the island show different values for the C282Y, reasons only) and qualitative by quantification of PCR amplification the most severe mutation. To study the significance of these C282Y ratio of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA. We use as mitochondrial DNA frequency values, we carried out a statistical analysis (Fisher’s markers HVR I and HVR II regions (witch were split in two fragments exact test). We observed a statistical difference (p=0.048) between each) and TH01, D1S1656, D6S366, FES/FPS, Amelogenin, as Nordeste (9.8%) and the other five municipalities (4.6%). This result nuclear DNA markers. The start hypothesis was that the number of may be explained by the relative geographical isolation of Nordeste DNA markers amplified by PCR will decrease with the oldness of in the island, and by its reduced population (4% of total population). samples. Our results confirmed this assumption - the oldest samples Considering São Miguel’s settlement history, we are genotyping are, the less positive amplifications were obtain, involving amplification the HLA-A and HLA-B loci in order to characterize the haplotypes especially of mitochondrial fragments and in case of nuclear fragments associated with HFE mutations in the island. (lmotavieira@hdes.pt). the smallest ones. Funded by DRCT (Azores). We consider this type of knowledge being of great interest because in human paleogenetics, investigations about particularities and P1221. Genotypes and alleles distribution of the KCNE1 (minK) processes involved in bone DNA degradation in time, comparatively, gene polymorphism in St.Petersburg children population. for example, with that about famous historical cases, are just a few, V. B. Timoshin, V. I. Larionova; insufficiently for problems rise by this matter. St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. The protein product of the minK gene is a modulator of the potassium channel activity and plays an important role in cardiac electrophysiology.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 347 Genetic polymorphism of the minK gene is associated with clinical atrial P1223. Allelic polymorphisms of metabolizing enzymes in a fibrilation (Lai at al., 2002). We have previously reported the correlation Hungarian roma population between the minK 38G allele and the chronic atrial fibrillation in the J. Beres1, O. Zsuzsa2, K. Istvan2; patients with sick sinus syndrome (Burova at al., 2004). 1Natoinal Center for Epidemiology, Budapest, Hungary, 2Institute of Public The aim of this study was to determine genotypes and alleles Health, Medical Faculty, Pecs, Hungary. distribution in St. Petersburg children population and compare at that The roma population is the largest ethnic minority in Hungary. Their of Chinese adult population. mortality structure differs from the national averages. In the present 126 healthy children (62 boys and 64 girls) aged 5 to 16 were included in study we investigated the allelic polymorphisms of N-acetyltransferase our study. The minK genotype was analyzed using PCR ampliphication 2 (NAT2), a glutathione-S-transferase M1 (GSTM1), glutathione- and digestion with endonuclease MspA1I. Allele frequencies and S-transferase T1 (GSTT1) and cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP 1A1) genotype distribution were compared by using χ2 test. metabolizing enzymes in the largest group of the Hungarian romas. We found no significant differences in genotypes and alleles The allelic freqencies were compared to the data of non roma frequency distribution between St.Petersburg population and Chinese population. Sample collection was performed in the framework of population. Roma Project (195 blood samples), genotyping was made from Our data may be used as control in investigation of minK gene perypheral leukocytes, with PCR-based methods ((NAT2: rapid and polymorphism in patient with different clinical forms of heart rhythm slow acetylators, GST M1 and T1: 0 and + genotypes, CYP 1A1: Ile/ disorders. Val polymorphism). Our results demonstrated a difference between the allelic distributions Chinese adult of roma and non roma populations. Allelic frequencies of GSTM1 St.Petersburg children population Alleles P-value (OR: 2.08, 95% CI: 1.45-2.99) and NAT2 (OR: 1.42, 95% CI: 1.00- population(n=126) (n=108) (Lai at 2.00) were significantly different, while in case of GSTT1 and CYP al., 2002) 1A1 there was no statistically significant difference.Since both GSTM1 38G allele and NAT polymorphisms might have an influence on susceptibility to (%) 162 (64,3) 136 (63,0) 0,841 certain cancers (e.g. colorectal, bladder and lung cancer), the found differences in the allelic distributions may contribute to the mortality 38S al- diffrerences between the Hungarian romas and non roma populations. 90 (35,7) 80 (37,0) lele(%) This hypothesis, however, must be confirmed, e.g. by studying allelic polymorphisms among cancer patients from the roma population. Genotypes P1224. Prevalence of Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 in Slovenia 38G/38G N. Teran1, J. Zidar2, D. Flisar3, B. Peterlin1; 53 (42,1) 46 (42,6) (%) 1Division of Medical Genetics, Dept. of Obstertics and Gynecology, UMC, Lju- bljana, Slovenia, 2Institute of Clinical Neurophysiology, Division of Neurology, 38G/38S 56 (44,4) 44 (40,7) 0,747 UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Department of Neurology, General Hospital Maribor, (%) Maribor, Slovenia. The discovery of the Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1) gene and the 38S/38S 17 (13,5) 18 (16,7) identification of the mechanism of mutation enabled more accurate (%) estimation of the epidemiological rates. Worldwide, the prevalence rates range from 2.2-5.5/100 000 inhabitants in Western Europe to P1222. Y chromosomal variation in the Czech Republic 189/100 000 inhabitants in the Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jen region in F. Di Giacomo1, F. Luca2, T. Benincasa2, L. O. Popa3, J. Banyko4, A. Kracma- Quebec, Canada. In the South-East of Europe, in Istria, Croatia, one rova5, P. Malaspina1, R. Brdicka5, A. Novelletto2; of the highest prevalence rates of 18.1/100 000 has been reported. 1University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy, 2University of Calabria, Rende, The purpose of this study was to calculate the DM1 prevalence rate in Italy, 3National Museum of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania, 4University of Slovenia. Patients were ascertained over a 10-year period (1994-2004) P.J. Safarik, Kosice, Slovakia, 5Institute for Haematology and Blood Transfu- from different sources. Direct mutation analysis was the method of sion, Prague, Czech Republic. choice for the diagnostic testing of DM1. A total of 91 DM1 patients from In order to analyse the contribution of the Czech Republic to the 46 families were analysed. After the correction for underascertainment, genetic landscape of Europe, we typed 257 male subjects from 5 the prevalence of 8.25/100 000 inhabitants was found. The prevalence locations for 17 Unique Event Polymorphisms of the Y chromosome. rate of DM1 in Slovenia is higher than the estimated average rate Sixteen haplogroups or sub-haplogroups were identified, with only in Western Europe and comparable to the prevalence rates in the 5 chromosomes uncharacterized. Overall, the degree of population North-East and Central Italy (9.31/100 000). The improved diagnostic structuring was low. The three commonest haplogroups were R1a methods provide both accurate estimation of epidemiological rates (0.344), P*(xR1a) (0.281) and I (0.184). M157, M56 and M87 showed no and identification of mildly or congenitally affected patients. variation within haplogroup R1a. Haplogroup I was mostly represented as I1b* and I1b2 was also detected in this population. Thus, the P1225. BARCODE: a new software for comparative dating of majority of the Czech male gene pool is accounted for by the three haplotypic nested lineages main haplogroups found in western and central Europe, the Balkans F. Luca1, M. Basile2, F. Di Giacomo3, A. Novelletto1; and the Carpathians. Haplogroup J was found at low frequency, in 1Department of Cell Biology, University of Calabria, Rende, Italy, 2Department of agreement with a low gene flow with the Mediterranean. Mechanics, University of Calabria, Rende, Italy, 3Department of Biology, Univer- In order to draw inferences on the dynamics of the Czech population, sity "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. we typed 141 carriers of the 3 most common haplogroups for 10 We present a new software for comparative dating estimates of microsatellites, and applied coalescent analyses. haplotypic lineages defined by Unique Event Polymorphisms (UEP), on While the age of the I clade agreed with that reported in the vast the basis of linked STR diversity. BARCODE (Basic ASD Regression study of Rootsi et al (2004), the ages of its sub-haplogroups differed for COmparative Dating Estimates), applies a comparative dating considerably, showing that the I chromosomes sampled in the Czech approach free of assumptions on STR mutation rates to detect the linear Republic are a subset of those found throughout Europe. Haplogroup accumulation of ASD over time. Its power relies on the exploitation of R1a turned out to be the youngest with an estimated age well after the UEP-defined phylogeny, which provides a unique solution for the the Last Glacial Maximum. For all three major haplogroups the results order of nodes in the tree to be analysed. The set of possible solutions indicate a fast population growth, beginning at approximately 60-80 to be tested for ASD-TIME linearity is created through an algorithm generations ago. specifically created. The more the phylogeny has a nested shape, Work supported by PRIN-MIUR 2003. the more the dating result is robust. BARCODE allows to weight each lineage according to its frequency in the dataset, a fundamental optionNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 348 when the sampled lineages include variants supposed to be ancestral of FH patients worldwide. It is not known much about the distribution to a demographic expansion or when dealing with data unbalanced in of mutations in Bulgarian population. The purpose of this study was sample-size. to define the spectrum of mutations among Bulgarians. We analyzed We report the results obtained by running BARCODE on published a group of 97 people all clinically diagnosed as FH patients. The Y-chromosomal data sets. The relative dating estimates are in general screening of mutations was achieved by a Single Strand Conformation agreement with the absolute estimates originally published. The results Polymorphism (SSCP) and samples with abnormal patterns were also allow inferences on STR mutation rates (ASD-TIME regression sequenced. In 12 cases the diagnosis FH was genetically confirmed. slopes): some critical loci emerged, which show variable mutation Our results present that several exons occured to be mutation hot- patterns across the data sets. However, most STR loci show a similar spots (exons 5, 9 and 11) in Bulgarian patients with FH. We found behaviour across the data sets, thus confirming their informativeness. 6 point mutations in 6 out of 14 screened exons: ex9 1195G>A in 5 The most commonly used STR loci can then be ranked in different patients; ex11 1646G>A in 3 patients; ex4b 590G>A, ex6 858C>A, classes, according to their mutation rates, independently on the ex8 1073G>A, ex5 761A>C and intron 7 1061-8 T>C in single cases. particular data set considered. The mutation 1073G>A is not described in literature. In addition two Work supported by PRIN-MIUR 2003. polymorphisms were found: ex13 1959C>T and ex11 1646G>A. The last one, in single case, was combined with mutation ex11 1646G>A. P1226. A study of multiple polymorphisms of folate-dependent, one-carbon metabolism in a northern European population. P1228. Thrombophilia markers in pediatric ischemic stroke G. Willis1, P. Finglas2, A. Wright2, S. Clarke1, K. Smith1, D. Heron1, B. A. Jen- patients nings3; V. Djordjevic; 1Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and Food Research, Norwich, United Kingdom, 3University of East Anglia, Norwich, Montenegro. United Kingdom. Ischemic stroke in childhood is less common then in adults (estimates Folates play a key role in disease prevention; deficiency is associated of the incidence is 0.6-1.2/100,000 per year), but is a very important with increased risk of neural tube defects, vascular disease, cancer cause of lifelong morbidity. It is multifactorial disease in which both and anaemia. Many enzymes of folate-dependent, one-carbon acquired and genetic influences may play important roles. The role metabolism are functionally polymorphic. Low activity forms of MTHFR hemostasis plays in pathogenesis of stroke (esspecialy in case of have been associated with raised homocysteine and vascular disease. thrombophilia) is still controversial. Folate metabolism is also a therapeutic target for drug groups that are Aim of our study was to establish the prevalence of genetic risk widely used in the treatment of cancer and other chronic diseases. factors (FV Leiden, FII G20210A, MTHFR C677T mutations) and Polymorphisms leading to over-expression of TYMS have been frequent polymorphisms (PAI-1 4g/5g and ACE ID) associated with associated with resistance to the chemotherapeutic agent 5FU. thrombophilia in a group of children with ischemic stroke. The study of multiple polymorphisms simultaneously will allow us to A study was carried out in a group of 30 children (11 girls and 19 boys, consider additive, synergistic and compensating variants of folate median age of first stroke eposode 7.5 years) and 120 consecutive metabolism that may be important clinically. Therefore, we have healthy blood donors. developed allelic discrimination and gel analysis assays for functionally The results are shown in Table: polymorphic forms of MTHFR, TYMS, DHFR, MTHFD, SLC19A1 cases,% controls ,% OR,(95% CIs) (REFC), MTR, and SHMT1; most assays are for non-synonymous m/n 3.3 5.8 0.56,(0.08-4.71) SNPs. The allele frequencies have been determined for 459 men FV Leiden m/m 0 0 - (mean age 60 years; range 40 to 80 years) from Norfolk, England. Results; loci and allele frequencies FII G20210A m/n 6.7 4.2 1.64,(0.30-8.91) m/m 0 0 - GENE/SNP I.D. Rare allelic form Frequency of rare allele m/n 60.01 39.21 2.33,(1.03-5.28) MTHFR/rs1801133 C677T 0.33 MTHFR C677T m/m 6.7 11.7 0.54,(0.12-2.53) MTHFR/rs1801131 A1298C 0.32 5g/5g 23.3 18.3 1.42,(0.53-3.75) TYMS/promoter 2R/3R 2R 0.46 PAI-1 4g/5g 4g/5g 56.7 43.3 1.71,(0.76-3.85) DHFR/intron 1 ins/del del 0.43 4g/4g 20.0 38.3 0.39,(0.15-1.04) SLC19A1/rs1051266 G80A 0.46 II 23.3 25.0 0.91,(0.35-2.37) MTR/rs1805087 A2756G 0.18 ACE ID ID 50.0 56.7 0.76,(0.53-1.72) MTHFD1/rs2236225 A1958G 0.42 DD 26.7 18.3 1.64,(0.63-4.21) SHMT1/rs1979277 C1420T 0.32 m-mutated allele, n-normal allele,I-insertion, D-deletion,1p=0.039 Conclusions Heterozygous carriers of MTHFR C677T mutation were overrepresented • in children with ischemic stroke (60% patients, 39.2% controls); while The robust and economical methods for studying these polymorphisms difference in frequencies of other tested genetic markers was not of one-carbon metabolism are presented. statistically significant. • Our study suggests that thrombophilia may not play an important role The allele frequency data and the methods can be used in disease in the pathogenesis of stroke in children. association and pharmacogenetic studies of northern Europeans. P1229. HLA and surnames are compared as paradigms of the P1227. Screening for point mutations in the LDL receptor gene genetic history of Lombardy (Northern Italy) in Bulgarians with severe hypercholesterolemia A. Lisa1, A. De Silvestri2, A. Degiuli3, L. Mascaretti4, C. R. Guglielmino2; S. Bichev1, L. Vladimirova-Kitova2, I. Tsekov1, I. Djoupanova1, V. Mihailov1, A. 1Molecular Genetics Institute CNR, Pavia, Italy, 2Dept Genetics & Microbiology Savov3, I. Kremenski3, V. Ganev1; University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Transfusion Center AO Lodi province, Lodi, 1Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Medical University of Plovdiv, Italy, 4Transfusion Center S. Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy. Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 3Medical University of Sofia, Laboratory of Molecular Pathol- Background Lombardy was a crossroad of ancient populations that ogy, Sofia, Bulgaria. occupied the Alps and the Po valley: Ligures, Celts, Etrurians and Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disease Romans. Aim of the present work is to study its genetic structure caused by mutations in the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) through two kinds of markers: surnames and HLA genes, assuming gene. As a result, a defect in the uptake of the low density lipoprotein that the presence of population clusters is related to the history. (LDL) and a disturbance in the lipid metabolism are present. More Methods. 260,732 telephone subscribers constitute the surname than 1000 mutations have been described so far (http://www.umd. sample: the frequencies of 10431 different surnames are calculated necker.fr). There is a genetic variability between different populationsNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 349 in each of the 11 provinces. The HLA sample is constituted by 33,488 P1232. Y-microsatellite polymorphism in Russian populations bone marrow donors born and resident in Lombardy and serologically from nothern and southern regions of European part of Russia typed for HLA-A and HLA-B loci (46 alleles). For both markers the A. V. Khrunin1, N. A. Bebyakova2, V. P. Ivanov3, M. A. Solodilova3, S. A. Lim- correlations between provinces are represented by a principal borska1; coordinate (PCA) plot and the results obtained with HLA and surnames 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2North were compared using the Mantel test. State Medical University, Archangelsk, Russian Federation, 3Kursk State Medi- Results Both the surname and HLA PCA showed 3 clusters: a) the cal University, Kursk, Russian Federation. southern provinces mainly flat; b) the northeastern provinces (partly An information about Y-chromosome microsatellite variation in the occupied by the Alps) and c) the area around the Como lake also in the Russians is crucial for reconstruction of population history of Eastern Northern part. The Mantel test showed that the results obtained with Slavs. Allele polymorphism and haplotypes of five Y- microsatellites (DYS HLA and surnames were highly correlated (P=0.02). 393, DYS 392, DYS 391, DYS 390 and DYS 19) were analyzed in two Discussion The 3 clusters, more evident with HLA genes, can be Russian male populations from northern (Archangelsk) and southern related to the ancient history, with a Celtic influence in the NE and (Kursk) regions of Russia. Significant differences in DYS 393 and DYS Ligures-Etrurian feature in the south. The Como lake area was of Celt- 392 allele distribution were revealed between populations tested (p = Ligures origin, as demonstrated also by the dialect. The knowledge 0.003 and 0.005, respectively). The allele diversity indices for these of homogeneous geographic clusters in terms of HLA gene/haplotype loci were more than 1.5 times higher in Archangelsk population than distribution could be useful in donor recruitment and in transplantation in Kursk population. When evaluating genetic relationships between policy. populations studied and some European populations, including already investigated Eastern Slavonic samples, it was shown that Archangelsk P1230. Molecular dissection of the Y chromosome haplogroups population was nearer to Finno-Ugrians (the Saami and Estonians) and A, E and R1b the Lithuanians, whereas Kursk population was clustered together with F. Cruciani, R. La Fratta, P. Santolamazza, D. Sellitto, M. E. Cefalì, F. Di Eastern Slavonic populations (the Russians from Novgorod region, the Raimo, R. Pascone, R. Scozzari; Ukrainians and Byelorussians), regardless of used genetic distance Università di Roma "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy. measure. The phylogenetic analysis of the most frequent haplotypes The male-specific region of the human Y chromosome (MSY) is allowed us to demonstrate that differences between populations from characterized by a low amount of sequence diversity compared to Kursk and Archangelsk regions were due to high frequency of major the mtDNA, the autosomes and the X chromosome. Recently, the haplotypes, typical for Finno-Ugric populations, in the Archangelsk use of DHPLC and direct sequencing of DNA has permitted to identify population. It is suggested, that differences revealed can be caused by more than 300 new single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the geographical specificity of demographic processes. MSY. The analysis of the geographic distribution of the haplogroups identified by these markers has provided new insights in the history of P1233. Familial aggregation of alopecia areata human populations, at the same time, it came out that undetected Y B. Blaumeiser1, M. M. Nöthen2; chromosome SNPs still contain useful information. 1University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Life and Brain Center, Bonn, In this study we have analyzed the sequence variation of 60 kb of Germany. the TBL1Y gene. While previous studies have analyzed the sequence Alopecia areata (AA) is a common dermatological disorder. The etiology variation of the Y chromosome in a random sample of individuals, we remains unsolved, but there is a strong evidence indicating that it is here focus on 22 chromosomes belonging to three specific haplogroups a tissue specific autoimmune disease with a genetic predisposition. (A, R1b and E), whose geographic distribution is relevant for the human Clinically it presents as a sudden onset of patchy, non-scarring hair evolutionary history of Africa and/or western Eurasia. loss, which may be diffuse or total. We discovered 32 new SNPs, and placed them in the known Y Familial aggregation has been described in previous reports, supporting chromosome phylogenetic tree: about half of the new mutations the genetic influence, with the rate of positive family history varying identify new branches of the tree. The geographic distribution of five between 3-42%. Here, we report the first family study of AA to examine new E-M78 sub-haplogroups, analyzed in more than 6,000 subjects first-degree relatives by direct interview and to obtain information on from Eurasia and Africa, has led to the identification of interesting affection status of second-degree relatives by interview of first-degree evolutionary patterns. relatives. Since a key issue is proper control for age, we used survival analysis methods that allow for age-specific risk calculations. Thereby P1231. Universal screening programm for early detection of we present age adjusted risks for first and for second-degree relatives congenital deafness in Flanders: contribution of genetic causes that can be used for risk counseling in families with AA. J. J. van den Ende1, F. Declau2, N. Peeters1, W. Wuyts1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Wilrijk (Antwerp), Belgium, 2Department of P1234. Epidemiology of CF gene in Romania Oto-rhino-laryngology, Wilrijk (Antwerp), Belgium. I. M. Popa1, L. Pop1, I. Popa1, G. Benga2, Z. Popa3, M. Schwarz4, L. Tamas5; Serious congenital hearing problems occur in about 1/1000 newborns. 1Clinic II Pediatrics, Timisoara, Romania, 2Molecular Biology Department, Cluj- In Flanders (Belgium) about 65 children each year are born with Napoca, Romania, 3CF Centre, Timisoara, Romania, 4Pediatric Genetic Unit, congenital deafness. Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, United Kingdom, 5Biochemistry Depart- Early detection of the hearing loss and its cause is important. On one ment, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Romania. hand because early intervention by proper hearing aids is crucial for Paper aim: updating information about the epidemiology of CF gene in an optimal social, emotional, motor- and mental development; on the Romania. Study group: 45 CF patients (20 males and 25 females), from other hand knowing the cause of the deafness can provide information different Romanian regions. Genetic tests: performed in the Pediatric about prognosis, recurrence risk, and possibilities of prenatal diagnosis Genetics Unit of Royal Manchester Children’s Hospital (UK) and in the and about possible additional problems in the future. Molecular Biology Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Since 1999 in Flanders a universal screening programm is running Cluj-Napoca (Romania). Methods used: ARMS Multiplex, PAGE, for newborns at the age of 4 weeks. The test consists of an AABR ARMS Duplex, ASO, SSCP/Heteroduplex and direct sequencing of (automatic Auditory Brainstem Response) test, also called the Algo- DNA. Results: The genotype structure was: ΔF508/ Δ F508: 31,1%, test. ΔF508/non ΔF508: 22,2%, ΔF508/x: 4,44%, x/x: 46,6%. (x- unidentified After 2 `refers` the patient is referred to one of the specialised centers mutation). The frequency of ΔF508 mutation was 46,6%. A number of in Flanders, where the hearing loss will be confirmed, and additional 15 non ΔF508 alleles were also identified and their frequency analysis diagnostic examinations are performed by a standardized protocol, in revealed correlations with different regions of the world: 20% of which a geneticist plays an important role. mutations being more frequent in Central and Eastern Europe, 33,3% Untill now more than 100 children with congenital deafness were of them being frequent in Western Europe or geographical areas far detected by the Algo-test, and the results of the additional tests will away from Romania (Canada, Israel). A number of 46,6% mutations be presented, including the percentage of genetic causes that were were rare or sporadic, from which there were 2 new mutations, identified found. in our group and not yet presented by other researchers: 1717-2AG,Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 350 within the intron 10 and R735K within the exon 13. Conclusions: the P1237. Association analysis of the dopamine transporter (DAT1) frequency of 46,6% for ΔF508 mutation in our group is similar with that -67A/T polymorphism with bipolar disorder. from the surroundings countries with majority Caucasian population; M. R. Keikhaee1, F. Fadai2, M. R. Sargolzaee3, A. Javanbakht4, H. Najmabadi1, the complexity of genetic structure emphasis the heterogeneous M. Ohadi1; character of Romanian population; the great number of unidentified 1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Razi Psychiatric alleles as well as the new identified mutations reveals the character Center,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Psychiatry, Mashad of specificity of some mutations.( Study performed through a Grant University of Medical Sciences,, Mashad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department Research Programme- CNCSIS/ A/1188/2004) of Psychiatry, Mashad University of Medical Sciences, Mashad, Islamic Repub- lic of Iran. P1235. Analysis of VDR, COL1A1, CALCR and ER genes An imbalance in the dopaminergic system in humans has been polymorphisms in the elderly people hypothesized to contribute to the pathogenesis of a number of M. V. Moskalenko1,2, O. S. Glotov1,2, V. G. Vakharlovsky1, M. V. Aseev1, V. S. psychiatric illnesses, including bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and Baranov1; attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. We performed a case/control 1Ott's Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, study on the DAT1 (HUGO approved symbol SL6A3) gene core 2St-Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. promoter polymorphism -67A/T to analyze the possible association The polymorphisms of four genes (TaqI - VDR, Sp1 - Col1a1, AluI of either allele of this polymorphism with bipolar disorder. The allele - CALCR and XbaI, PvuII - ER) associated with some multifactorial and genotype frequencies of the polymorphism were studied in 136 diseases (osteoporosis, arthritis, endometriosis, mioma and others) patients and 163 controls, which were matched on the basis of sex, were studied by PCR-RFLP in two groups of people from the north- age and ethnicity. The genotype frequencies in the patients group were west region of Russia. The middle age people group included 120 (60 as follows: AA 30.9%; AT 55.1%; TT 14% vs. the genotype frequencies men and 60 women - group 1) unrelated individuals of middle age (25- in the control group: AA 49%; AT 41.8%; TT 9.2% [c2=10.3, df = 2, 45), the group of elderly included 147 people (29 men and 118 women OR = 2.15 (95% CI 1.34-3.47, p ≤ 0.006]. The T-variant of the -67A/ - group 2) unrelated individuals elder than 70 years. T polymorphism revealed a ~1.4-fold excess in the patients group We have not elucidated any authentic differences in frequencies of comparing with the controls (p ≤ 0.003). For the first time, these findings genotypes and alleles of VDR, Col1a1, CALCR and ER genes between provide tentative evidence for the contribution of the DAT1 gene core group of elderly people and population (p>0.05) (tab 1). According to promoter polymorphism to the etiopathophysiology of bipolar disorder present data it might be speculated that group 1 and group 2 have not at least in the Iranian population that we have studied. Replication any inherited advantages for longer survival of people. studies of independent samples and family-based association studies are necessary to further evaluate the significance of our findings. Tab 1. The frequencies of genotypes and alleles of VDR, Col1a1, CALCR and ER genes P1238. Consanguinity and Infertility VDR S. M. Seyedhassani, A. Aflatoonian, N. Tabibnejad, S. M. Kalantar; COL1A1 CALCR ER (XX, ER (PP, (TT, Research and clinical center for infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. Genes (SS, Ss, ss, (TT, TC, Xx, xx Pp, pp Tt, tt & Introduction: Consanguineous marriage is widespread in many & S, s) CC & T, C) & X, x) & P, p) T, t) parts of the world. There is an increased incidence of both congenital malformations and other conditions such as infertility which will present middle age people, n=120 later. To assess the incidence of consanguineous marriage in Yazd province and its role in infertility. 42.18 62.59 56.46 13.61 25.85 Genotypes, 42.86 36.05 34.01 39.46 51.02 Material and Methods: We studied 5200 married defined couples in % 14.96 1.36 9.53 46.94 23.13 260 randomized clusters that were divided equally in ten different areas of the province including rural and urban areas. These couples were 63.61 80.61 73.47 33.33 51.36 interviewed based on using a structured questionnaire to ascertain Alleles, % 36.39 19.39 26.53 66.67 48.64 the prevalence of consanguinity, infertility and related epidemiological findings and assessed for etiological factors. elderly people, n=147 Results: Our data showed that there were consanguineous marriage in 2153 45.30 70.84 58.33 12.93 23.27 Genotypes, couples (41.4%)(CI 95% from 41.2% to 42.7%) in different degrees 42.74 28.33 32.5 43.97 48.14 % including degree 2 (0.04%), degree 3 (27.3%), degree 4 (7.4%), 11.96 0.83 9.17 43.10 27.59 degree 5 (6.7%). 66.67 85.00 74.58 34.91 47.84 In total, 276 cases of infertility were encountered and the overall Alleles, % 33.33 15.00 25.42 65.09 52.16 prevalence of infertility was about 5.3% (CI 95% from 4.7% to 5.9%). In infertile couples, 135 cases (48.9%) had consanguineous marriage (P=0.009; Odds Ratio=1.38; CI 95% from 4.7% to 5.9%). P1236. Issues concerning familial inheritance of Hipospadias Conclusion: Consanguineous marriage in couples was related to expression of D. Vasilie, M. Puiu, C. S. Pop; infertility, but this wasn't significantly different in female and male University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. factors infertility. Hypospadias is a congenital malformation with a complex etiology This study can assist physicians and genetic counselors to realize the which consist in abnormal opening of penile urethra. We have studied incidence of consanguineous marriage in Iran and its role in expression 756 cases of hypospadias in our clinic between 1975 -2000. This trial of infertility and setting priorities for first level prevention of it. was statistical significant. In order to determine the role of genetic factors familial study were performed to investigate the frequency P1239. The Genetic differentiation and Alu insertion of such malformation in relatives. An increase frequency could be polymorphisms (ACE, TPA25, PV92, Ya5NBC27,Ya5NBC148) in explained by the transmission of an enzymatic defect in the synthesis the Kazakhs Population of Middle Asia of testosterone or decrease sensitivity of testosterone receptor. In G. S. Svyatova1, A. M. Abdullaeva1, G. M. Berezina1, A. Z. Salimova2, E. K. 13.7% of cases significant familial aggregation of hypospadias ( 2 or Khusnutdinova2; more members of the same family) were identified. In 3.17% of cases 1Republican Centre of Health Protection of Mother and child, Almaty, Kazakh- related malformations were found (skeletal and cardiac). In 13.49% stan, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of the Ufa Scientific Centre of of cases hypospadias was associated to other genital malformations. RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation. The study determines the role of genetic factors in the etiology and The Middle Asia are an interesting regions for studying relative influence pathology of hypospadias . The inheritance of hypospadias ist probably of linguistic variability and geographic barriers on the genetic structure polygenic multifactorial. of populations. Polymorphic Alu-repeats occur in non-coding regionsNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 351 and are thought to be evolutionarily neutral and present the objective Watkins et al., 2003 for the same Alu loci). Basing on 8 Alu loci data markers for human population genetics and evolution studies. Gst value for the world dataset was 0.090. The highest level of genetic Five Alu insertion polymorphisms were examined in three rural Kazakh differentiation is observed in East and Southeast Asia (0.083), which populations of Middle Asia, represent to Turkic-speaking ethnic groups. is very close to the world’s value. The lowest value can be seen in A total of 152 unrelated healthy Kazakh people were studied. A portion Central South Siberia (0.001). Principal component analysis showed of genes (ACE, TPA25, PV92, Ya5NBC27,Ya5NBC148) from genomic that all of the Volga-Ural populations are plotted close to European DNA was amplified by PCR and analyzed on a 6% polyacrylamide populations. Populations of Central Asia and Central South Siberia gel. The distribution of the empirical genotypes and allelic frequencies forms rather distinct cluster together with Karanogays separating from of Alu-polymorphisms was completely conformed to theoretical populations of East and Southeast Asia. In conclusion, populations of deviation of Hardy-Weinberg (χ2=0,253; p>0,05). The allele frequency the two boundary regions between Europe and Asia (Volga-Ural region distribution patterns were characterized by relatively high level of of Russia, and populations of the North Caucasus) are more similar to genetic diversity (H -0.475). The index of genetic differentiation (Gst) European populations than to Asian populations. The North Caucasus e in three rural Kazakh populations was 0.0179. The highest estimate populations demonstrated genetic pattern which is very close to Near of genetic differentiation was at PV92 loci (Gst 0.042) along with East populations. European populations reflect neither geographic relatively low Gst at the Ya5NBC27 loci -0,0007. The coefficient of nor linguistic relationships. Siberian and Central Asian populations genetic differentiation in the three populations studied was 0,012 (G ) demonstrate more similarity and close genetic relationships. st to relatively low level of genetic subdivision of the Kazakh populations. The frequencies of genotypes and allelic variants of Alu- polymorphic P1242. The study of the STR polymorphism THO1 and CSF1PO genes in Kazakh population are intermediate between mongoloid loci in Volga-Ural populations (Chinese, Mongols) and classical Caucasians. Phylogenetic analysis V. L. Akhmetova1, L. A. Zhivotovsky2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; demonstrated close genetic relationship between the Kazakh, Uigurs 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Vavilov Insti- and Uzbek ethnic populations. tute of General Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. It was confirmed, that the analysis of Alu insertion polymorphisms are In recent years, STR loci are used for personal identification in the tools for reconstructing ethnogenetic history of populations medical and forensic casework because of their multiallelic variation and, consequently, high level of informativeness. There are substantial P1240. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphisms differences in allele frequency distributions for independence DNA loci and early human development among ethnic groups. Therefore in each region and for each ethnic M. S. Nazarenko, V. P. Puzyrev, T. V. Kosyankova, S. A. Nazarenko; group is essential to create one's population-genetic base on allele Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. and genotype frequencies for DNA loci used in the world-wide forensic- Experimental data in mice and previously published results in humans genetic practice. Moreover on carrying out of medico-legal statistics is point to a crucial role of NO in the course of pregnancy. It is known important to choose representative population correctly. that variant alleles of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) The polymorphism of STR loci THO1 and CSF1PO were studied gene are associated with increased susceptibility to pregnancy in seven Volga-Ural populations: Bashkirs, Tatars, Chuvashes, disorders and fetal defects. Some polymorphisms in the eNOS gene Komies, Mordvinians, Udmurts and Russians. The distribution of the are also implicated in the development of age-dependent diseases. obtained genotypes did not deviate from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium The objective of the investigation was to explore the probable (P>0.05). Comparison of the informativeness of loci THO1 and association between the promoter region -C691T, intron 4 VNTR CSF1PO allows us to consider the first more informative by findings and 7 exon G894T of the NOS gene polymorphisms and human of statistical parameters of forensic importance: the average value spontaneous abortions. A case-control study of the prevalence NOS of the observed heterozygosity (H) was 0.794 in THO1 and 0.734 3 gene polymorphisms were determined in the DNA samples from 166 in CSF1PO; polymorphism information content (PIC) and power of embryos that had been spontaneously aborted between the 5th and discrimination (pD) were also higher in THO1 (PIC=0.747, pD=0.896) 16th week after conception, and 188 adult controls. Preliminarily, the than in CSF1PO (PIC=0.691, pD=0.880); matching probability (pM) - embryonic tissues were analyzed by cytogenetiñ methods and picked 0.101 and 0.121, consequently; mean exclusion chance (W) - 0.544 in up the samples with normal karyotype only. The genotype frequencies THO1, 0.467 in CSF1PO; the coefficient of allelic variety was 4.584 in for the G894T polymorphism was found to be out of Hardy-Weinberg THO1 and 3.810 in CSF1PO; index of Shennon diversity - 0.336 and equilibrium (χ2=3.98: P<0.05) due to heterozygotes excess (ho=0.46, 0.271, consequently. he=0.40). The frequency of C allele -C691T polymorphism among the In conclusion, investigated THO1 and CSF1PO loci can serve as spontaneously aborted embryos and the control group were 91.6% highly informative markers for genetic research, forensic casework and 81.4%, respectively (OR=2.48; P=0.0004). The distribution of and determination of biological relatedness of individuals. genotype frequencies was significantly different between the study and control groups for CT heterozygotes of -C691T polymorphism (13.3% P1243. Genotoxicological monitoring of nurses handling and 35.5% respectively; χ2=20.01; P<0.0001). The results of the study cytostatic drugs evaluated before and after taking antioxidant indicate that the embryonic NOS 691CT genotype may protective support 3 affects the fetal viability in early human development. J. Mrđanović1, S. Jungić2, S. Šolajić1, D. Jakimov1, G. Bogdanović1; 1Institute of Oncology Sremska Kamenica, Sremska Kamenica, Serbia and P1241. Genetic structure of Eurasian populations based on Alu Montenegro, 2Clinical Hospital Center Banja Luka, Banja Luka, Bosnia and insertion data Herzegovina. R. Khusainova1, I. Kutuev1, V. Akhmetova1, S. Fedorova2, G. Svyatova3, E. Purpose: The aims of this study were to evaluate genotoxic damage Khusnutdinova1; in nurses professionally exposed to cytostatics, and to investigate 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Department whether antioxidant treatment could influence reparation of genome of Molecular Genetics of Yakut Scientific Center, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, damage. The influence of confounding factors, such as age, smoking 3Republican Prenatal Center of Kazakhstan, Almaty, Kazakhstan. status and duration of occupational exposure were also investigated. A total of 1049 individuals from Volga-Ural region of Russia (Turkic Methods and patients: speaking Bashkirs, Tatars, and Finno-Ugric speaking Komis, Maris, Biomonitoring was performed on fifteen oncology unit nurses before Mordvins, and Udmurts), Central Asia (Turkic-speaking Kazakhs, and six months after taking commercial antioxidant preparation Uzbeks, and Uighurs), the North Caucasus (Turkic speaking (OLIGOGAL®-SE). Fifteen unexposed healthy volunteers served as a Karachays, Kumyks, Kuban Nogays, and Karanogays), and Siberia control group. The sister chromatid exchange (SCE) assay, standard (Turkic speaking Yakuts, Tungusic speaking Evenks, Mongolic cytokinesis-block micronucleus (MN) assay, and proliferating rate speaking Kalmyks) were analyzed using eight Alu loci (ACE, ApoA1, index were used for evaluation of genotoxic damage. There were PV92, TPA25, NBC27, NBC102, NBC148, and NBC182). All loci seven nonsmokers and eight smokers among exposed workers, and were polymorphic in all populations. Genetic differentiation in various eight nonsmokers and seven smokers among control group. regions of the world was fairly substantial (using additional data of Results: Significantly higher values of SCE and MN before (SCENormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 352 p<0.0001; MN p<0.05) and six months after antioxidant treatment P1246. Mitochondrial DNA polymorphism in three population (SCE p=0.001; MN p<0.05) were found in nurses group compared with samples of Tuvinians control. Six months after antioxidant treatment SCE (p=0.001) and PI M. V. Golubenko1, S. V. Buikin1,2, A. N. Kucher1, V. P. Puzyrev1,2; values (p<0.1) were found to be significantly decreased. 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian Medical Analyses related to the smoking habits revealed significant difference University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. in SCE value (p<0.1) between smokers and nonsmokers in the group To study mtDNA polymorphism in Tuva Republic (South Siberian region of nurses. of Russian Federation), HVS-I sequencing and restriction haplogroup Age and duration of occupational exposure did not significantly confirmation was performed in three population samples of Tuvinians: influence any of the genotoxicological parameters. Bai-Taiga administrative area (west of the region, N=169), Todja area Conclusion: Results of this study showed that handling with cytostatic (north-east, N=130) and Shinaan area (south-east, N=147). In total, drugs may cause genome damages in occupationally exposed nurses 90 different HVS-I lineages were revealed, belonging to 17 different and that antioxidant support may contribute in reparation of these haplogroups, and West Eurasia-derived haplogroups encompass genotoxic damages. Study also confirmed that smoking represents 7.5% of all mtDNAs. Low frequency of interethnic marriages in confounding factor in genotoxic risk Tuvinians suggests that most of “European” lineages are not due to recent admixture. The most abundant and heterogenous haplogroup P1244. Preliminary results of the study methylenetetrahydrofo in Tuvinians is haplogroup C, which encompasses about one-half of late reductase enzyme polymorphism (C677T) as maternal risk their mitochondrial gene pool. More than 1% frequency estimates factor for Down Syndrome among Russian women were obtained for haplogroups A, B, D, F, G, H, J, U and for 22 HVS-I A. Y. Belayeva, S. A. Nazarenko; lineages in total, but in particular areas these lineages were not always Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. the same. Only 5 haplogroups and 4 haplotypes had more than 5% Down’s syndrome is the commonest chromosomal anomaly with frequencies in total sample. 29 of 90 haplotypes were common with an incidence of about 1:700 live births. This syndrome is a complex previously studied Tuvinian sample (Derenko et al. 2003) whereas genetic and metabolic disorder attributed to the presence of three only 8, 10 and 14 haplotypes were shared with Yakuts, Altaians, copies of chromosome 21. The extra chromosome derives from and Buryats, respectively. Analysis of migrations has shown that the the mother in 93% of cases and is due to abnormal chromosome genetic diversity in Todja population increased due to migrants from segregation during meiosis (nondisjunction). Except for advanced other areas of Tuva who brought 17 new haplotypes into this area age at conception, maternal risk factors for meiotic nondisjunction population. Such effect has not been shown for Bai-Taiga and Shinaan are not well established. The relationship between chromosomal populations. According to the results, Tuvinians constitute quite isolated nondisjunction leading to aneuploidy and folate metabolism has drawn and slightly subdivided population, with high haplogroup C prevalence. attention in the recent years. Several studies suggested that abnormal The work was supported by RFBR grant 04-04-48792. folate metabolism and the C677T polymorphism of the methylenetet rahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene may be one of the maternal P1247. Friedreich spinocerebellar ataxia in Romania risk factors for Down syndrome. In order to confirm this association, D. Coprean1, S. Lerintiu1, M. Popescu2, B. Bosca1; we studied the prevalence of the C677T mutation in 56 mothers who 1"Iuliu Hatieganu" UMPh, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2"Radu Horia" Center of Neu- had a child with Down syndrome and 54 control mothers with healthy romuscular Pathology, Vâlcele, Romania. children. The incidence of the mutant T allele in study group (29%) Introduction: Friedreich spinocerebellar ataxia is an autosomal was the same as in control women (34%) P = 0,51. MTHFR C677T recessive neurodegenerative disease, characterized by progressive genotype frequencies were not significantly altered in mothers of evolution, pyramidal cerebellar phenomena, suppression of children with Down syndrome (P = 0.65). Our preliminary results do osteotendinous reflexes and deep sensitivity of lower limbs, ataxic gait, not support the presence of an increased risk of Down syndrome in dysarthrias, cardiomyopathies, slow speech, dysmetria associated mothers carriers of the T allele in Russian population. Further research with hypermetria, diabetes mellitus. on larger samples is needed to test our results. Material: We investigated 142 patients with Friedreich spinocerebellar ataxia admitted to the ,,Horia Radu” Center of Neuromuscular P1245. Y chromosomal STR haplotypes in Iranian population Pathology, Vâlcele, Covasna county. F. Moshiri, F. Mahjoubi; Methods: history, clinical examination, family inquiry, genetic record, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, reconstruction and analysis of pedigrees of the families included in Islamic Republic of Iran. the study; the biostatistical method, which allowed us to establish the As both the Y chromosome and mitochondrial DNA show uniparental frequency of the heredo-collateral history of Friedreich ataxia, the inheritance they are particularly useful for tracing the separate sex distribution of the cases included in the study, the frequency of ancestry of paternal and maternal lineages in human populations. Y Friedreich ataxia among the cases of the Center of Neuromuscular chromosome markers and their genetic diversity can be used to give Pathology, as well as the incidence of the disease in the different information on male-specific patterns of migration and the origin and Romanian counties. diversity of specific populations. Haplotypes based on polymorphic Results: The analysis of pedigrees confirms the autosomal recessive markers are easily constructed because of the lack of recombination inheritance of Friedreich ataxia; only 38.1% of patients presented in these genomic regions. a heredo-collateral history of Friedreich ataxia; the study of sex Desirable characteristics of markers which should be used are to have distribution shows that 45.1% of cases were females and 54.9% males; a high level of polymorphism in the population, and the lowest possible the distribution of cases according to the onset age shows a 58.2% incidence of recurrent mutations. The variance in microsatellite frequency in the age group 10-15 years; the cases of Friedreich ataxia marker has been used for population genetic study. The microsatellite represent 7.03% of all cases of neuromuscular diseases admitted in mutation rate is 10-3, and the rate of those on the Y chromosome has the same period: the highest incidence of Friedreich ataxia was found been estimated to be 2.1x 10-3 in each generation. Furthermore, it in Brasov, Sibiu, Bihor, Timis, Botosani counties. has been found that Y chromosome variants tend to be more localised Conclusion: The incidence of this disease can be reduced by the geographically than those of mtDNA and the autosomes. Putting all detection of carriers of gene X25, prenatal diagnosis by DNA analysis these data together, the Y chromosome is good to study as it shows and genetic counseling. paternal/clonal inheritance, and has an effective population size that is only 25% that of the autosomes. P1248. Molecular genetic studies of sporadic spinocerebellar For this study 8 of these widely used Y-chromosome markers Dys425, ataxia (SCA) in the cypriot population Dys426, Dys434, Dys435, Dys436, Dys437, Dys438 and Dys439 has A. T. Georghiou, M. Tsingis, T. Kyriakides, M. Pantzaris, S. Papacostas, E. been employed to analyses almost 300 males from 21 populations in Zamba-Papanicolaou, K. Christodoulou; Iran. These markers showed a good efficiency to discriminate between The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. different ethnic groups. Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) form a heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders that primarily affect the spinal cord,Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 353 the cerebellum and brainstem. Autosomal dominant and recessive the possible mechanisms leading to sudden deaths on a preliminary inheritance has been detected in families and sporadic cases have data. also been reported. The main clinical features include gait difficulties, 95 confirmed cases of HCM were considered in the present study ataxia and dysarthria. The age of onset is usually within the 4th decade. of which 43 had obstructive type of HCM. Our study revealed an Several associated features may present in different patients that increased preponderance of the condition among the males (3.5:1) include optic atrophy, peripheral neuropathy, retinal degeneration, when compared to previous studies. Of the 95 probands, 3 died due and dementia. Several attempts to clinically classify SCA patients to HCM in a follow up of 2 years. The family history of sudden death have proved to be unsuccessful due to the overlapping features seen was found to be 7% among non-obstructive HCM and 14% among within the same SCA type and in many cases within the same family. obstructive HCM. This frequency of 21% (pooled) is very high compared Many SCA loci and genes have recently been identified that prove the to 12% sudden death reported from earlier studies. Further the history extensive genetic heterogeneity of this group of degenerative disorders. of syncope was also found to be double among the obstructive HCM The most frequent mutation is a CAG repeat expansion, which causes cases compared to the non-obstructive form. In conclusion, autonomic a polyglutamine expansion at the protein level. Fifty sporadic patients dysfunction and abnormal vascular control could be acting as possible that clinically conform to the diagnosis of SCA have been identified independent triggers of sudden death in obstructive HCM, whereas in the Cypriot population. Due to the high prevalence of FRDA in the hypotension and myocardial ischemia could be playing a role in non- western part of the island we initially analysed the above patients at obstructive HCM related sudden deaths. the FRDA gene. All patients were negative for the FRDA expansion. SCA patients were then analysed for a mutation in the SCA1, SCA2, P1251. Are ACA- and GGC-divergent MJD haplotypes the SCA3, SCA6, SCA7, SCA8, SCA12, SCA17 and DRPLA genes. No signature of de novo mutational events? expansion has been detected. We, therefore, conclude that SCA in S. Martins1,2, C. Gaspar3, I. Silveira4, A. Brice5, N. Wood6, L. Ranum7, G. Rou- the cypriot population is not caused by any of the most frequent SCA leau3, P. Coutinho8, A. Amorim1,2, J. Sequeiros4,9; mutations detected in other populations. 1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2Fac Ciências, Univ Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Cen Research in Neuroscience, McGill Univ and Montreal General Hosp, Montreal, P1249. Decreased frequencies of ABCA1 polymorphisms R219K PQ, Canada, 4UnIGENe, IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 5Lab Médecine Experimentale, and V771M in Hungarian patients with coronary heart disease INSERM U 289, Hôp Salpétrière, Paris, France, 6Neurogenetics, Inst Neurolo- and stroke gy, Univ London, London, United Kingdom, 7Depart Neurology and Inst Human H. Andrikovics1, E. Pongrácz2, Á. Kalina3, C. Aslanidis4, G. Schmitz4, A. Tor- Genetics, Univ Minnesota, Minnesota, MN, United States, 8Serv Neurologia, dai1; Hosp S Sebastião, Stª Mª Feira, Portugal, 9ICBAS, Univ Porto, Porto, Portugal. 1National Institue of Hematology, Budapest, Hungary, 2Central Hospital of Min- The autosomal dominant neurodegenerative Machado-Joseph disease istry of Interior, Budapest, Hungary, 3Hospital of National Railways, Budapest, (MJD) has been reported worldwide in families from very distant origins. Hungary, 4University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. A previous haplotype study encompassing the expanded (CAG) n Genetic polymorphisms of ABC-transporter A1 (ABCA1) may region within the MJD1 gene and three intragenic biallelic markers has alter the regulation of plasma HDL-level, promoting or protecting shown the ACA and GGC haplotypes in 94.4% of the 72 informative from arteriosclerosis. Recently, several common SNPs have been MJD families, collected from 15 different countries. In order to clarify recognised in ABCA1, but their effects on protein-function or their role whether other expanded chromosomes with haplotypes different from are still controversial. these two most common are the evidence of different MJD mutational We investigated 244 unrelated, randomly selected patients with origins, or just the result of recombination and/or recurrent mutations ischemic stroke, 150 patients with coronary heart disease (CHD) at analysed biallelic markers, we have (1) extended the SNP-based and 193 blood-donors for allele frequencies (AF) of three common haplotype study, genotyping three additional markers; (2) calculated ABCA1-polymorphisms (R219K, V771M, I883M). Compared to gene diversity indices based on four flanking microsatellites, less than control (30.8±4.7%; 4.9±2.2%), decreased AF were found in both 250 kb apart from the (CAG) repeat, and (3) allele-specifically amplified n patient groups for R219K, and V771M (stroke:28.7±4.1%; 3.1±1.6%, and sequenced a 4 kb region from expanded chromosomes of 8 MJD CHD:25.7±5.0%; 1.3±1.3%). Upon stratification by age of onset, patients with the AGA, GGA and still undisclosed (A/G)GC haplotypes. more pronounced AF-decreases were observed. In a subset of stroke Newly studied SNPs did not discriminate additional MJD lineages, patients younger than 50, both variants occurred in significantly lower although, in some cases, complete haplotypes were not assessed due frequencies (22.4±5.5%; 1.8±1.7%). Similarly, among CHD-patients to the observed heterozygosity. Results from microsatellites’ typing younger than 60, AF of R219K and V771M (22.6±7.5%; 0±1,6%) in these eight patients have, however, shown the highest molecular decreased. V771M was almost exclusively (35/36) found in individuals diversity (0.44) when compared to that found in the rest of the analysed carrying the R219K allele. The allele frequency of the third variant, chromosomes carrying either ACA (0.39; n=91) or GGC (0.25; n=61) I883M did not show significant differences in the groups and subgroups haplotypes. Sequence differences were also observed throughout the studied. Our data confirm earlier observations that ABCA1 R219K 4 kb analysed region, although a comparison to the control data is still and V771M polymorphisms may be associated with a protective in course. Present results suggest that different MJD origins may be role against CHD and extend those to another important pathologic underlying the haplotypes other than the ACA and GGC. condition namely stroke. These protective effects seem to be more pronounced in subsets of patients with younger ages. P1252. Type 2 Diabetes mellitus and PPARγ and CAPN-10 genes polymorphism in the Northern Greek population P1250. Malignant course of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in A. Kouvatsi, A. Tichalas, S. Pappa, C. Triantaphyllidis; India Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. R. T. Rishikesh1, A. S. Durgaprasad1, B. Thakkar2, N. Calambur3, S. B Raju3, Type 2 diabetes mellitus is the most common form of diabetes P. Nallari1; worldwide, affecting approximately 4% of the worlds’ adult population. 1Department of Genetics, Osmania University, Hyderabad, India, 2Cardiovascu- It is multifactorial in origin, with both genetic and environmental lar thoracic surgery unit, KEM hospital, Mumbai, India, 3Cardiology unit, CARE factors contributing to its development. Genetic polymorphism in hospital, Hyderabad, India. different genes has been associated with the disease in a number of Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a heart muscle disorder populations. exhibiting pronounced phenotypic variation in clinical features ranging Known polymorphisms in the genes coding for the peroxisome from benign to malignant forms and with high risk to heart failure and proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) and the cysteine protease sudden death. HCM is familial in majority of cases and is transmitted calpain-10 (CAPN10), were analysed in 92 patients with type 2 as an autosomal dominant trait. Sudden death in HCM can be initiated diabetes and 100 healthy individuals (control sample), all coming from by several different triggers which include ventricular arrhythmia, Northern Greece. atrial fibrillation, myocardial ischemia, abnormal vascular control and The polymorphism Pro12Ala (exon B) in the PPARγ gene was autonomic dysfunction. The aim of the present study was to identify analysed by the PCR-RFLPs method. The results obtained suggest the percent of sudden death associated with the subtypes of HCM and that the Pro12Ala polymorphism protects against type 2 diabetesNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 354 mellitus in the studied population and affects some clinical traits in variables that might be associated with FRAXA intermediate alleles. diabetic patients. The current study fails to find any strong evidence of association Five single nucleotide popymorphisms, designated as SNP-19 (intron of FRAXA intermediate alleles with SEN, behavioural problems or 6), SNP-43 (intron 3), SNP-44 (intron 3), SNP-63 (intron 13) and SNP- cognitive difficulties. However, we have found some suggestive 110 (exon 10) in the CAPN-10 gene, were analysed by PCR-RFLPs evidence of an association between Pervasive Developmental or MS-PCR method. The statistical analysis indicated that the genetic Disorder (PDD) and intermediate alleles. Our findings illustrate some variation in the five CAPN-10 SNPs is not associated with type 2 of the difficulties encountered in identifying individuals with SEN. The diabetes mellitus in the studied population. power to identify specific components of cognitive and behavioural Additional studies based on a larger population group will provide a difficulties was reduced due to elective drop-out which is characteristic better understanding of the contribution that these genes make to of longitudinal studies. Our results demonstrate the non-random loss diabetes risk in the Greek population. of participants from this cohort and highlight problems that may arise when such data are used in genetic association studies. P1253. Familial amyloid polyneuropathy V30M in Portugal: evolutionary dynamic of a disease in expansion P1256. Frequencies of the C598T mutation in VHL associated A. Sousa1,2, A. M. Silva2,3, I. Fonseca2,4, T. Coelho2,5; with autosomal recessive erythrocytosis 1ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 2Familial Amyloidosis Clinical Unit, Hospital Santo N. Vasserman, S. Tverskaya, R. Zinchenko, A. Polyakov; António, Porto, Portugal, 3Neurology, Hospital Santo António, Porto, Portugal, Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. 4Nephrology, Hospital Santo António, Porto, Portugal, 5Neurophysiology, Hospi- Familial benign polycythemia (OMIM 263400) is a rare autosomal tal Santo António, Porto, Portugal. recessive disorder that is characterized by erythrocytosis, normal Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) type I is an autosomal dominant leukocyte and platelet counts, and increased erythropoietin production. disorder caused by mutations in the transthyretin (TTR) gene. With the There are more than 100 patients who are Chuvash by nationality and exception of a few families, Portuguese focus is associated with the lived in northern-east part of the republic. V30M mutation. FAP is highly prevalent in Portugal, where Andrade Ang et al (2002) identified substitution C598T in homozygouse state first identified it in 1939. We reviewed our register that includes 2029 in polycythemic Chuvashs. This substitution lead to amino-acid patients observed between 1939 and December 2003. Of these, 1900 Arg200Trp change in VHL gene in all individuals affected with Chuvash patients have (or belong to families with) molecular confirmation of erythrocytosis. V30M mutation. 70% of the patients (53% of the families) have been We investigated DNA from 34 patients and 40 healthy relatives from 14 diagnosed in the last twenty years Families were classified as ‘de novo families. All patients are homozygouse in respect to C598T mutation families’ or ‘previously undiagnosed families’ according to absence or in VHL gene. Moreover we examined DNA from 422 healthy unrelated presence of similar disease in previous generations. Absence of the Chuvashs. 14 heterozygouse and 1 homozygouse carriers were among disease is due to incomplete penetrance, not to de novo mutations. De them. So allelic frequency of C598T mutation is 2% for Chuvashs, and novo families predominates among recently diagnosed families (67% frequency of the disease in Chuvash population must be 1:2500. versus 42%). Age-of-onset (in yrs) is significantly significantly higher We investigated presence of C598T mutation in neighbouring in index cases of de novo families (45.5 ± 11.8) than in index cases of populations and Russians. We discovered 6 heterozygouse carriers undiagnosed families (32.1 ± 7.7). New families with a previously silent among 344 Mary (allelic frequency 1%, calculated disease frequency mutation are diagnosed every year. FAP is a disease in expansion in 1:10 000), 2 heterozygouse carriers among 221 Udmurth (allelic Portugal. The evolutionary dynamic of FAP gene is discussed. frequency 0.5%, calculated disease frequency 1:40 000). There was no C598T mutation among 271 Russians. P1254. New SNP in the exon two of gene encoding neutrophil Individuals affected with Chuvash erythrocytosis discovered in elastase II in Iranian population Chuvash population. Affected individuals among Mary population G. Ahangari1, A. Farhoudi2, Z. Chavoshzadeh3, S. Jamshidi1, M. Kaeyhani1, A. did not discover in spite of relatively high calculated frequency of Ramyar2; erythrocytosis. This can be explained by benign course of the disease, 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic that clinicians did not always identify, or by modifier genetic factor that Republic of Iran, 2Children Medical Center, Tehran Medical University, Tehran, present in Chuvash population. Islamic Republic of Iran, 32Children Medical Center, Tehran Medical University, This work was support in part by RHF grant 04-01-00262a Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. The gene for human neutrophil elastaseII, a powerful serine protease P1257. Heritability of complex traits in an Italian genetic isolated carried by blood neutrophil and capable of destroying most connective population. tissue proteins, was cloned from a genomic DNA library of normal A. Crispo1, P. D'Adamo1, C. Lanzara1, A. Ferrara1, C. Specchia2, M. Carella3, P. individual. Peripheral blood obtained from 30 normal individuals. Gasparini1; Total RNA was isolated from fresh-polymorph-prep separated cells 1Telethon Institute for Genetic and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2Università di Bres- by using RNA standard techniques. RNA was analyzed by employing cia, Brescia, Italy, 3IRCSS C.S.S., San Giovanni Rotondo-Foggia, Italy. PCR amplification of reverse transcribed using a total of ten The molecular bases of complex and quantitative traits can be better specific primers. Mutational analysis was performed by bidirectional identified studying genetically isolated populations. The aim of present sequencing methods.we amplified five exon of ELA2 gene separately study is to investigate heritability of the most common complex and and sequenced each exon. We have found new SNP in exon two codon quantitative traits in Carlantino, a small village from Southern Italy. number 44. It was a silent mutation C to A substitution but no changes Data from 1,417 individuals were collected and used. Traits include in amino acid sequence Alanine has induced. The codon sequence blood pressure, height, weight, body mass index, waist to-hip-ratio, was GCG that has been changed to GCA. uric acid, cholesterol, triglycerides, glucose, Na, K, Cl, Mg, P, LDH, CPK, alkaline phosphatase, AST, ALT, bilirubine, blood formula. The P1255. An investigation of the FRAXA intermediate allele variance component method implemented in SOLAR was used to phenotype using the ALSPAC cohort estimate heritability (h2r) that represents the total additive genetic S. M. Ennis; heritability after the effect of all covariates has been removed. Genetic Epidemiology & Bioinformatics Group, Southampton, United Kingdom. Covariates included were sex, age or any phenotypes (other than the The FRAXA trinucleotide repeat at Xq27.3 gives rise to fragile X trait), and/or interactions of these. After analyses traits with a highest syndrome when fully expanded and both premature ovarian failure heritability value were: Height (0.70, SE=0.05, p<0.0001) Triglycerides (POF) and fragile X tremor and ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) when in the (0.69, SE=0.07, p<0.0001) Uric Acid (0.60, SE=0.03, p<0.0001), MPV premutation range. Reports of phenotypic effects extending into the (0.61, SE=0.01, p<0.0001), MCH (0.59, SE=0.02, p<0.0001), MCV intermediate repeat range are inconsistent but some studies suggest (0.56, SE=0.09, p<0.0001); these three last traits as expression of the that these smaller expansions predispose to special educational needs significant proportion of thalassemic cases in the population. Absence (SEN). This study utilises the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and of any statistical significance was obtained for creatinine, alkaline Children (ALSPAC) cohort to investigate cognitive and behavioural phosphatase, gammaGT, and WHR (Waist to-hip-ratio). In conclusion,Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 355 our study is the first report on heritability of such large number of Risk Estimate traits in a genetically isolated population. Our findings suggest that Relatives (Odds Ratio) a substantial part of variance of some traits is explained by genetic Total 4,68 factors, thus helping us on focusing the search for corresponding genes on those traits with a strongest heritability component. Parents 5,60 Siblings 7,28 P1258. The load of hereditary pathology in Tomsk, Russia Children 7,86 L. Nazarenko, O. Salyukova, J. Kotalevskaya; Grandparents 3,35 Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Medical genetic study of the population of Tomsk, Russia had been Uncles 4,61 performed. The population sample comprised 412 720 subjects. For Cousins 3,99 each nosological group, the loads of Mendelian pathology with different Nephews 2,06 modes of inheritance had been determined. 71 autocomal dominant diseases had been found in a total of 454 patients, with hereditary Spouses 1,08 (not significant) syndromes being the most prevalent. Autosomal recessive pathology was represented by 69 diseases found in 376 patients, hereditary Odds ratio was significant for all types of relatives and increased with syndromes being the most prevalent too; and X-linked pathology, by 11 degree of kinship to the proband, whereas the risk for spouses was diseases in 89 patients. The prevalence rate had been calculated for not. each nosological form. The loads of autosomal dominant, autosomal These results point out to familial aggregation in our sample and recessive and X-linked diseases were 1.48 and 1.35 per 1000 people suggest a genetic component involved in the two common subtypes and 0.66 per 1000 men. The spectrum of hereditary pathology in Tomsk of migraine. population was described. Migration was the major factor influencing the prevalence rates of hereditary pathology. P1261. Investigation deletion GSTT1 gene in Ukraine A. F. Melnyk, L. A. Livshits; P1259. Analysis of GSTM1 and GSTT1 genes polymorphisms in Institute Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiyv, Ukraine. newborn, middle age and in elderly people from the North-West Glutathione S-transferase T1 (GSTT1) gene ensure the synthesis of region of Russia the relevant enzyme product, that belong to the Phase II detoxification O. S. Glotov, N. Y. Shved, G. S. Demin, V. G. Vakharlovsky, T. E. Ivashchenko, system responsible for biotransformation and degradation electrophilic V. S. Baranov; xenobiotics. For this gene known nonfunctional null allele (0), which is Ott's Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian formed as a result of extended deletion. Federation. GSTT1 null genotype is known as a risk factor predisposition to lung The polymorphisms of metabolic genes (GSTM1, GSTT1) responsible and bladder cancer as well as to some other environmentally induced for xenobiotic conjugating enzymes of Phase II detoxification system diseases such as chronic bronchitis, bronchial asthma, alcoholic were studied by PCR in three groups of people from the North-West cirrhosis. region of Russia. The newborn group consisted of 57 children born in Analysis GSTT1 null genotype was performed by PCR in the group of Ott's Institute - group 1, the middle age cohort included 83 unrelated 71 healthy volunteers from Ukraine. The frequency of the GSTT1 null individuals of middle age (25-45) - group 2, the group of elderly people genotype is 21 % (n = 15). This frequency is comparable to population were represented by 147 unrelated individuals elder than 70 years. controls obtained in studies for population of the UK (61/325, 19%) The frequencies of GSTM1 0/0 genotypes were similar in all three and USA (20/98, 20%) but it is higher then Russian population (7/72, groups (45.7%, 45.8%, 44.0%, respectively). Low frequency of null 9.7%). allele homozygotes for GSTT1 gene in the group 1 (14%), middle The result of our research can be the background for genetics testing (18%) - in the group 2 and rather high (28%) in the group 3 were found. and consulting individuals from chemical pollutant area of Ukraine and The difference in the frequencies of null allele homozygotes between for precise therapy of patients with high risk of development GSTT1 the newborns and elderly people was significant (χ2=3.96, p<0.05)). associated pathologies. The frequencies of null alleles of both GSTT1 and GSTM1 genes were increased, but not significantly, in the group 3 (13.6%) compared to P1262. Advances in association mapping of disease genes using group 2 and group 1 (9.6%, 8.7% respectively). It might be speculated linkage disequilibrium maps. that people homozygous for null allele of GSTT1 gene passes some N. Maniatis, N. E. Morton, A. Collins; metabolic advantages which support their longer survival. Human Genetics Division, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, SO16 6YD, United Kingdom. P1260. Familial aggregation of common forms of migraine in a We have developed a simple yet powerful approach for disease gene group of Portuguese families association mapping by linkage disequilibrium (LD). This method is C. Lemos1, M. Castro1, J. Barros2, C. Fraga2, L. Guimarães3, P. Maciel4, I. Sil- unique since it applies a model with evolutionary theory that incorporates veira1, J. Sequeiros1, J. Pereira-Monteiro2, A. Sousa1; a parameter for the location of the causal polymorphism. The method is 1UnIGENe, IBMC and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço Neurologia, HGSA, based on single marker tests and LD maps, which describe the pattern Porto, Portugal, 3Fac. Ciências Saúde, Univ. Fernando Pessoa, Porto, Portugal, of LD by assigning a location in LD units (LDU) for each marker. As a 4ICVS, Univ. Minho, Braga, Portugal. proof of principle, we tested our method using 27 SNPs that cover an Migraine is a common neurological disorder, with a complex mode of 890 kb region flanking the CYP2D6 gene with known location. Four inheritance. Migraine with aura (MA) and migraine without aura (MO) functional CYP2D6 polymorphisms cause the poor drug metabolising are the two most common forms of this disease. Several studies have phenotype. Previous LD mapping studies using single markers and described an increased risk in relatives of migraineurs and suggest haplotypes have identified a 390 kb region associated with this that genetic factors may be implicated in both subtypes. We studied phenotype. Using a metric LDU map, the commonest functional familial aggregation of MA and MO in 171 Portuguese families of polymorphism within the gene was estimated to be located only 14.9 probands with MA, MO or both. Relatives were diagnosed according kb from its true location, surrounded within a 95% confidence interval to the criteria of the International Headache Society. of 172 kb. Using same modelling procedure, the kb map had a relative Familial aggregation was evaluated by estimating the relative risk of efficiency of 33% compared to the map in LDU. Our findings show that the disease, first in the total number of relatives and then in relatives, the support interval and location error are smaller than any published according to their degree of relantionship to the proband. Risk in the results on these data. Despite the low resolution and the very strong general population has been estimated previously at 8,8%. We also LD in the region, our results provide evidence of the substantial utility estimated the risk for spouses to disentangle the influence of genetic of LDU maps for disease gene association mapping. These tests are and environmental factors in migraine. robust to large numbers of markers and are applicable to haplotypes, diplotypes, whole-genome association or candidate region studies.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 356 P1263. Interparalog gene conversion patterns of HBII-52 C/D box Dagestan. Populations of Avars, Chamalals, Bagvalals, Andis, Lezgis, snoRNAs cluster at 15q11-q12 Dargwasses and Tabassarans inhabiting mountain part of Dagestan M. Ogorelkova, P. Martinez, X. Estivill; were analyzed. The overall pattern of the MDS analysis suggests CRG, Barcelona, Spain. that mountain isolates of Dagestan like other Caucasus populations Brain expressed, paternally imprinted C/D box HBII-52 snoRNAs are clustering with West Eurasian populations being closer to Middle East organized in a ~99 Kb cluster of 47 copies on chromosome 15q11-q12. populations. A large proportion of Y chromosome haplogroups defined They are suggested to post-transcritionally modify 5HT2C receptor using 46 NRY biallelic markers are those considered to have originated transcripts by affecting the (A) to (I) editing and/or alternative splicing. in the Middle East. It has been shown earlier based on mtDNA and Y The HBII-52 copies share high homology with each other (>98%), and chromosome variation analysis that mountain inhabitants reveal great over half of them are expected to be functionally active. Due to high distinction which is in good agreement with the language differentiation level of sequence identity, gene conversion is anticipated to occur pattern of the region. But what regards autosomal variation, estimates between snoRNA homologues. based on our Alu data set shows extremely low genetic differentiation In order to study the patterns of gene conversion of the HBII-52 snoRNAs (Fst = 0,008). In general lower values compared to those obtained cluster we have analysed the DNA variability of 23 presumably functional by uniparentally inherited markers are expected but the amount of copies in 70 Spanish individuals. Our preliminary data indicate that the difference is somewhat striking possibly explained to some extent snoRNAs are characterized by high nucleotide diversity, high overall by marker characteristics itself. Anyway autosomal variation reflects gene conversion rates for the region and multiple gene conversion shared genetic background suggesting recent common ancestral hot-spots. In 40 chromosomes analysed so far we have identified population in the past. Contemporary genetic structure has been 31 SNPs, 20 of which are located at potential gene conversion sites primarily shaped by genetic drift. with tract length of 5 bp or more. Four gene conversions between homologues that involve more than one paralogous sequence variant P1266. Glucokinase mutations in women with gestational (PSV) were detected, with gene conversion tracts between 6 to 31 bp. diabetes mellitus selected by clinical criteria We have detected HBII-52 snoRNAs haplotypes that are marked by M. Żurawek1, E. Wender- Ozegowska2, D. Januszkiewicz- Lewandowska1, A. several gene conversion events and have accumulated minor alleles Zawiejska2, J. Nowak1; for multiple SNPs. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Science, Poznan, Poland, Multiple SNPs are found at the proximal and distal parts of the snoRNAs 2University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. cluster while central copies are devoid of variants suggesting that some Maturity- onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically and homologues might represent gene conversion hot spots. clinically heterogeneous form of non- insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, characterized by early onset, usually before 25 years of P1264. Human von Willebrand factor gene STR polymorphism age, an autosomal dominant inheritance and primary defect in insulin (vWFII) in Russian, Belorussian and Kalmyk and Yakut secretion. Mutations in at least six genes have been shown to underline populations. MODY, including GCK mutations (encoding glucokinase). Glucokinase- D. A. Verbenko1, T. V. Lopatina1,2, V. A. Spitsyn3, N. A. Bebyakova4, L. A. Tar- related MODY 2 is a common form of this disorder, especially in children skaya1, M. V. Sorensen5, A. I. Mikulich6, S. A. Limborska1; with mild hyperglycemia and in women with gestational diabetes and 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, a family history of diabetes. The purpose of this study was to estimate Russian Federation, 2Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation, the prevalance of MODY 2 in Polish gestational diabetic patients. 3Medical and Genetics Scientific Centre, Russian Academy of Medical Scienc- Selected gestational diabetic women fulfilled the following criteria: es, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4North State Medical Academy, Arkhangelsk, age<35 years, BMI< 25, a small increment (<3 mmol/l) during 2-h oral Russia, Arkhangelsk, Russian Federation, 5McGaw Medical Center, Northwest- glucose tolerant test and a history of type II or gestational diabetes in ern University, Chicago, IL, United States, 6Institute of Arts, Ethnography and a first or second-degree relatives. The PCR- SSCP analysis involving Folklore, National Academy of The Republic of Belarus, Minsk, Belarus. coding regions of the 12 exons and the intron-exons boundaries of An STR polymorphism in Human von Willebrand factor gene (vWFII) the GCK gene was used. In 12 probands (10%) of the 119 patients possess high individual discrimination power and have an application in we detected two novel GCK mutations: G448fsinsG, E312Q, two medical, forensic and population genetic studies. The variability of this previously reported S383L, Y215Y and four intronic variants: IVS2- DNA marker have been studied in different ethnic groups of Eastern 12C>T, IVS3-8G>A, IVS4+26C>A, IVS7-13A>G. All mutations were Europe: Russians (Arkhangelsk and Kursk regions), Belarussians absent from 120 control subjects. We found previously reported (Woodland region), Kalmyks (Elista region) and Yakuts (Central region polymorphism IVS9+8C>T. The frequency of the C and T alleles was of Sakha Republic). Allele typing was performed using the PCR and respectively 0.8 and 0.2.The obtained results indicated on relatively subsequent electrophoresis followed by silver staining. Nine alleles low prevalence of MODY 2 in Polish gestational diabetic patients. of the locus were noted in populations studied. Allele frequency This work is supported by Ministry of Sciences and Informatics grant distributions are in agreement with Hardy-Weinberg expectations in all no PO5E09326 populations. The level of observed heterozygosity was high and varied from 0.65 to 0.79. In contrast with other hypervariable STR markers P1267. Polymorphism of the MTHFR gene and serum lipid levels studied in these populations, observed allele frequency distributions in Serbian child population in distant ethnic groups from Eastern Europe show no statistically T. M. Damnjanovic, I. Novakovic, L. Lukovic, V. Bunjevacki, S. Cvijeticanin, B. significant difference, whereas there is significant differentiation for Jekic; Yakut population from Asia. This may reveals conservative fitness Institute of Human Genetics, Belgarade, Serbia and Montenegro. action on the gene, because of the gene product importance for As it is known thermo labile polymorphism C677T of the methylenete survival. trahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene has been shown to result in increased total homocysteine concentrations caused by a decreased P1265. Population structure of Dagestan mountain isolates enzyme activity. Homocysteine could act as inhibitor or promoter of based on Alu insertion and Y chromosome data oxidation LDL cholesterol. B. Yunusbaev1, I. Kutuev1,2, R. Khusainova1, M. Reidla2, S. Rootsi2, E. Met- The aim of this study was to determine C677T genotype in 609 (310 boys spalu2, T. Kivisild2, R. Villems2, E. Khusnutdinova1; and 299 girls) healthy children and investigate a possible association 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Estonian among the TT genotype and serum lipid levels. C677T polymorphism Biocenter, Tartu, Estonia. was genotyped by PCR amplification of specific fragment of genomic Mountain inhabitants of Dagestan speak North Caucasian languages DNA followed by digestion with the HinfI restriction enzyme. We have and are known to be characterized by extreme linguistic diversity in a found that genotype was wild type CC in 260 (42, 7 %), heterozygous relatively small geographic area. In addition to small population size most CT 268 in (44, 0 %) and homozygous mutant TT in 81 (13, 3%) children. ethnic groups tend to live isolated. 8 Alu insertion polymorphisms (PV92, Total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol and triglycerides ACE, APOA1, B65, A25, NBC27, NBC123, and TPA25) were typed in a were determined for each MTHFR genotype group (CC, CT, and TT) total of 390 unrelated individuals from 7 autochthonous populations of in boys and girls. LDL cholesterol are significant higher (p<0, 02) in TTGenomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 357 group of children. Also, in boys levels of both total and LDL cholesterol magnitude. The expression of miRNAs varied greatly from 0 to 32,091 among the CT and TT groups differed significantly (p<0, 02, p<0, 05). copies per cell in mouse tissues. Presence of genomic DNA did not We did not find any significant association between the homozygous affect the miRNA quantitation. The assays discriminated between two genotype (TT) and HDL cholesterol and triglycerides level in both miRNAs that differed by as little as a single nucleotide, and between sexes. mature miRNAs and their precursors. This method allows accurate and sensitive miRNA expression profiling, uncovers precise changes P1268. mtDNA hypervariable regions in determination of local of miRNA expression during stem cell differentiation, and identifies human populations diversity after war resettlement potential miRNA markers specific to particular cell type and cancer. N. Pojskic; Comparison of miRNA expression profiles between normal and cancer Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and tissues will be presented. Herzegovina. Comparison between the genetic data sets collected before and after P1271. Sub-classification and molecular characterization of the war proved significant influence of war in Bosnia and Herzegovina early stage breast carcinoma using Applied Biosystem Human 1992-1995 on genetic structures of local human populations. Genome Survey Microarrays MtDNA hypervariable regions HV1 and HV2 diversity of three local Y. Wang1, T. Sorlie2, C. Xiao3, A. Borresen-Daleb4, G. Schroth1, R. Samaha1; human populations in alpine area of B&H was investigated. Molecular 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Departments of Genetics diversity indices and genetic structure parameters were calculated and Surgery, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Celera Genom- for three subdivided populations based on their spatial isolation and ics, Rockville, MD, United States, 4The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, effects of war resettlement. Because of its developed infrastructure Norway. and connections with urban area, one of the investigated villages DNA microarray technology has shown great promises in deciphering Dejcici is the center of refugees’ repatriation after four-year exodus. molecular phenotypes of breast cancer. In this study, we profiled gene Present population of this village includes returnees that originate from expressions on 20 biopsy tissues of early stage breast carcinoma several other villages in the same mountain area. Populations of the using Applied Biosystem’s Human Genome Survey Microarrays. Two two other villages Bobovica and Lukomir were expelled and returned main previously defined clinically relevant subtypes of breast tumors, home following the seize of atrocities. The named populations were Luminal A (longest survival time) and Basal (shortest survival time) compared against standard Bosnian population. were identified. Statistical analysis identified 1210 genes as signature Usefulness of mtDNA hypervariable regions in determination of local genes characterizing the two subtypes of breast cancer. PantherTM human population after the war resettlement was tested using different functional classification and biological pathway analysis on these diversity measures as well as with adapt specific population genetics signature genes depicts a more detailed molecular portrait of these measures. Comparison with result of short tandem repeats analyses of expression-based subtypes: Signature genes of Luminal A subtype the same populations have been done in order to determine the level were over-represented by biological function/processes such as cell of differences of these genetic markers for using in determination of structure and amino acid metabolism, while genes over expressed in local human populations diversity. the Basal subtype were over-represented by oncogenes, cell cycle signaling pathways. P1269. Cross-Population Mapping Genes for Schizophrenia- In an attempt to identify the best set of genes as potential biomarkers Spectrum Disorders in Daghestan Genetic Isolates for sub-classifying breast cancer, the same 20 patients samples were K. B. Bulayeva1, S. J. Glatt2, O. A. Bulayev1, T. A. Pavlova1, M. T. Tsuang2, R. analyzed using Stanford cDNA Arrays and Agilent Human Whole M. Kurbanov3, Y. Aulchenko4, C. van Duijn4; Genome Arrays. The results from the three microarray platforms were 1N.I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, found to be highly correlated. Using PAM analysis, a minimal numbers Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Behavioral Genomics; Department of genes were selected to best characterize and distinguish the Luminal of Psychiatry; University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States, A and Basal subtypes of tumors. These classifier genes were further 3Daghestan State Psychiatric Hospital, Makhachkala, Daghestan, Russian verified by TaqMan assays. Validated by multiple gene expression Federation, 4Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical platforms, the classifier genes identified in this study defined potential Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. prognostic molecular markers for breast cancers. Schizophrenia presents across a wide clinical spectrum, and a large number of genes are presumably involved. Genetic isolates may be P1272. High-resolution molecular characterization of 16p13.3 used to reduce the genetic and clinical heterogeneity of these complex and 11p15.5 rearrangements causing alpha- and beta- thalassaemia by multi-color Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe schizophrenia-spectrum disorders. A genome-wide linkage scans for Amplification. schizophrenia susceptibility loci in pedigrees from Daghestan genetic isolates provided highly significant evidence of cross-population C. L. Harteveld1, A. Voskamp1, M. Phylipsen1, N. Akkermans1, S. J. White2, P. differences in linkage patterns. We present the findings of a parametric C. Giordano1; linkage analysis of families from four primary and secondary genetic 1Hemoglobinopathies Laboratory, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Human and Clini- isolates. We found strong evidence for linkages with schizophrenia- cal Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands. spectrum disorder at two regions of chromosome 22 (22q11, with Genomic deletions involving the α-globin gene cluster on chromosome maximum heterogeneity α=1.00 and a LOD score of 8.7, and 22q13, 16p13.3 are the most common molecular cause of α-thalassemia with α=0.75 and a LOD score of 6.7). Furthermore we confirmed a (approx. 85% of cases). Rearrangements in the beta-globin gene locus on chromosome 17 (17p11.1-p12) with a LOD score of 5.03 (α cluster on 11p15.5 account for approx. 10% of all beta-thalassemia =1.00) that replicated earlier reported our results in a single pedigree. mutations and for the majority of Hereditary Persistence of Fetal These findings should provide sufficient rationale for subsequent fine Hemoglobin (HPFH) syndromes. The molecular tests commonly used mapping and positional cloning efforts at these loci in order to elucidate to identify deletion types of alpha- and beta-thalassaemias and HPFH the underlying susceptibility genes. at present are gap-PCR, Southern blot analysis and Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis. However, the applicability of these techniques is limited to known deletions, dependent upon the hybridization probes available and may involve time consuming and P1270. Real-time profiling of miRNAs from single cells laborious cell culture to generate metaphase chromosome spreads. D. Ridzon, A. Broomer, H. Zhou, C. Chen; We have developed a rapid and simple technique based on Multiplex Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification to detect rearrangements in A new miRNA quantitation method has been developed using stem- the alpha- and beta-globin gene clusters. MLPA allows the precise loop primers for reverse transcription (RT) followed by real-time quantification of up to 51 probe sequences within a nucleic acid TaqMan®. A total of 240 miRNA assays were designed and tested sample using a single tube assay. We describe the design of two sets using as few as single cells or as little as 25 pg total RNA. The C of 35 and 51 probes, covering a region of 700 kb of the alpha- and 250 values correlated (R2 = 0.999) to the copy number over seven orders oT f kb of the beta-globin gene cluster respectively, amplified by primersGenomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 358 labeled with up to three different fluorophores. Besides the detection as they pertain to human genetic testing. Specifically, two platform of the most common deletions, several alpha- and beta-thalassemia technologies have recently emerged using iC and iG; MultiCode RTx causing deletions, not previously described, were found using this for solution based quantitative analysis and MultiCode PLx for solid assay. Because of its robustness and simplicity, this technique should phase multiplexed end-point analysis. Together, these two platform become the standard for the detection of (large) rearrangements technologies will be applicable to some +90% of all genetic testing. causing hemoglobinopathies and other diseases in laboratories This presentation will focus on our experience using the MultiCode capable of performing automated DNA fragment analysis. PLx for human genetic detection. The presentation will discuss reports using a highly multiplexed PLx assay for analysis of the CFTR gene P1273. The influence of neuropeptide ‘Semax’ on the synthesis and using lower complexity PLx assays to target various other human of neurotrophic factors in rat retina and brain genes developed as "home brews". T. Agapova, Y. Agniullin, M. Shadrina, S. Shram; Institute of Molecular Genetic, Moscow, Russian Federation. P1276. In silico identification of transcription factors involved Glaucoma is a group of optic nerve progressive neuropathies which in cellular differentiation by promoter analysis of co-regulated is followed by the morphological alterations of the optic nerve disk. genes The main elements damaged under this disease are ganglion cells P. A. 't Hoen, J. Hou, R. X. de Menezes, E. Sterrenburg, J. T. den Dunnen, G. of retina. Glaucoma is characterized by different microcirculatory J. van Ommen; changes, ischemia of the retina and neuron death. Intranasal Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands. introduction of ‘Semax’ is used in ophthalmologic practice for the Having analysed changes in gene expression during the differentiation treatment of glaucoma. According to the one of hypothesis ‘Semax’, of human primary skeletal myoblasts on microarrays, we aimed for the the physiologically active analogue of adrenocorticotropic hormone (4 identification of the transcription factors responsible for the observed - 10), stimulates the production of neurotrophic factors BDNF and NGF changes in gene expression. To this end, upstream sequences of in the glial cells of the neural tissue and increases the vital capacity of co-regulated genes were retrieved and aligned with 322 recognition the neurons. We observed its influence on the expression of BDNF sequences of vertebrate transcription factors (TFs). The majority of and NGF in rat retina and some parts of brain under the different types differentially expressed genes included in the search had not previously of the peptide introduction. The PCR analysis showed that under been associated with myogenesis. Still, we observed that their the subconjunctival introduction ‘Semax’ caused the increase of the promoters were significantly enriched in regulatory elements binding mRNA expression of neurotrophic factors in the retina. Under the myogenic TFs, such as MEF2, SRF and Msx, when compared to intranasal introduction the level of the expression of BDNF and NGF control promoter sequences or promoters from genes with unchanged mRNA decreased for 40 % in the retina. This level of BDNF mRNA expression. This demonstrates the power of the algorithm in the increased for 30% in hippocampus under such conditions. Expression identification of relevant TF binding sites. In addition, we found that of NGF mRNA in hippocampus and visual region of cortex increased promoters of up-regulated genes were significantly enriched in binding for 40% and decreased for 20% in thalamus. We hypothesized those sites for TFs that have not or have only recently been implicated in therapeutical effects of ‘Semax’ as intranasal medication was not myogenesis. Among these are Forkhead transcription factors and the directly connected with the activation of neurotrophic factors synthesis PBX/MEIS1 heterodimer. Their binding sites were also significantly in retina. over-represented in the homologous mouse promoter sequences, further substantiating their functionality. Binding sites for mentioned P1274. Universal Primer APEX: a flexible and large-scale transcription factors are often found together in the same promoter. genotyping platform These clusters of binding sites can be used to predict involvement of K. Krjutskov, M. Remm, A. Kurg, T. Puurand, H. Uibopuu, A. Metspalu; genes not measured on the microarray in myogenesis. The approach Institude of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia. developed can be extended to expression datasets coming from other Our purpose is to work out universal primer APEX and then greatly cell models, and will be helpful to distill candidate TFs responsible for increase throughput and precision of large scale genotyping, while the observed co-regulation of gene expression. reducing cost. In the present project we will attack several limiting key factors for such analyses, including design oligonucleotide primers, P1277. Comparative use of 10-mer DNA oligonucleotides and parallel analyses of large sets of genetic markers, and array-based DNA:LNA oligonucleotides for sequence analysis by arrayed primer extension genotype scoring platform. These technologies are expected to enable whole-genome association studies for mapping candidate genes for M. Nelis1, M. Teder2, A. Kurg1, L. Nagirnaja1, A. Metspalu1; common diseases. 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, We use restrictase and universal adapter ligation procedure for Tartu, Estonia. amplification of target-DNA from genomic DNA. Before PCR with The ability of DNA microarrays to measure thousands of binding universal primer we reduce genomic DNA complexity on highly specific interactions simultaneously has led to their rapid adoption in many affinity array. In this step we hybridize probe-specific DNA to on an applications. One opportunity is to synthesize a universal array array oligonucleotides and remove unbound material during washing containing all 4N possible oligonucleotides of length N. Due to the step. After eluation of hybridized DNA from pound oligonucleotides, we potential complexity of the large number of different oligonucleotides run PCR with universal primer and primer extension on array. on chip, it is difficult to find optimal reaction conditions. One way to Our ultimate purpose is to work out high-throughput and flexible stabilize A:T and G:C-rich duplexes is to incorporate chemically genotyping platform that uses a one universal primer assay to genotype modified nucleotides in short universal primers. 15,000 SNPs per individual on a single oligonucleotide array. The aim of current study was to test 10-mer oligonucleotides for sequence analysis by arrayed primer extension (APEX) method in P1275. Expanding the scope of molecular analysis microarray format on glass slides. In the next stage we investigated the S. Johnson, D. Marshall, G. Harms, C. Miller, J. R. Prudent; use of modified Locked Nucleic Acid (LNA) monomers in constitution EraGen Biosciences Inc., Madison, WI, United States. of 10-mer APEX primers at different positions. Theoretically addition of a single LNA base in DNA/RNA oligonucleotide can raise Tm value of Recently, a new set of tools has emerged that simplifies certain the duplex by 4 - 9°C. aspects of molecular testing and provides additional benefits. Called Contrary to the expected rise of APEX signals the effect of inclusion MultiCode® (for multiple coding), these tools evolve around the of LNA monomers into DNA oligonucleotides resulted in significant idea that genetic material is not limited two base pairs. Indeed other deterioration of the signals of APEX reactions. The hybridization base pairs could exist chemically and one additional base pair now experiments performed in microchip format revealed either no effect does exist commercially. The components required to advance the or higher thermostability of modified oligonucleotides compared to the commercialization potential, such as triphosphates for enzymatic DNA tenmers. Inclusion of LNA monomers into DNA oligonucleotides incorporation of this base pair have recently become available for probably interferes in DNA polymerase reaction with chimeric isoguanine (iG) and 5’-methyl-isocytosine (iC). This presentation oligonucleotides. will discuss current and potential areas of interest for this base pairGenomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 359 From the results it can be concluded that the incorporation of LNA P1280. Investigation of NQO1 genotype polymorphisms between monomers in short oligonucleotide primers is perspective for Iranian healthy population and Ataxia- telangectasia ( A-T) hybridisation based microarray methods but not effective for APEX patients reaction based methods. B. Bayat, F. Biramijamal, M. Banoei, M. Sanati, A. Isaian, M. Moin; NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P1278. ATM Gene Mutations Detection, Haplotype Analysis, Ataxia -telangectaisa ( A-T) is a cancer - prone and radiation sensitive mt-DNA and D-loop Variation in Iranian Patients with Ataxia- syndrome. The A-T patients are hypersensitive to radiation, free radicals Telangiectasia. are generated by radiation. The NAD(P)H: quinine oxidoreductase M. Sanati, B. Bayat, B. Houshiar, M. Houshmand, A. Isaian, M. Shafa Shariat- (NQO1) enzyme prevents redox cycling which leads to generation panah, A. Farhoodi, M. Moin; of free radicals. It has been reported that this gene has a single NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at site of codon 187 (nucleotide 609). Ataxia-Telangiectasia is an inherited autosomal recessive disorder A Pro to Ser substitution at codon 187 of the NQO1 gene is associated characterized by defect in a number of distinct organ systems. with a loss of NQO1 protein and enzyme activity. To investigate the Symptoms include progressive cerebellar ataxia, telangiectasia, relationship between NQO1 codon 187 (nucleotide 609) polymorphism immunodeficiency, chromosomal instability radiation sensivity and and risk for A-T patients. We collected samples from AT patients and increased incidence of malignancies. The ATM gene of human healthy population from different region of Iran with different ethnicity chromosome 11q22.3 has been identified as the gene responsible for groups( Fars, Mazandarani, Turk). The NQO1 Pro187Ser genotypes human recessive disease ataxia-telangiectasia .ATM is encoded in 66 were determined by polymerase chain reaction - restriction fragment exons and spans 150kb of genomic DNA. In this study 20 families length polymorphisms ( PCR- RFLP) for 206 healthy control and 20 AT with at least one affected child with clinically suspect for ataxia- patients. We found only 20 Iranian A-T patients. Among the patients telangiectasia were examined and extracted DNA was amplified by and healthy controls (with Fars, Mazandaran and Turk ethnicities) the using standard methods. genotype frequency of NQO1 Pro187Ser were 70% and 67% for Pro/ Three exons which were hot spot for point mutations in ATM gene were Pro, 25% and 28.2% for Pro/Ser, 5% and 4.8% for Ser/Ser, respectively. detected by PCR-RELP and SSCP. The polymorphic bands sequenced No significance differences were found for NQO1 genotype distribution to detect the possible point mutations. In this manner, mt-DNA was among patients and healthy individuals. Our finding suggested that tested by 6 primers for existence of any mitochondrial deletions. We NQO1 genotype does not play an important role in developing Ataxia also amplified and sequence the D-loop of these patients by standard -telangectaisa. sequencing techniques. Likewise four molecular markers: D11S2179, D11S1787, D11S535, D11S1343 were genotyped in A-T families. P1281. Application of an integrated Bayesian approach to the Those markers were amplified using extracted sequence primers from detection of copy number changes in arrayCGH images. Gene Bank. The amplified products were separated using denaturing N. M. Haan, G. Snudden; PAGE gels, and the data were analyzed to detect their pattern of BlueGnome Ltd., Cambridge, United Kingdom. inheritance in each family. We have found three mutations (insertion, Bayesian methods have been widely applied to data analysis substitution)in the examined exones and mtDNA deletions including problems in the life sciences. Their application to copy number change 2 individuals with 7.5kb deletions, one with 5kb together with a 9.0kb detection has however been limited to the post processing of primary deletion for all. The samples were then sequenced to admit deletion data extracted from microarray images by traditional black box image breakpoints. Also the results of the D-loop variations related to A-T processing techniques. This combination of Bayesian and black box patients have been discussed in the presentation. approaches is sensitive to variability; both from experimental and operator sources in the primary data. P1279. Identification of p53 genotype among Iranian Ataxia- In this presentation we describe a novel approach which combines the telangiectasia (A-T) patients three major stages of arrayCGH analysis; extraction of primary data, M. Banoei, F. Biramijamal, B. Bayat, M. H. Sanati, A. Isaian, M. Moin, A. Far- normalisation and copy number change detection, in a single integrated hoodi; solution. The Bayesian model based approach is introduced as a means NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of improving the measurement of the underlying biological quantities Recent studies showed an association between the specific diseases while at the same time estimating the likely variability associated with and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Ataxia-telangiectasia those measurements. The importance of a single statistical framework (A-T) is a cancer-prone and radiation-sensitive syndrome. It is also, as a means of carrying forward knowledge of this variability through a recessive multi-system disorder caused by mutations in the ATM to the detection of copy number changes is illustrated by examples of gene at 11q22-q23. The risk of cancer is substantially elevated in A-T how detected copy number changes may be qualified by confidence patients. It is reported that the ATM/p53 signalling pathway is altered estimates; meaningful within the clinical context. by a very low ATM expression or by the presence of a mutated p53. In The presentation will also illustrate how an integrated Bayesian the absence of ATM, humans show a primary immunodeficiency that approach removes operator intervention from the analysis of arrayCGH includes low serum antibody titers. data thereby making this powerful technology accessible to individuals To investigate the relationship between p53 codon 72 polymorphism without a strong background in microarray image analysis and the and risk for AT, we collected samples from AT patients and healthy associated mathematical techniques. population from different region of Iran with different ethnicity groups (Fars, Mazandarani and Turk). The p53 Pro72Arg genotypes were P1282. Deletions of the SHOX gene in patients with Leri-Weill determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length dyschondrosteosys evidenced by the MLPA approach. polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) and direct DNA sequencing analysis in L. Stuppia, V. Gatta, O. Scarciolla, I. Antonucci, G. Calabrese, G. Palka; 207 healthy controls and 19 AT patients. Among the patients and healthy G. D'Annunzio University Foundation, Chieti, Italy. subjects with Fars, Mazandarani and Turk ethnicity, the genotype The human SHOX gene (Xp22 - Yp11.3) is involved in the pathogenesis frequency of p53 Pro72Arg were 15.8% and 34.8% for Arg/Arg, 73.7% of diseases characterized by the presence of short stature, being and 45.9% for Arg/Pro, 10.5% and 19.3% for Pro/Pro, respectively. rearranged in up to 70% of patients with Leri Weill dyschondrosteosys Significance differences were found for p53 allele distribution among (LWD) and in up to 12% of patients with idiopathic short stature. In the patients and healthy individuals. Our finding suggested that the majority of cases, the SHOX gene alterations consist of large deletions, frequency of Arg allele is more than healthy Iranian population. detectable by FISH or molecular analysis of intragenic CA repeats. However, FISH is a low throughput technique and is able to detect only large deletions, and analysis of CA repeats can be performed only when DNA of the parents of the proband is available. In recent years, the Multiple Ligation Probe Amplification (MLPA) technique has demonstrated to be a useful tool in the study of deletions of several genes. In this study we used the MLPA approach for the detection ofGenomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 360 SHOX deletions in 14 patients affected by LWD (9 of which previously P1285. Elaboration and usage of point mutation detection analysed by FISH) and 20 with idiopathic short stature (15 of which technology based on AS-PCR using automated DNA analyzer. previously analysed by FISH). MLPA analysis evidenced SHOX O. V. Vanyusheva1, I. A. Shilov2, A. S. Karyagina2; deletions in 6 LWD patients (43%), and in no case with idiopathic 1Moscow Lomonosov State Academy of Advanced Chemical Technology, Mos- short stature. In all cases, MLPA analysis confirmed results previously cow, Russian Federation, 2R&D firm “ATG-Biotech”, Moscow, Russian Federa- obtained by FISH. Interestingly, MLPA analysis showed two alternative tion. proximal breakpoints, producing two different deletions of 2.3 Mb and We developed a new method of point mutation detection based on 500 kb, respectively. These results demonstrate that MLPA analysis is allele-specific PCR using capillary electrophoresis for PCR-product an useful tool in the study of SHOX gene, showing a reduced labour analysis. It consists of a reaction with three primers where two of them intensity as compared to FISH and providing more information about are allele-specific and third is common primer. Allele-specific primers the breakpoints of the deletion. with different length of 5’-terminal sequences are used for development of the AS-PSR products with different lengths that allow us to detect P1283. Genomic organization and classification of conserved a heterozygote. Length standards are used for exclusion of false non-coding sequences in vertebrates reveals distinct classes of results and for increasing method reliability. The standards are special genes synthesized DNA fragments lengths of that are intermediate between R. Sanges, E. Stupka; AS-PSR product lengths. In case of capillary electrophoresis with Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy. fluorescent detection the length standards and the PCR fragments are The increasing number of available sequenced genomes is enabling labeled with different fluorophores and analyzed in the same capillary. researchers to determine with increasing confidence the presence of The elaborated technology was used for development of the tests conserved non-coding sequences. We have focused our efforts on for detection of mutations in several genes which are responsible understanding the evolution and the genomic organization of these for thrombosis: C677T mutation in MTHFR gene, Leiden mutation regions relating them to the function and structure of neighboring in factor V gene and G20210A mutation in prothrombin gene. Also genes comparing five vertebrates genomes in two phyla. the method was used for detection of M235T, T174M and G(-6)A We have mapped CNSs to the exon-intron structure of the genes and mutations in angiotensinogen gene, which are responsible for essential classified each analyzed gene on the basis of CNS localization and GO hypertension and for detection of Sp1 (ColIα1), BsmI (VDR), XbaI and classification. We have also attempted to cross phylum boundaries by PvuII (ERα) polymorphisms concerned with osteoporosis. analyzing the fragmentation of mammalian CNSs in fish. The elaborated technology is appropriate for clinical usage and large- Preliminary results suggest that the density of conserved sequences is scale polymorphisms analysis. higher in introns with respect to flanking regions in most of the analyzed genes. Furthermore CNSs seem to be present in higher number in the P1286. A new approach to argue causality of FBN1 mutations in first intron within the coding region as compared to other introns, and UMD-FBN1 this seems to be related to an increase in intron size. G. Collod-Beroud1, M. Y. Frederic1, C. M. Monino1, C. Beroud1, D. Hamroun1, Our GO classification suggests that the minority of genes that show M. Claustres1, C. Boileau2; a higher number of CNS in the flanking regions has a statistically 1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire, Montpellier, France, 2Laboratoire cen- significant enrichment for genes involved in development and tral de Biochimie, d'Hormonologie et de Genetique Moleculaire, Hopital Am- transcription, suggesting a different regulation mechanism for this broise Pare, Boulogne, France. class of genes. Moreover genes without CNSs (but conserved in all five Mutations in the fibrillin-1 gene (FBN1), the major component of vertebrates) show a statistically significant enrichment for involvement extracellular microfibrils, are associated with Marfan syndrome (MFS), in biosynthesis and metabolism indicating a much simpler regulation but also with a spectrum of conditions phenotypically related to MFS mechanism. Moreover we show that it is important to take into account called type-1 fibrillinopathies. To facilitate mutational analysis at the fragmentation of non-coding sequences when comparing them across molecular level and to provide the tools to search for genotype/phenotype longer evolutionary distances. correlations, a Locus Specific DataBase UMD-FBN1 was created in 1995. Among the 711 mutations indexed, the global analysis revealed two P1284. Rapid mutation detection method of complex genes by classes of mutations. The first one (40.89%) corresponds to mutations Heteroduplex Analysis with Capillary Array Electrophoresis predicted to result in shortened fibrillin-1 molecules: nonsense mutations, E. Velasco1, M. Durán1, E. Esteban-Cardeñosa1, M. Infante1, E. Lastra2, C. splicing errors, insertions, duplications and deletions. The second one García-Girón2, C. Miner1; (59.11%) corresponds to missense mutations. Since in vitro validation 1Universidad de Valladolid, IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital General Yagüe, of these nucleotide variations is not possible in diagnostic settings, Burgos, Spain. indirect arguments must be accumulated to define if these missense Scanning for mutations in complex genes in a large number of samples is mutations are really causative. In this context, we have annotated the hampered by the large size of these genes and the scattering of mutations FBN1 sequence for Highly Conserved Domains (HCD). These data list all over their coding sequences. We have transferred Heteroduplex for a given position the known arguments such as: cysteines implicated Analysis (HA) by Conformation Sensitive Gel Electrophoresis (CSGE) of in disulfide bonds, amino acids implicated in calcium-binding, N-linked the two major breast cancer predisposing genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, to glycosylation, furine/Pace sites, metalloproteases sites, RGD, or very a multicapillary DNA sequencer in order to increase the throughput of this conserved amino acids of unknown function in cb EGF-like, TGFBP, technique. This new method, that we have called Heteroduplex Analysis EGF-like modules, as well as in fibulin-like (Cterm) and in LTBP-like by Capillary Array Electrophoresis (HA-CAE), is based on the use of (Nterm) modules newly described. The new annotation of the FBN1- multiplex-PCR, different fluorescent labels and heteroduplex analysis in a HCDs shows that 83% of missense mutations are localized in one 16-capillary DNA sequencer. To date, a total of 114 different DNA sequence of these HCDs even if numerous parts of the protein remain to be variants (19 insertions/deletions and 95 single nucleotide substitutions functionally annoted. Thus up to 90% of all FBN1 mutations can be -SNS-) of BRCA1 and BRCA2 have been successfully detected by HA- considered as pathogenic, even in the absence of validation. CAE. In addition, we have optimised the multiplex-PCR conditions for the colorectal cancer genes MLH1 and MSH2 in order to analyse them by P1287. Sequencing the short arm of human chromosome 21 HA-CAE. Both genes have been amplified in 13 multiplex groups which R. Lyle1, K. Osoegawa2, B. ten Hallers2, B. Zhu2, E. Eyras3, R. Castelo3, C. contain the 35 exons and their corresponding flanking intronic sequences. Bird4, M. Cruts5, S. Dahoun1, X. She6, C. van Broeckhoven5, E. Eichler6, R. MLH1 and MSH2 have been analysed in nine Hereditary Non-Polyposis Guigo3, J. Rogers4, P. de Jong2, S. E. Antonarakis1; Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC) patients, and we have found six different 1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Children's DNA changes: one complex deletion/insertion mutation in MLH1 exon 19 Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, CA, United States, 3Centre for and another five SNS. Only the complex mutation and one SNS may be Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 4Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cam- classified as cancer-prone mutations. Our experience has revealed that bridge, United Kingdom, 5University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 6University HA-CAE is a simple, fast, reproducible and sensitive method to scan the of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. sequences of large multi-exon genes. The sequence of the euchromatic portion of the human genomeGenomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 361 is essentially complete. However, large regions of the genome, human genome has suggested that the frequency of DNA deletions comprising ~5-7% of the total, remain to be sequenced. These regions created upon L1 retrotransposition is 3.4% at the most (Kazazian include the short arms of the acrocentric chromosomes (13, 14, and Goodier, Cell 2002; Myers et al. AJHG 2002). However, “even 15, 21 and 22). The acrocentric chromosomes are of great interest the youngest of the polymorphic Ta sub-family L1s in the draft human as they are involved in many translocations causing human genetic genome sequence must be thousands of years old”. An analysis of disease. Human chromosome 21 has special significance because of recently integrated Alu sequences concluded that only ~0.8% (2/244) its involvement in Down syndrome. The sequence of the short arm of Alu retrotranspositions were associated with genomic deletions of Hsa21 (21p) would thus be important not only for understanding (Salem et al. MBE 2003); but the first case appears to occur through chromosome 21 genetics and disease, but an important step in the gene conversion whereas the second would have occurred through characterisation of these unexplored regions of the genome and toward double-stranded DNA break repair. It is potentially more instructive to the completion of the human genome project. We have constructed analyze insertions that have occurred into mammalian genomes in the a BAC library containing human sequence from only Hsa21 and past 100 years. However, no deletions were found to be associated shown that it contains clones from 21p. So far we have generated with the 14 original pathological L1 insertions examined (Kazazian approximately 1.3 Mb of new sequence from 21p (estimated to be and Goodier 2002). Here we reported that some 10% of L1-mediated 10-15% of the total), which shows that 21p contains regions which retrotranspositions are associated with significant genomic deletion in have the characteristics of euchromatic sequence. Gene prediction by humans through a meta-analysis of all reported L1-mediated events EST and in silico based methods, followed by confirmation of ~30% causing human genetic disease. gene models by rtPCR in 24 human tissues, indicates the presence of many expressed sequence on 21p. In this project, we aim to produce P1290. Investigation of mutations involved in macular corneal a sequence contig of 21p and characterise 21p with respect to genes dystrophy in Iranian patients and repeat content. m. S. Z. H. Ataii; NRCGEB, Teharn, Islamic Republic of Iran. P1288. Anti-iNOS locus in the human genome: structure and Macular corneal dystrophy (MCD) is an inherited autosmol recessive potential role in natural antisense RNA mediated regulation of disorder, which is clinically characterized by progressive corneal iNOS expression stroma clouding in both eyes. S. A. Korneev1, E. I. Korneeva1, G. Critchley2, M. O'Shea1; MCD is subdivided three Immunophenoty (MCD types I, IA and II),some 1Sussex Centre for Neuroscience, University of Sussex, Brighton, United King- mutations in the carbohydrate sulfotrans ferase 6 genes (CHST6) were dom, 2Hurstwood Park Neurological Centre, Brighton and Sussex University identified to cause MCD. Hospitals NHS Trust, Haywards Heath, United Kingdom. The CHST6 genes mapped on chromosome 16q22.That encoded a Recently we have demonstrated that DNA inversions, mutations protein with the some name. involving major rearrangements of the genome and usually regarded DNA was extract from 17 blood samples from suspected of MCD as catastrophic to gene function, can have an important role in the patients. PCR method was used to amplified regions three common creation of novel genes (Korneev & O’Shea, J Mol Biol Evol, 2002). We MCD point mutations which is hot spot for this disease. suggested that these genes form a special class of genetic elements Sequencing method was used to identify new point mutations. capable of producing antisense RNA molecules. Specifically, using a We found new mutations in some patients that none of these mutations molluscan model system we have shown that nitric oxide synthase was detected in the control group. (NOS)-related antisense RNAs can function as specific negative regulators of NOS gene activity. Our experiments indicate that this P1291. The Cypriot and Iranian National Mutation databases novel mechanism of gene regulation is important for learning and M. Kleanthous1, P. C. Patsalis2, A. Drousiotou3, M. Motazacker4, K. Christo- memory formation (Korneev et al., J Neurosci, 2005). By employing doulou1, M. Kariolou1, E. Baysal5, K. Khrizi4, B. Moghimi4, S. van Baal6, H. computational methods of analysis we have started our search for Najmabadi4, G. P. Patrinos6; similarly organised elements in other species including human. Here we 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Department of Molecular report on our discovery of a locus in the human genome whose structure Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, appeared to have been affected by an internal DNA inversion. This Departments of Cytogenetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3The Cyprus Institute of Neurol- region of the genome has the highest similarity to the gene encoding ogy and Genetics, Department of Biochemical Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Ge- inducible isoform of nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). Furthermore, by netics Research Center, Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, analysing the human EST databases, we have identified a transcript Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Genetics Research Center, Social Welfare produced from this locus. We refer to this transcript as anti-iNOS RNA. and Rehabilitation Sciences University, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 6Erasmus As expected the anti-iNOS RNA contains a region, which exhibits University Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, MGC-De- approximately 90% complementarity to iNOS mRNA and therefore it partment of Cell Biology and Genetics, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. can be considered as an example of natural trans-encoded antisense The exponential discovery rate of new genomic alterations, leading RNA. Moreover, by using RT-PCR we confirmed that the anti-iNOS to inherited disorders, as well as the need for comparative studies locus is transcribed in the human brain. of different populations mutation frequencies necessitates recording their population-wide spectrum, in online mutation databases. The P1289. Some 10% of L1-mediated retrotranspositions are National Mutation Databases are continuously updated mutation associated with significant genomic deletion in humans depositories, which contain extensive information over the described J. M. Chen1, P. D. Stenson2, M. A. Batzer3, D. N. Cooper2, C. Férec1; genetic heterogeneity of an ethnic group or population. Here, we report 1INSERM (Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale) U613 the construction of the Cypriot (http://www.goldenhelix.org/cypriot) – Génétique Moléculaire et Génétique Epidémiologique, Etablissement and Iranian National Mutation databases (http://www.goldenhelix.org/ Français du Sang – Bretagne, Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Centre iranian), both derived from an academic effort to provide high quality Hospitalier Universitaire, Brest, France, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff up-to-date information on the underlying genetic heterogeneity of University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Department of Biological Sciences, Center inherited disorders in the Cypriot and Iranian populations respectively. for BioModular Multi-Scale Systems, Lousiana State University, Baton Rouge, Both databases have been built and maintained online using the LA, United States. specialized ETHNOS software (Patrinos et al., 2005) and contain Analysis of L1 elements engineered for retrotransposition in cultured brief summaries of the various genetic disorders included within each cells has revealed that ~6% of L1 retrotranspositions resulted in database. Additionally, an easy-to-use query interface provides instant significant deletions of genomic DNA (Gilbert et al. and Symer et al. access to the list and frequencies of the different mutations responsible Cell 2002). The frequency of L1 retrotransposition in humans has been for the inherited disorders in these countries. Furthermore, numerous estimated to be between 1/2 and 1/33. If sizable deletions were to links to the respective Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) accompany even 1-5% of L1 retrotranspositions in vivo, the cumulative entries and, when available, to the locus-specific databases fruitfully effect upon genome structure over evolutionary time would be very integrate the databases content into a single web site. Both databases substantial. An analysis of recently integrated L1Hs Ta elements in the can serve as valuable online tools for molecular genetic testing ofGenomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 362 inherited disorders in these countries and could potentially motivate Pyrosequencing is a real-time sequencing technology that can further investigations of yet unknown genetic diseases in the Cypriot overcome the tediousness of current DNA methylation analysis and Iranian populations. procedures when several CpGs are to be studied. Quantification of the methylation at each cytosine is conducted during the sequencing P1292. Human gene MOB, a member of yet unknown process by analysing the proportion of C and T (or A and G) nucleotide evolutionarily conserved gene family, codes for sphingomyelin after bisulphite treatment. synthase. Several reports have demonstrated the sensitivity and specificity of I. P. Vladychenskaya, L. V. Dergunova, V. G. Dmitrieva, S. A. Limborska; Pyrosequencing for quantifying SNPs. This capacity has been extended Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. to methylation analysis of 2 to 6 successive CpGs in a single run. Prior investigation of human brain cDNA libraries revealed an We sought to improve read-length of this technology to facilitate the evolutionarily conserved gene MOB that has been cloned in silico mapping of differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in the genome. on chromosome 10. Analysing hypothetical primary structure of By using an improved enzyme mix and adding single stranded DNA the transmembrane peptide product proposed for the MOB major binding protein to the reaction, we obtained reproducible results for as transcript we have found it to be identical with the newly describer many as 10 successive CpGs in a single sequencing reaction spanning primary structure of human sphingomyelin synthase 1 (SMS1); now up to 80 nucleotides. A minimum amount of 10 ng of bisulphite treated we consider MOB as a gene encoding SMS1. In human, two yet DNA is necessary to obtain good reproducibility and avoid preferential uncharacterized genes paralogous to MOB (SMS1) were revealed. amplification. These genes termed par1 MOB and par2 MOB are localized on We applied the Pyrosequencing technology to analyse the methylation chromosomes 4 and 10, respectively; together, they represent a novel profile of 4 DMRs in the vicinity of the imprinted genes H19 and IGF2 gene family. MOB, p1 MOB and p2 MOB orthologs of conserved in human lymphocytes and showed that reproducible variations of the genomic structure were found in warm-blooded animals; orthologs of methylation status of consecutive CpGs do exist in these regions.. p2 MOB were also found in D. melanogaster and C. elegans. We have Conclusion: Pyrosequencing is a reliable and straight forward examined MOB (SMS1) transcription activity; expression levels of technology for DNA methylation analysis with several improvements the major MOB transcript (transcript encoding SMS1) were assessed when compared to other existing procedures. among different human tissues by means of semi-quantitive RT-PCR. Comparing to the maximal expression level detected within the brain P1295. Towards automated provision of comparative positional tissues, transcript abundance within kidney is one and a half times less, candidates for deafness and blindness: Oxford grids and the within lung and liver - two times less, within spleen and lymphatic node comparative prediction of orthologues - seven times less. We have also analysed the expression pattern of J. H. Edwards1, S. Gregory2, F. W. Nicholas3; the alternative MOB transcript lacking the longest coding exon VII and 1Biochemistry Dept, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Australian found it to be similar with that of the major transcript. National Genomic Information Service (ANGIS), University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3Reprogen, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Syd- P1293. Structural organization of the human complexin 2 gene ney, Australia. (CPLX2) and aspects of its functional activity. There are many inherited forms of deafness and blindness that have L. V. Dergunova1, N. M. Raevskaya1, I. P. Vladychenskaya1, M. V. Oborina1, A. not yet been characterized at the molecular level. A powerful strategy B. Poltaraus2, S. A. Limborska1; for molecular characterisation of any inherited disorder involves the 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Engelhar- identification of comparative positional candidates from comparative dt's Institute of Molecular Biology RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. maps. Using in vitro and in silico approaches we have characterized the Deafness and blindness are ideal disorders for comparative analysis organization of the human complexin 2 (CPLX2) gene. This encodes as, at any rate in the young, most non-environmental forms are for a protein of 134 amino acid residues, contains five exons, is Mendelian recessives and are likely to block the same pathways in localized on human chromosome 5q35.3, and spans more than 87 all mammals. While RNA analysis offers a more direct approach to kb. We performed in silico analysis of the CPLX2 5' untranslated candidate loci, it depends on biopsies which, for the eye or ear, are region (UTR) and propose an alternative variant of the gene transcript. rarely ethical. Comparative mapping offers an alternative route to likely Compared to the mRNA reported earlier, this transcript bears a partly candidates. altered 5'-UTR associated with the same open reading frame. Both Astute observations on the mouse, cat and dog, combined with CPLX2 transcripts share exons III-V; the alternative transcript is devoid induced mutation in the mouse, provide extensive comparative data for of exons I and II, and includes exon A instead. Exon A is localized identifying the molecular basis of inherited forms of sight and hearing within CPLX2 intron 2 about 7 kb upstream to exon III. Using reverse disorders in humans. transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) we detected both As a step towards automating the identification of comparative positional types of transcripts in human cerebellar mRNA. In silico data suggest candidates, we have developed software for drawing electronic Oxford that two alternative TATA-less promoter regions separated by 74 kb grids and for comparative predictions of orthologues. Grids involving govern the expression of two CPLX2 transcripts. Several potential cat, dog, human, mouse and rat, together with comparative predictions transcription start sites were detected by primer extension for each of orthologues, are viewable at http://oxgrid.angis.org.au. of two alternative CPLX2 transcripts. Activity of the promoter proximal to the translation start site is believed to be mediated by a GAGA- P1296. Loci of recurrent segmental aneuploidy in the genome of box. Analysis of extended CPLX2 transcripts revealed several 15- healthy and mentally retarded subjects detected by Array-CGH LOX-DICE-like elements as well as K-box and GY-box functional sites M. Poot, M. J. Eleveld, H. K. Ploos van Amstel, R. Hochstenbach; within their extended 3'-UTRs. These elements may be involved in UMC Utrecht, 3508 AB Utrecht, The Netherlands. the processes of stabilization and post-transcriptional regulation of Using a 3,700 BAC array we performed Array-CGH on over 100 the gene activity. Structurally, the organization of CPLX2 transcripts is children suspected of chromosomal disorders and some of their conserved in human, mouse and rat. unaffected parents. Per individual we found on average statistically significant aberrant signals with 28 BACs. In 6% of our patients some P1294. Improvement of the sensitivity of DNA methylation of these signals represented pathogenetically relevant aberrations. analysis using the Pyrosequencing real time sequencing In the remainder of our subjects these aberrant signals appeared technology independent of clinical symptoms and occurred with a frequency of 2% J. M. Dupont1,2, J. Tost2, H. Jammes3, I. G. Gut2; to 49%. In the patient and in the healthy subject subset of our study 1Laboratoire d'Histologie Embryologie Cytogénétique, CHU Cochin Port Royal, population the same BACs occurred with similar frequencies as loci of AP/HP-Université Paris 5, Paris, France, 2Centre National de Génotypage, recurrent segmental aneuploidy (RSA). In total more than 500 BACs Evry, France, 3Génomique et Epigénétique des Pathologie Placentaires, IN- indicated loci of RSA, which covered in total 2.1% of the euchromatin. SERM-Université René Descartes, IFR Alfred Jost, CHU Cochin Port Royal, Approximately 25% of loci of RSA occurred as duplications only, 37% Paris, France. as deletions only, and 38% as both deletions and duplications. TheGenomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 363 genomic distribution of loci of RSA varied widely among autosomes, The combination of computational prediction of alternative splicing with a preponderant location in the Giemsa-light, gene-rich bands. events with high throughput experimental verification facilitates the Approximately 30% of loci of RSA contained no genes at all, 8% efficient detection of tissue and tumor specific transcripts. contained only enzymes, and the remainder mixtures of genes from different classes, including numerous transcription factors. We P1299. In vitro transfer of ceruloplasmin polypeptide into rat conclude that loci of RSA occur frequently in the general population. mitochondrial matrix Since loci of RSA segregated from healthy parents to affected children, A. Vasin1,2, S. Klotchenko1,2, N. Platonova2, N. Tsymalenko2, L. Puchkova1,2; we speculate that they confer no apparent clinical consequences, and 1St-Petersburg State Polytechnical University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federa- may be neutral to evolutionary pressures. tion, 2Research Institute of Experimental Medicine RAMS, St-Petersburg, Rus- sian Federation. P1297. Different CFTR genotypes induce dissimilar expression Ceruloplasmin (Cp) is a key participant of copper and iron metabolism. patterns in CF putative modifier genes There is a single copy of Cp gene in haploid genome, but its tissue- S. Gambardella1, M. Biancolella1, M. D'Apice1, F. Amati1, F. Sangiuolo1, G. specific isoforms of transcripts and proteins were found at different Castaldo2, P. Pignatti3, F. Salvatore2, G. Novelli1; stages of ontogenesis. Research is devoted to search of novel Cp 1Tor Vergata, Department of Biopathology, Rome, Italy, 2University Federico II, isoforms in rat cells. Cp polypeptides were found in mitochondrial Department of Biochemistry, Naples, Italy, 3Sect Biol e Genetics, Verona, Italy. matrix of brain, liver, testicles and mammary gland, but not in heart and Cystic fibrosis (CF; #219700) is a disorder caused by mutations in the spleen. It was also shown that Cp isoform (mtCp), not sequestered into CFTR gene. Although a strong genotype-phenotype relationship in secretory pathway membranes, was synthesized in cytoplasm. In vitro CF has been observed, significant clinical variability exists among CF [125I]mtCp is transferred to mitochondrial matrix. It was registered patients carrying the same genotype or the same class of mutations. based on the data of radioautography of immunoprecipitates, analyzed While some of the variability is undoubtedly caused by environmental using SDS-PAGE. The transfer is ATP energy consumption process; factors, genes other than CFTR likely modify phenotypes. Even if a it concentrationally depends on the presence of soluble factors certain number of putative gene modifiers have been investigated in of cytoplasm. Mitochondria swelling, valinomycin and oligomycin CF, none are clearly substantiated. treatments, as well as removal of labile copper ions and copper ions We built an home made cDNA microarray containing a large number of active centers from Cp molecule have no influence on Cp transfer. of genes involved with intracellular processes in cells where CFTR Both translocators of outer and inner mitochondrial membranes is normally expressed and genes occurring in cells that respond to participate in the transfer, but [I125]Cp is also successfully transferred abnormalities caused by CFTR defect (i.e. inflammatory, ion flux), to mytoplasts, obtained after digitonin treatment. Computer analysis to identify genes and pathways interacting or compensating CFTR of rat chromosomal Cp gene revealed the existence of open reading functions. We studied the expression profiles of a total of 150 selected frame (75 bp) with exon 3 in intron 2 and the upstream localized candidate genes in two different human epithelial bronchial-derived cell potential promoter. Predicted Cp-mRNA isoform corresponds to mtCp. lines (CuFi1, F508del/F508del; CuFi3, F508del/R553X). We observed RT-PCR analysis with specific primers for mtCp-mRNA detected the change in the expression in 40 genes (27%) of the examined active predicted isoform in liver and brain, but not in heart and spleen. Direct in the inflammatory response, in protein degradation, in molecular sequencing of PCR-product showed that mtCp-mRNA contained intron chaperone actions, in ion flux and in CFTR physical interaction. A few 2 region. of these, shared the same expression pattern in the two cell lines (i.e. Supported by RBRF03-04-48748;Integration I0064. S100A8, S100A9, SMAD3, SMAD4, ENaC), whereas others showed a different expression pattern (AP1M2, AP3B1, AP1S1). These data P1300. Structural and functional characterization of the human demonstrate that different CFTR mutations cause diverse genomic SOX14 promoter response, and indicate strategies to develop therapeutic targets that J. Djurovic, I. Petrovic, M. Seovic, M. Stevanovic; may benefit specific patients with disease associated to a particular Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and genotype. Montenegro. SOX14 is a member of SOX gene family of putative transcriptional P1298. High throughput experimental verification of predicted regulators implicated in the control of diverse developmental tissue and tumor specific splice isoforms processes. Although SOX gene expression patterns suggest tissue- O. Mueller1, D. Zink2, S. Haas3, R. Salowsky1, B. Korn2; and development stage-specific control of gene expression, little is 1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2RZPD Ressourcenzentrum für known about mechanisms responsible for expression of these genes. Genomforschung, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular In order to elucidate the molecular mechanisms controlling the Genetics, Berlin, Germany. expression of the human SOX14 gene, we have determined the Any failure or error in the splicing control mechanism can be transcription start site using primer extension method and carried involved in a number of pathological processes, such as cancer or out the structural and functional analysis of the regulatory region neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, splice isoforms that are responsible for its expression. Our result indicates that the transcription disease specific could serve as excellent diagnostic markers, which of the SOX14 initiates at the single major site at the guanine residue are easily identifiable by PCR. 251 bp upstream of the start codon, although the existence of a minor A computational prediction strategy was used based on the genomic transcription start site can not be excluded. mapping of EST consensus sequences and library annotation provided To identify the DNA regions responsible for the control of SOX14 gene in the GeneNest database. Out of 427 genes with at least one tissue transcription we have analyzed the ability of truncated fragments from specific transcript as well as 1120 genes showing tumor specific the 5' flanking region of the SOX14 gene to drive expression of CAT isoforms, a subset of predicted isoforms were experimentally verified reporter gene. Functional mapping of the 5' regulatory region revealed by an RT-PCR screening approach. An experimental strategy has that the sequence between -470 and +201 bp is essential for minimal been set-up that allows to screen expression of genes in 112 different basal activity of the SOX14 promoter. human tissues of multiple developmental stages and cell lines. Within We have identified that NF-Y transcriptional factor binds to the CCAAT this project, the electrophoretic separation of RT-PCR products turned box motif present in the regulatory region of the SOX14 promoter. By out to be the bottleneck impeding the switch from a medium to a high mutation analysis we have shown that CCAAT box motif present in throughput strategy. To circumvent the limitations of slab gel analysis, the SOX14 promoter plays a functional role in the transcription of this a lab prototype of an automated on-chip electrophoresis system that gene. allows high throughput analysis of DNA fragments was implemented in the workflow. In our experimental set-up, we analyzed RT-PCR samples on 4 x 96 well plates within a defined sequence of consecutive one- on-one measurements. The high throughput experimental verification of computationally predicted tissue specific isoforms revealed a high success rate in confirming their expression in the respective tissue.Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 364 P1301. Functional characterization of the human SOX3 treatment by the neuroprotector Semax (synthetic polypeptide Met- promoter: Identification of transcription factors implicated in Glu-His-Phe-Pro-Gly-Pro; its N-terminus represents a fragment of basal promoter activity adrenocorticotropic hormone). We have analyzed the effect of Semax N. Kovacevic Grujicic, M. Mojsin, A. Krstic, M. Stevanovic; upon BDNF expression within cerebellum and forebrain cortex of the Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and rats subjected to global brain ischemia. After 15 minutes of irreversible Montenegro. bilateral common carotid artery occlusion the animals were subjected Sox genes constitute a large family of developmentally regulated genes to intraperitoneal injection of Semax or 0,9% NaCl. Animals were involved in the decision of cell fates during development and implicated decapitated 30 minutes /1 hour / 2 hours after the operation. Sham- in the control of diverse developmental processes. Sox3, an X-linked operated animals were used as a control. BDNF mRNA expression member of the family, is expressed in the brain from the earliest stages level was assessed by semi-quantitive PCR. Under experimental of development. It is considered to be one of the earliest neural markers conditions, the sham-operated and ischemized rats treated with 0,9% in vertebrates playing the role in specifying neuronal fate. The aim of NaCl did not demonstrate the difference between BDNF expression this study has been to determine and characterize the promoter of the levels within investigated brain regions. BDNF expression within the human SOX3 gene and to elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying cerebellum of the ischemized rats also was not influenced by Semax. the regulation of its expression. We have identified the transcription At the same time, comparing to the ischemized animals treated with start point and carried out the structural and functional analysis of the 0,9% NaCl, expression level of BDNF within forebrain cortex of the regulatory region responsible for SOX3 expression in NT2/D1 cell line. animals treated with Semax was increased. Maximum of the BDNF Using promoter-reporter constructs we have determined the minimal expression was detected within the forebrain cortex 30 minutes after SOX3 promoter region that confers the basal promoter activity. We occlusion. Possibly, therapeutic effect of Semax is mediated by the have investigated in detail the functional properties of three conserved increased production of BDNF within brain cells. motifs within the core promoter sequence that bind transcription factors Sp1, USF and NF-Y. By mutational analysis we have shown that all P1304. Gene Filter: a software tool for high throughput sequence three sites are of functional relevance for constitutive SOX3 expression selection and analysis. in NT2/D1 cells. Taken together, data presented in this paper suggest A. Weinhaeusel, A. Kriegner, E. Dilaveroglu, I. Visne, K. Vierlinger, C. Noe- that transcription factors such as Sp1, USF and NF-Y could function as hammer; key regulators for the basal activation of the human SOX3 gene. Seibersdorf research, Molecular Diagnostic Unit A-2444 Seibersdorf, Austria, Seibersdorf, Austria. P1302. Interspecies variance of Alu elements in the galectin-1 For research organisations with limited bioinformatics support, there gene correlates with splicing isoforms pattern. are time restrains in the analysis of large numbers of target sequences. N. Bruzzese, F. Censi, D. Taruscio; Gene Filter is a user-friendly java software for high throughput Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. sequence selection and analysis for multiple purposes such as the LGALS-1 gene codifies the 14-kDa galactose-binding lectin galectin- design of customized oligo microarrays. The current release includes 1. The protein own multiple cellular functions spanning cell-cell and Gene Finder and Sequence Extractor. cell-matrix interaction, cell differentiation, pre-mRNA maturation, and Gene Finder is a search engine that queries NCBI and UCSC apoptosis induction. Exon skip alternative mRNA of the gene was databases for gene related information, chromosomal coordinates and found in human tissues as well as in normal and tumor cells. Alternative strand orientation for a large number of user defined search identifiers isoform bears premature truncation codon that might influence protein such as GenBank, RefSeq, UniGene, GeneSymbol, CytLocus or expression. nucleotide sequences. Search terms are either loaded from plain text Previously we suggested that the presence of Alu-S elements in the files or directly pasted into the program window. Results are displayed human gene, one upstream and two others downstream the skipped in the program window. Several user defined selection features allow exon give rise to a stem-loop configuration of the primary transcript additional filtering of search results. affecting mRNA maturation, due to their arrangement in opposite Sequence Extractor is an automated sequence deriving routine that directions (Bruzzese et al., ESHG 2004). Here we report comparative uses the strengths of UCSC Table Browser and NCBI Map viewer to analysis of gene expression that further underlines how Alus pairing extract multiple sequences and annotations for Gene Finder defined drives folding of mRNA and may cause exon skipping. genome regions. Human gene expression pattern shows normal product, a shorter one Userfriendly batch processing of hundreds of sequences can be lacking the skipped exon and a larger isoform, likely an intermediate performed very efficiently for high throughput sequence analysis. mRNA which include introns or part of them. Further program packages for the design of gene expression-, SNP-, In monkey the galectin-1 gene possess one Alu-S in the upstream CGH-, and methylation microarrays are under development. intron, but three in the downstream intron all belonging to the S family and also oriented in inverse direction with respect to the first P1305. Simple solutions for multiplexed real-time PCR with one. Expression pattern displays normal and exon-missing mRNAs, Promega’s new Real-Time PCR System however it shows two larger transcripts, presumably explained by G. Madsen; an augmented potentiality of combinations between the Alus to form Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, United States. secondary structures. Join Promega for the introduction of our new Real-Time PCR On the contrary, mouse posses only the Alu element in 5'- and none Technology, Plexor™ System. Based on the expanded genetic in the 3'-intron, however exon sequence are highly comparable. alphabet, the system allows simple design of multiplexed real-time PCR Noticeably, gene expression completely lost the alternative isoforms. assays for genotyping and quantitative analysis. Data will be presented on new assay designed for RNA or cDNA gene expression analysis, P1303. Semax increases BDNF expression in ischemized rat SNP genotyping, mutation detection and detection of bacteria/virus. brain. Understand how the system will simplify your assay development, V. V. Stavchansky1, L. V. Dergunova1, A. Y. Botsina2, I. A. Platonova2, T. Tvo- allow you to develop high performance primers on our website, give rogova2, E. F. Shaykhutdinova1, E. L. Voloshenyuk1, V. I. Skvortsova2, S. A. you the ability to run high multiplexed quantitation with one chemistry Limborska1; on any real-time PCR instrument and enhance your data analysis with 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian the straightforward system software. State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. Neurotrophic factors (e. g. brain-derived neurotrophic factor, BDNF) P1306. Impact of genetic polymorphisms on birth weight are known as natural neuroprotectors envolved in proliferation, R. J. Sram, J. Dejmek, B. Binkova, I. Chvatalova, I. Solansky; differentiation and survival of neuronal and glial cells. Analysis of Institute of Experimental Medicine AS CR and Health Institute of Central Bohe- neurotrophins mRNA expression is a convenient tool to assess mia, Prague 4, Czech Republic. therapeutic efficiency of the anti-stroke drugs. It was revealed that All studies from Poland and the Czech Republic indicate the BDNF expression was increased in rat cultured glial cells under relationship between ambient air pollution and an increase of DNAGenomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 365 adducts in maternal and cord blood and/or in placentas, as well as analysis was performed using the gene expression assays on demand the relationship of these biomarkers to the development of newborns. (Applied Biosystems). For the comparison of HGSM data and RT-PCR Therefore we studied the impact of genetic polymorphisms on a Pearson-correlation of 0.92 to 0.63 was found for the established pregnancy outcome as a part of EC CHILDRENGENONETWORK cancer genes, e.g. EGFR, erbB2, estrogen receptor α (ESR1), project. DNA was isolated from placenta samples collected in progesterone receptor (PGR), urokinase-type plasminogen activator polluted regions (Teplice and Prague) and control region (Prachatice). (PLAU, uPA), and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (SERPINE1, PAI). Polymorphisms of metabolic genotypes (GSTM1, GSTP1, GSTT1, In conclusion, the novel 1700 chemiluminescent microarray analyzer EPHX3, EPHX4, CYP1A1 Ile/Val and CYP1A1-MspI) were determined generates highly reliable and accurate data when performing whole in 1014 placenta samples. The consequence of genotypes to birth genome expression profiling. Therefore, highly sensitive and specific weight as well as category LBW+prematurity (low birth weight < 2500 microarrays may become a useful tool for clinical applications. g, prematurity < 37 weeks) was determined. Using multiple regression analysis, CYP1A1-MspI mutation decreased the newborn birth weight P1309. Different quantitative traits of gene expression in of smoking mothers in Teplice ( -315 g, P<0.05). GSTM1 nulll genotype idiopathic dilated, hypertrofic and restrictive cardiomyopathy significantly increased LBW+prematurity in all three groups (AOR = N. Marziliano, M. Grasso, E. Porcu, M. Pasotti, E. Disabella, C. Lucchelli, C. 1.33, P<0.05, especially at Teplice AOR = 1.54, P=0.01 and Teplice- Pellegrini, M. Viganò, L. Tavazzi, E. Arbustini; nonsmokers AOR = 1.53, P<0.05), CYP1A1 Ile/Val polymorphism IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. in smoking mothers in the first trimester (AOR = 2.89, P<0.05) and Background. The ability to quantitate the expression levels of specific smoking mothers in the first trimester at Teplice (AOR = 2.91, P<0.05). genes has always been central to any research into gene function Other significant predictors were exposure to carc-PAHs, maternal and gene-to-gene interactions. We tested the hypothesis that different smoking, passive smoking. Combination of different polymorphisms is gene expression of cytoskeleton, contractile proteins MMP and further analyzed. Our results indicate that genetic polymorphisms may related TIMP characterise idiopathic dilated, hypertrofic and restrictive affect birth weight in newborn children, if combined with air pollution cardiomyopathy, demonstrating that gene expression profiling of and/or lifestyle (smoking). myocardium may meet clinical parameters and is feasible in the Supported by the Czech Ministry of Environment VaV/740/5/03 and by cardiological setting. the EC QLK4-CT-2002-02198. Material and Methods. Total RNA was extracted from 70 myocardial samples (both left and right ventricles) obtained from hearts excised P1307. Analysis of iNOS expression in rats under brain at cardiac transplantation (San Matteo hospital). cDNAs were experimental ischemia analysed by real time PCR for the following genes: MYH7, MYBC3, V. G. Dmitrieva1, L. V. Dergunova1, A. Y. Botsina2, I. A. Platonova2, T. Tvorogo- TNNT2, ANGPT2, GAA, TIMP1, TIMP4, MMP1, MMP2, MMP9, va2, E. F. Shaykhutdinova1, E. Torshina1, V. I. Skvortsova2, S. A. Limborska1; MMP10, MMP11, MMP12, MMP14. The between-group differences 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian were analysed using the by Mann-Whitney U test. Age, gender, and State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. hemodynamic differences of the samples did not affect the profile’s Stroke is the second or third leading case of death in many countries. accuracy in stratified analyses. We also correlated the gene defects Although the underlying mechanisms of this disease are not fully with the expression patterns. understood, it has been shown that nitric oxide (NO) overproduction Results and Conclusions. We found a substantial over expression and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) overexpression play pattern of the cytoskeletal/contractile proteins MYH7, MYBPC3, important roles in producing injury caused by hemorrhagic shock. To TNNT2 in the groups but with a number of quantitative differences. investigate the profile of iNOS expression during the first 24 hours Moreover, the over expression of ANGPT2, GAA, TIMP2 and TIMP4 after ischemia we took advantage of the experimental model of the profiles the hypertrophic pattern while the over expression of MMP1, global brain ischemia in rats. Ischemized animals were decapitated MMP2, MMP9, MMP10, MMP11, MMP12 and in particular MMP14 30 minutes /1 hour / 2 hours / 4 hours / 8 hours / 12 hours / 24 hours characterises the dilatative pattern (p<0.01). We also found that gene after irreversible bilateral common carotid artery occlusion. Forebrain profiling is specific to disease stage, and it is unaffected by differences cortex iNOS mRNA expression level was assessed by RT-PCR. iNOS in clinical characteristics. Finally, these studies may prompt further low-level expression was first observed 8 hours after the operation; we pharmacological investigations in identifying specific pathways for did not detect any expression activity of the gene immediately after the therapeutic targeting. operation. Within 12 and 24 hours after the operation the level of iNOS expression was increased insignificantly. Thus we demonstrate that P1310. Non-enzymatic labeling of nucleic acids using under the experimental conditions used the level of iNOS expression The Universal Linkage System (ULS™) in DNA Microarray is low throughout first 24 hours after the operation. applications S. Snoeijers, A. McGeever, D. Postma, T. Van der Lende; P1308. Validation of the novel chemiluminescent microarrays KREATECH Biotechnology B.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands. using real-time RT-PCR The Universal Linkage System (ULS™) is a (platinum-based) labeling D. Kemming1, N. Tidow2, B. H. Brandt1; technology that allows labeling of biomolecules like RNA, DNA and 1University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany, 2GeneSys Laboratory, Dermabel proteins with a large variety of widely used haptens and fluorophores. GmbH, Muenster, Germany. In DNA microarray applications the ULS™ system demonstrates one Over the recent years, gene expression profiling has become a of its key advantages: direct labeling of nucleic acids in their natural promising tool for the risk assessment and therapy prediction of cancer. form, e.g. genomic DNA, total RNA or its mRNA fraction. In contrast to the fluorescent technology used by other platforms, Current labeling methods in microarray experiments rely on enzymatic the novel Applied Biosystems 1700 chemiluminescent microarray conversion of the original target into labeled cDNA or aRNA. Apart from analyzer uses a chemiluminescent substrate following digoxigenin- being time consuming, costly and error-prone, valuable information is labeling and incubation with anti-digoxigenin-alkaline phosphatase lost due to bias introduced by the enzymes. Using ULS™ to directly antibody. Chemiluminescent detection increases the sensitivity of label natural targets circumvents this problem and also gives major expression analysis, and the use of 60mer oligonucleotides supports advantages in studies to e.g. splice variants or microRNAs. Here data high specificity. will be shown in which the ULS™ arrayCGH fluorescent labeling kit We have tested the precision and accuracy of this novel microarray has been evaluated for direct genomic DNA labeling used for BAC system. Total RNA was isolated from fresh frozen tumour samples of 7 array hybridizations and compared with standard enzymatic random- patients with ductal invasive breast cancer. All samples were analyzed prime labeling. with the Applied Biosystems Human Genome Survey Microarray Since the available amount of total RNA can be limiting, some (HGSM). Technical replicates (n=5) showed high reproducibility of the applications require linear target amplification. ULS™ offers the array results. Real-time RT-PCR was used as an independent method possibility to enzymatically generate unmodified linear amplified aRNA to validate the gene expression levels found by microarray analysis. For samples which can be used or labeled as required. Importantly, by real-time RT-PCR 71 breast cancer-related genes were selected and avoiding the use of modified nucleotides in the IVT reaction, RNAGenomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 366 samples will be amplified with much higher yields and better size P1313. The Regulation of Spermatogonial Stem Cell-Specific distribution of the amplified product. Data will be presented where the Genes by Piwil2 Protein ULS™ aRNA fluorescent labeling kit is compared to a commercial J. H. Lee, W. Engel, K. Nayernia; aminoallyl labeling product. Institute of Human Genetics, Goettingen, Germany. Although spermatogenesis is essential for reproduction, little is known P1311. Segmental duplications of human chromosome 8p23.1: about spermatogonial stem cells. These cells provide the basis for multiple copies of a new gene showing variability in copy spermatogenesis throughout adult life by undergoing self-renewal and number in humans and other primates by providing progeny that differentiate into spermatozoa. Members of N. Bosch, L. Armengol, X. Estivill; piwi gene family play essential role in self-renewal of germline stem Genes and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG); Experi- cells. Piwil2 is one of three mouse homologues of piwi. Piwil2 was mental and Health Sciences Department, Pompeu Fabra University (UPF); found in germ cells of adult testis, suggesting that this gene functions Barcelona Biomedical Research Park (PRBB), Barcelona, Spain. in spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal. In order to find molecular Segmental duplications (SD) are paralogous segments of high mechanisms underlying stem cell activity, in vitro gain of function sequence identity that account for about 5% of the human genome. cell culture model was established. Messenger RNAs isolated from Due to the high level of identity, these regions are susceptible to cells expressing Piwil2 and mRNAs isolated from cells without Piwil2 illegitimate recombination. Genomic architecture of cytogenetic band expression were compared using a stem cell array technique. It was 8p23.1 is of special interest due to the presence of low copy repeats shown that Piwil2 modulates expression of stem cell specific genes, located at their boundaries. This particular organization increases including Pdgfrb, Slc2a1, Gja7and spermatogonial cell surface markers the vulnerability of the region to undergo rearrangements, such as a Thy-1 and Itga6. These molecules play essential role in non-germinal polymorphic inversion found in about 25% of the general population. stem cells. In this study, we focus on a multiple copy gene distributed in different clusters along the 8p23.1 low copy repeats. Different polymorphic P1314. The role of the general transcription factor NF-Y in the clusters in copy number of a novel gene with unknown function, have regulation of the expression of human Sox3 gene been detected by in silico analysis of the 8p23.1 region. These results A. Krstic, N. Kovacevic Grujicic, M. Mojsin, M. Stevanovic; have been confirmed by pulsed field gel electrophoresis in several Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and subjects of the general population, as well as in chimpanzee, gorilla Montenegro. and orangutan. However, although it is also present in great apes, the Early neurogenesis and neuronal differentiation are precisely controlled organization and copy number of the different clusters are significantly by a series of genes. Sox3 is expressed in the brain from the earliest different between humans and great apes. Further exploration of the stages of development. It is considered to be one of the earliest region 8p23.1, and specially these gene clusters, is of great interest, markers in vertebrates playing the role in specifying neuronal fate. due to its possible evolutionary implications. Moreover, gene expansion In order to elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation phenomena has been described as a main evolutionary force driving of the human SOX3 gene expression, computer prediction software specific traits of the human lineage. Therefore, a better characterization was used to search the matrix database and to identify potential of the human chromosome 8p23.1 region, taken as an example of transcription binding sites in the human SOX3 promoter. The number gene expansion, should lead to a better understanding of common of putative consensus binding sites for known transcription factors was mechanisms underlying evolution of primates and humans. identified in the 5’ noncoding region of the human SOX3 gene. The presence of three evolutionary conserved CCAAT boxes, representing P1312. 'arrayCGHbase': a freely available and versatile tool for the putative binding sites for the general transcription factor NF-Y, data mining and visualisation of arrayCGH and SNP chip data suggests the potential importance of this factor in the regulation of the B. Menten1, F. Pattyn1, K. De Preter1, P. Robbrecht1, G. Mortier1, A. De Paepe1, human SOX3 gene expression. EMSA and “supershift” experiments S. Van Vooren2, J. Vermeesch3, Y. Moreau2, B. De Moor2, F. Speleman1, J. are performed to prove the specificity of the NF-Y binding to all three Vandesompele1; identified CCAAT control elements. 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, Gh- To examine whether the putative CCAAT box is functional, site directed ent, Belgium, 2Department of Electrotechnical Engineering, Faculty of Applied mutagenesis was done. The ability of the mutant and its wild-type Sciences, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, Heverlee, counterpart to drive expression of the cat reporter gene was compared Belgium, 3Center for Human Genetics, Leuven University Hospital, Herestraat in NT2/D1 cell line. We have shown that mutagenesis of the CCAAT 49, Leuven, Belgium. box (-101 bp to -105 bp) reduced the expression of the reporter The availability of the human genome sequence as well as the large gene more than 5-fold when compared to the wild-type expression. number of physically accessible oligonucleotides, cDNA, and BAC This result indicates that the CCAAT box motif present in the SOX3 clones across the entire genome has triggered and accelerated the use promoter plays a functional role in the transcription of this gene. of several platforms for analysis of DNA copy number changes including microarray comparative genomic hybridization (arrayCGH) and SNP P1315. Microrrearrangements of human chromosome 15q11-q13 chip analysis. One of the challenges inherent to this new technology in families with autistic disorder is the management of large numbers of data points generated in C. Cerrato, M. Ogorelkova, M. Gratacós, X. Estivill; each individual experiment. We have developed arrayCGHbase, Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain. a comprehensive analysis platform for arrayCGH experiments. Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder exhibiting complex genetic ArrayCGHbase consists of a MIAME (Minimal Information About a etiology. Human chromosome 15q11-q13 is a candidate region Microarray Experiment) supportive MySQL database underlying a data to autism based on linkage, linkage disequilibrium, cytogenetic mining web tool, to store, analyze, interpret, compare, and visualize abnormalities, and maternal duplications at this locus in patients arrayCGH results in a uniform and user-friendly format. Following with autism and autism-related phenotype. Chromosome 15q11-q13 its flexible design, arrayCGHbase is compatible with all existing and contains several imprinted genes expressed in the brain, including small forthcoming arrayCGH platforms. Data can be exported in a multitude nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) genes, and is rich in segmental duplications. of formats, including BED files to map copy number information on the These sequences promote fairly frequent 15q11-q13 rearrangements genome using the Ensembl or UCSC genome browser. ArrayCGHbase resulting in Prader-Willi syndrome, Angelman syndrome, mental is web based and platform independent and therefore allows users retardation and autism spectrum disorder. Among plausible candidate to access the analysis suite through the internet or a local intranet genes for autism in this region is the cluster of the gamma-aminobutiric after installation on a private server. We will present the major features acid (GABA) receptor genes. In order to detect possible duplicon- of the tool as well as illustrate the potential for custom and future mediated submicroscopic rearrangements of 15q11-q13, we have options. ArrayCGHbase is freely available at http://medgen.ugent.be/ performed the analysis of microsatellite markers in Spanish autistic arrayCGHbase/. families, and multiplex families of autistic probands from the Autism Genetic Resource Exchange (AGRE) and control samples. We have found frequent microduplications at 15q11.2 region and at GABA locusGenomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 367 in autistic patients and control samples. Two patients have a paternally P1318. Prioritization of positional candidate genes in common inherited microduplication between the genes GABRA5 and GABRG3 complex diseases using gene networks whereas other two patients have a maternally inherited duplication L. Franke1, L. Fokkens1, M. Egmont-Petersen2, R. Malik2, H. H. M. J. van Ba- within the D15S1021 marker. All the other duplications are the novo kel1, C. Wijmenga1; microrearrangements. Using quantitative PCR, PFGE, additional 1Complex Genetics Section, DBG-Dept Medical Genetics, University Medical microsatellites and single nucleotide polymorphisms in the region we Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Large Distributed Databases Group, are currently defining the size of these rearrangements, which should Computer Sciences Department, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. help to delineate the relationship between 15q11-q13 alterations and Although the majority of common diseases are complex, resulting from autistic disorder. many different genes with weak effects, there will only be a limiting number of molecular pathways contributing to disease aetiology. P1316. Transcriptional activation via bidirectional RNA Linkage studies have led to the identification of considerable numbers polymerase II elongation over a silent transposon promoter of susceptibility loci, but lack behind in pinpointing true candidate B. Conrad; genes from these regions because they usually span 10s of Mb’s. To Dept. of Genetic Medicine & Development, University of Geneva Medical aid in the identification of causative genes we propose a prioritization School, Switzerland. method for positional candidate genes, by assuming that the majority Transcriptional interference denotes negative cis-effects between of causative genes are functionally closely related. promoters. Here we show that it can act positively. Bidirectional We used a Bayesian framework to generate a gene network, based RNA polymerase II (pol II) elongation over the silent HERV-K18 upon data from GO, KEGG, BIND, HPRD, several protein-protein promoter representing 104 similar promoters genomewide activates interactions experiments, approximately 6,000 microarray experiments transcription. In tandem constructs, an upstream promoter activates and data-mining results from PubMed abstracts. We tested the gene HERV-K18 transcription, which is abolished by a polyA signal in- network in over 80 heritable disorders for which at least three disease between, and restored by polyA signal mutants. TATA-box mutants in genes have been identified. Artificial susceptibility loci (~10 Mb) were the upstream promoter reduce HERV-K18 transcription. Experiments constructed around each causative gene and the gene network was with the same promoters face to face produce similar effects. A small used to predict per disorder per locus the positional candidate genes. promoter deletion partially restores HERV-K18 transcription, consistent For nearly half of the disorders the analysis of the loci using the gene with activation resulting from repressor repulsion by the elongating pol network performed well, i.e. the true causative genes were identified II. Transcriptional elongation over this class of intragenic promoters from the artificial linkage regions. will generate regulated sense-antisense transcripts, or alternatively We have shown that by assuming that causative genes in a specific initiating transcripts, thus expanding the diversity of mechanisms disorder are usually functionally related, we are capable of predicting capable of organismal complexity. the correct positional candidate genes when analyzing susceptibility loci. This method therefore could be valuable for analyzing common P1317. Genome-wide re-sequencing using Cloned Single- disease loci in which the causative genes have not yet been Molecule ArraysTM identified. S. T. Bennett; Solexa Limited, Saffron Walden, United Kingdom. P1319. Expression profiles of the recovering gut in coeliac Revolutionary new technologies capable of transforming the economics disease patients points towards the molecular aetiology of sequencing are providing unprecedented opportunities for whole B. Diosdado1, H. van Bakel1, M. C. Wapenaar1, L. Franke1, J. W. R. Meijer2, C. genome re-sequencing, as well as genome-wide transcription, J. J. Mulder3, C. Wijmenga1; epigenomics and genome structure analyses. 1Complex Genetics Section, DBG-Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Medi- Solexa’s single-molecule array technology for whole-genome cal Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Department of Pathology, Rijn- sequencing promises minimal (one-tube) sample preparation, ultra state Hospital, Arnhem, The Netherlands, 3Department of Gastroenterology, VU high feature densities and greatly reduced costs, and is ultimately Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. capable of reaching up to five orders of magnitude improved efficiency Coeliac disease (CD) is a common autoimmune disorder affecting over current methods. To enable single-molecule methods, we have the small intestine, and patients show an immunological response developed a very robust four-colour DNA sequencing-by-synthesis to the common food protein gluten, which is present in wheat. They technology that employs reversible terminators with removable suffer from severe malabsorption due to a dramatic restructuring of fluorescence. This novel sequencing biochemistry has now been the mucosa, but on a gluten-free diet they show clinical improvement shown to support up to 25 cycles with high fidelity, both in solution and accompanied by gradual recovery of the mucosa, as judged by the on surfaces. A 25-mer read length represents a key milestone towards sequential disappearance of the disease’s hallmarks (villus atrophy, accurate human whole genome re-sequencing in that 25 bases permits crypt hyperplasia, and lymphocytosis). alignment to the human reference sequence, as shown by a recent We performed microarray expression profiling on duodenal biopsy study conducted in silico by Solexa. samples from 48 CD patients, across all stages of remission, and 21 To enable earlier applications of our sequencing platform, we have control individuals to gain insight into the molecular pathology and the chosen to leverage our proprietary sequencing biochemistry into driving genetic factors. cloned single-molecule arrays, which are formed using the surface- Gene-expression profiling yielded 118 differentially expressed genes amplification method developed by Manteia SA. We have made (p<0.05), of which 78 were up-regulated and 40 down-regulated. These significant progress in the preparation of such cluster arrays from genes can be grouped into a limited number of different processes. randomly cut genomic DNA samples and in adapting our single- In general, remission is a gradual process leading to down-regulation molecule-compatible surface chemistry to improving the methodology. of immune-related genes and up-regulation of genes involved in re- The clusters arrays have been used with our sequencing-by-synthesis establishing the normal homeostasis of intestinal mucosa. The picture technology, a fluorescence microscope and automated fluidics to that emerges is that CD is not only an inflammatory condition that sequence small genomes. Our current capabilities in this area will be affects the absorption of nutrients, but that underlying this impairment described, highlighting the number of features analysed, attainable is the lack of terminal differentiation of the enterocytes. Many of the read length and the measured sequencing accuracy. clinical features and complications of CD can be directly linked to molecular pathways highlighted in our study. Interestingly, some of these genes are located under linkage peaks shared between other autoimmune disorders and CD, suggesting these genes might be implicated in common pathways and considered as potential primary genes in autoimmune disorders.Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 368 P1320. Identification of transcription start sites in retinal The products of the GLI gene family translate signals of the sonic expressed genes hedgehog protein (SHH) into specific patterns of gene expression. R. E. Carpio1, V. Roni1, W. Raffelsberger2, A. Mukhopadhyay3, B. Wissinger1; Their co-ordinated function appears to determine a GLI-code which, 1Molecular Genetics Laboratory, University Eye Hospital, Tuebingen, Germany, in the limb, directs pattern formation in posterior-anterior direction. Tuebingen, Germany, 2Genetics and Molecular and Cellular Biology, IGBMC, Factors controlling the localized and timely expression of GLI genes Strasbourg, France, 3Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Cen- are unknown. tre Nijmegen,, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. We report the identification and functional analysis of cis-regulatory The aim of this study is the identification of transcription initiation elements controlling expression of GLI3. sites of two retinal expressed genes RDH12 and SLC24A2 in order to The genomic sequence upstream of exon 1of human GLI3 is predicted evaluate the reliability of 5´ ends provided by refseq database entries. to contain a promoter sequence. By deletion analysis, we identified a RDH12 codes for a photoreceptor specific retinal-dehydrogenase 300 bp minimal promoter region with a high capacity for transcriptional and is implicated in Leber congenital amaurosis. SLC24A2 codes activation of a luciferase reporter gene in cell culture. To assay the for a potassium-dependent sodium-calcium exchanger in cone involvement of trans-active factors, predicted binding sites within this photoreceptor. region are modified by mutagenesis. Our experimental method employed EST sequence database Comparison of the human, mouse and fugu genomic GLI3 sequences mining and cross-species comparisons to perform in silico assembly showed regions of very high conservancy residing in intronic regions. and analysis of 5´ transcript termini. In addition mRNA from human Three such segments were tested for their potential to regulate retina was used for Cap Finder RACE experiments to study and luciferase expression in cell culture. Two segments differing in these characterize the 5´ end of the genes of interest. This led us to define properties were further analyzed for their ability to control time and additional transcribed sequences extending to the 5´of the reference localization of beta-galactosidase reporter gene expression in sequence entries of the two genes which was confirmed by RT-PCR transgenic mouse embryos. experiments. Moreover, we also found additional exons that were not The detection of sequence elements controlling in cis the expression present in the databases. The new model for RDH12 contains three of GLI3 contributes to the understanding of pattern formation and new 5´ untranslated exons , one of which occurs in two different splice addresses the question of highly conserved noncoding DNA sequences variants. The new model for SLC24A2 predicts two sites of transcription in vertebrate genomes. initiation as well as two additional exons that are alternatively spliced. Experimental analysis of the transcripts proved to be essential for the P1323. SOX gene expression analysis by non-radioactive RNA- ultimate mapping of the initiation site. This information constitutes the RNA in situ hybridization basis for further exploration of the promoter and other cis-regulatory D. Drakulic, G. Nikcevic, M. Stevanovic; sequences at the 5´end of these genes. Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and Supported by the European Union Research Training Network Montenegro. ‘RETNET’ MRTN-CT-2003-504003 RNA-RNA in situ hybridization is reliable method for studying tissue and cell specific gene expression, which enables visualization of labeled P1321. Interactions of 4F2hc and y+LAT1 in forming a cationic antisense RNA probe hybridized to specific mRNA. In this study we amino acid transporter have employed non-radioactive RNA-RNA in situ hybridization using J. Salmi1, M. Kleemola1,2, O. Simell3, J. Mykkänen2, K. Huoponen1; biotin- or digoxigenin-labeled RNA probes in order to detect SOX 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Turku gene expression in carcinoma cell lines. By applying this approach we Centre for Biotechnology, Biocity, Turku, Finland, 3Department of Paediatrics, confirmed results obtained by Northern blot analysis, where presence Turku University Central Hospital, Turku, Finland. of SOX2 mRNA in NT2/D1 and SOX14 mRNA in HepG2 cells has 4F2hc and y+LAT1 form together a transporter for cationic amino acids been shown. Our aim was to set up RNA-RNA in situ hybridization located mainly in the basolateral membrane of epithelial cells in the method in in vitro cultured cells in order to further analyze SOX gene small intestine and kidney tubule. Mutations in y+LAT1 cause lysinuric expression on various normal and cancer tissues. protein intolerance (LPI, OMIM #222700), which is due to a defect in the absorption of cationic amino acids in the small intestine and P1324. A subset of miRNA genes are associated with CpG- the proximal kidney tubule. 4F2hc, which is a 529 amino acids long islands glycoprotein, interacts with y+LAT1 with its carboxyl terminus, but the S. Holstebroe, N. Tommerup; precise regions taking part in the interaction are still unknown. Wilhelm Johannsen Centre, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen N, Den- We made four different-sized deletion constructs (262, 278, 321 and mark. 404 amino acids) of 4F2hc to identify the most necessary regions of Micro-RNA (miRNA) genes encode small RNA molecules involved in the carboxyl terminus in the interaction with y+LAT1. The significance of mRNA translation and degradation by the RNA interference (siRNA) the disulfide bridge between 4F2hc and y+LAT1 was also examined by machinery. CpG-islands are CpG-rich regions that are common near mutating the bridge-forming cysteine residues into alanines. In order to transcription start sites, often associated with promoter regions, and study the interaction of the subunits we labelled the C-terminal end of some of which may be hypermethylated in cancer. We have found a 4F2hc with a DsRed1 tag and y+LAT1 with an EGFP tag and studied highly significant proportion of miRNAs (11.5%) embedded within CpG the trafficking of the two proteins to the plasma membrane in the HEK islands. This includes has-mir-212 and has-mir-132, which are located 293 cells with a confocal microscope. The most important regions of in the CpG-island of HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1). Although the carboxyl terminus of 4F2hc included amino acids 279-321 and CpG-islands are frequently associated with the 5'-region of known 405-529. The absence of the disulfide bridge did not have any effect on genes, 8000 of the 27000 CpG islands in the genome are located in the trafficking of the transporter to the plasma membrane. Currently, between genes. We found that a subset of the miRNAs are intimately we are making a more detailed deletion analysis of the C terminus of associated with these non-genic CpG-islands as well, with a significant 4F2hc in order to locate the most important interaction region. bias towards a location of the CpG-island within a 5 kb upstream region of the miRNAs. Thus, a subset of miRNA genes are associated P1322. Highly conserved noncoding DNA sequences within with CpG-islands, suggesting a potential role of these miRNAs in CpG- introns are controlling in cis the expression of GLI3 island methylation, in development and in carcinogenesis. Z. Paparidis1, E. de Graaff2, G. Elgar3, K. H. Grzeschik1; 1Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität, Marburg, Germany, 2Depart- P1325. UMD-FBN2: A New Locus Specific DataBase (LSDB) for ment of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Nether- mutations in the FBN2 gene lands, 3MRC Rosalind Franklin Centre for Genomics Research, Genome Cam- C. M. Monino1, M. Y. Frederic1, C. Beroud1, D. Hamroun1, C. Boileau2, M. pus, Hinxton, United Kingdom. Claustres1, G. Collod-Beroud1; Limb defects present an excellent model for the study of signaling 1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire, Montpellier, France, 2Laboratoire cen- pathways in humans. Molecular clues involved in limb patterning are tral de Biochimie, d'Hormonologie et de Genetique Moleculaire, Hopital Am- similarly used to direct the development of other parts of the body. broise Pare, Boulogne, France.Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 369 Congenital Contractural Arachnodactyly or Beals-Hecht syndrome is tissues (skeletal muscle, ovary, testis and pituitary gland) thus a heritable connective tissue disorder caused by mutations in FBN2 suggesting new paracrine roles of the peptide-receptor system. gene. It is related to Marfan syndrome (MFS) which is due to mutation In testis, ovary and lymphocytes, INSL3 presents an additional in another member of the same family, FBN1. Main symptoms of transcript due to an alternative splicing introducing a 95bp fragment CCA are skeletal features as arachnodactyly, dolichostenomelia, between exons 1 and 2. Probably this new exon comes from an ALU pectus deformities and kyphoscoliosis. This disease is associated sequence. The additional transcript is not present in other tissues. with a relatively good prognostic because of the rare occurrence of Both INSL3 alleles are expressed in patients’ cDNA, thus excluding cardiovascular manifestations as aortic dilatation or dissection and imprinting hypothesis. mitral valve prolapse, responsible for the most important mortality The putative INSL3 peptide translated from the alternative transcript, in MFS. The incidence of CCA is unknown, but it is rarer than MFS and seen by Western Blot, shares the C-term sequence with JAK3 which incidence is 1/10, 000. FBN2 is a 127,6 Mb gene in 5q23-31 (Janokinase 3) protein. JAK3 and INSL3 are contiguos genes in 19p13 encoding fibrillin-2. It shares with FBN1 an interesting structure of sharing one exon. Normally this exon is translated in the two proteins tandemly repeated modules. Because of the high similarity between with different frames. The alternative INSL3 transcript uses the JAK3 these two genes, it seems to us interesting to be able to compare frame. This might suggest a common mechanism involving JAK3 and their mutations. For this purpose, we have constructed, as for FBN1 in INSL3 minor form. It might also be just a not useful transcript induced 1995, a locus specific database with the UMD software. The database by the ALU insertion. curently contains 22 FBN2 mutations, 21 of which are clustered in exons 24 through 34. They include 1 nonsens and 8 splice site P1328. Regulation of alternative splicing in the MID1 gene mutations predicted to result in shortened fibrillin-2 molecules. We causing Opitz BBB/G syndrome have annotated the FBN2 sequence with described Highly Conserved S. Roepcke, S. Krause, M. Vingron, S. Schweiger, J. Winter; Domain (HCD). These data allows us to list missense mutations as Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. following: 3 mutations are in amino acids implicated in ca2+ binding, 8 Clinical features of Opitz BBB/G syndrome are confined to defects of mutations modify cysteines implicated in disulfide bond, and 1 mutation the developing ventral midline, whereas the causative gene, MID1, is in a conserved amino acid in TGFBP modules. is ubiquitously expressed. We have shown previously that the MID1 protein function is restricted to the developing ventral midline by a large P1326. Visualization of 1039 chromosomal breakpoints in number of alternatively spliced transcripts that function in a negative Mendelian Cytogenetics Network database (MCNdb) associated regulation mode. with mental retardation Analysing the alternatively transcribed exons in more detail, we have M. Hjorth, E. Engenheiro, S. Holstebroe, I. Bache, M. Bugge, Z. Tümer, N. now discovered that two of them are partially derived from ALU repeats. Tommerup, Mendelian Cytogenetics Network; Point mutations have led to splice donors and consequently to novel Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functionel Genome Research, Copenhagen, gene products in the human lineage. Moreover, we have detected 30 Denmark. additional ALU sequences within the genomic sequence of the MID1 Mental retardation, affecting 2-3% of the population, is an extremely gene, two of them resembling the exonized ALU’s. These sequences heterogeneous condition where probably hundreds if not thousands are currently tested for potential expression using RT-PCR. However, of genes might be involved. Mendelian Cytogenetics Network is a aberrant expression pattern of alternatively spliced transcripts are a collaboration of >300 cytogenetic laboratories that submit disease- promising pathomechanism in those patients with X-linked Opitz BBB/G associated balanced chromosomal rearrangements (DBCRs) to a syndrome that have no detectable mutations in the open reading frame central database MCNdb (http://www.mcndb.org). Presently, there of the MID1 gene. Thus, to identify regulatory regions we conducted a are 2852 DBCRs in MCNdb and the most common trait is mental thorough analysis of exonic and intronic DNA sequences based on the retardation (1039 DBCRs ~36% of DBCrs in MCNdb). We have conservation pattern between six vertebrate species. In addition, we initiated a systematic analysis of this subgroup in order to identify good searched the exons for potential binding sites of splicing enhancers. candidates for further molecular mapping by using tools available within In total, we have identified 40 significant sites on which two prediction MCNdb. The tool Genome Link displayed 2237 breakpoints in the UCSC methods agree. Eight of these are evolutionarily conserved and thus Genome Browser, facilitating the detection of breakpoint clusterering. represent good candidates for functional regulatory sequences. The At the genome level, the 5 largest clusters involved 7q11, Xp11, 7p16, set comprises binding sites of SRp40, SRp55, ScR35 and SF2/ASF. 2q31 and 7q22. The tool Trait Compare compared clinical traits within Mutation analysis and binding tests of the respective sequences are selected clusters in order to detect potential identical syndromes. We ongoing. applied general network theory to search for co-occurrence of mental retardation with any other trait. Breakpoints involving chromosome P1329. MAPH as a robust and convenient assay for assessing 1 were most frequently associated with speech defects, behaviour gene copy number disorders and hypotonia, whereas breakpoints involving chromosome J. G. Tyson, C. N. S. Archer, H. Bulsara, T. M. O. Majerus, J. A. L. Armour; 2 were most frequently associated with dysmorphic facies, seizures Institute of Genetics, Nottingham, United Kingdom. and paresis of ocular muscles. Furthermore, we used the tool Check DNA copy number variation is an important cause of genetic disease. OMIM to link the breakpoints and associated traits in specific cases to Multiplex Amplifiable Probe Hybridization (MAPH), a method patented known loci in Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man. Our data supports by the University of Nottingham, is a versatile and simple technology for that virtual analysis of DBCRs associated with MR by the tools available assessing gene copy number. Ease of probe design and manufacture within MCNdb can identify candidates for further mapping studies and makes MAPH a particularly adaptable technology. Custom probe sets clinical re-examination. can be rapidly created to target copy number changes not catered for by other tests. P1327. Expression analysis of human INSL3-LGR8 system MAPH has proved reliable in research but in order to bridge the gap P. Dabrilli, E Ferraresi, L Bartoloni, A Garolla, A Ferlin,C Foresta; between its current status as a laboratory test and its projected role University of Padova, Padova, Italy. in routine clinical diagnosis, a thorough and systematic experimental INSL3 is a member of the Insulin-like family of peptide hormones. testing of the assay was needed. A 2-year Wellcome Trust project It’s mainly produced by Leydig cells in prepubertal and adult testis. specifically designed to improve the reproducibility and robustness of This peptide is involved in transabdominal descent of testes acting MAPH has shown remarkable progress in the precision and reliability through its only G-protein coupled receptor LGR8. A paracrine role is of the test. Prior to this development work, measurement errors described in preventing male germ cell apoptosis in rat. INSL3 and (expressed as standard deviations) for subtelomeric copy number LGR8 mutations are described in patients affected by cryptorchidism. were generally in the range 10-15%; by adopting an updated, simplified We analyzed INSL3-LGR8 system expression, both at RNA and protein protocol, standard deviations below 7% are consistently achieved level, in various tissues and we tested the hypothesis of imprinting in on 95% of 100 tests attempted. Other achievements to date include INSL3 studying three frequent polymorphisms. reduction of the amount of DNA required per test, improved probe INSL3 and LGR8 transcripts were contemporary found in different sets and adaptation to a 96-well plate format. Probe sets have beenGenomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 370 validated for loci and genes including subtelomeric regions (ST3F), P1332. Array CGH reveals accumulation of chromosomal BRCA1, HNPCC, PMP22 and TBX5. breakpoints in regions with high content of low copy repeats in This project is near completion and has demonstrated MAPH has mentally retarded patients the potential to work as a diagnostic test and as a complementary R. Ullmann1, F. Erdogan1, M. Kirchhoff2, R. Schulz1, I. Müller1, W. Chen1, C. technology to confirm results found by other methodologies. Hultschig1, C. Lundsteen2, H. Ropers1; 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Rigshospitalet, P1330. Large scale SNP genotyping using APEX technology on Kopenhagen, Denmark. an in situ synthesized microarray In a recent publication chromosomal aberrations were reported in 24% J. Pullat1, M. Beier2, J. Hoheisel3, A. Metspalu1; of mentally retarded patients investigated. In this array CGH study we 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2LUMA Biotech, Heidel- analysed a set of 29 patients with mental retardation, who were pre- berg, Germany, 3Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany. selected for the presence of abnormal karyotypes by chromosomal HR Arrayed primer extension reaction (APEX) technology was designed (High Resolution)-CGH. as a method for SNP genotyping, mutation detection and DNA We started with a 1Mb resolution for the whole genome (4225 clones; resequencing. The capacity for large-scale genome analyses is still 20 cases) and subsequently supplemented this array with the tiling critical to many potential applications keeping in mind large number path for the chromosomes known to be affected (14182 BAC clones; of the good quality SNPs in the databases. For the spotted arrays 9 cases). selection of informative and well-working SNP is still costly and time- Array CGH confirmed all aberrations detected by HR-CGH, including consuming process. a 1.7 Mb deletion on chromosome 17, which was already suggested We present the different approach that solves the problem by using in by HR-CGH. situ synthesized (5´-3´) oligonucleotide arrays on GeniomOne platform Although this proved HR-CGH to be highly sensitive, array CGH enabled of LUMA biotech (Germany) for the assay development. We could a more precise localisation of the breakpoints and provided a better easily design the set of oligonucleotides and quickly generate as well understanding of the complexity of chromosomal rearrangements, to test them, and then only informative and well-working SNPs will be which was underestimated by HR-CGH selected for the spotting. Spotted arrays are much more economical in some cases. Using our array CGH analysing software CGHPRO to use in the large-scale studies compared to Geniom platform. In this and a customized script to screen against the segmental duplication way we will save the cost of the oligonucleotides (40 EUR per SNP) database, we examined the distribution of low copy repeats in the which will be discarded after 50 to 100 experiments because they are regions of chromosomal breakpoints in those nine aberrations either monomorphic in population under study or do not work in the that were detected at the tiling path resolution. In 5/9 cases both particular assay (10-20%). breakpoints were characterised by an increase of low copy repeats We introduce steps of the final array design as well as first results in in the breakpoint flanking region, in a further 2/9 cases the regions designing enzymatic reaction on in situ synthesized oligonucleotide around one breakpoint showed this feature. microarray. To achieve positive proof for APEX experiments on This study represents not only a direct comparison between GeniomOne, were designed chip, which contains different test-probes chromosomal and array CGH techniques, but also demonstrates the (15-25 nt) coding for the same SNPs and negative control-sequences. potential of array CGH to provide quick insights into the most probable As a result of the negative (without template) APEX, detected signals causes of the chromosomal rearrangement. were specific and indicated the higher signal for longer hairpin with higher GC-content. P1333. Mutational Profiling of Human Disease Genes S. Nidtha1, R. R. Bennett2, K. Poulter1, R. Fang1, R. Nutter1, P. Baybayan1; P1331. CGHPRO - A comprehensive data analysis tool for array 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Children's Hospital, Bos- CGH ton, MA, United States. W. Chen, F. Erdogan, H. Ropers, S. Lenzner, R. Ullmann; Identification of mutations in human genes to determine the genetic Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. basis of common disorders such as cancer, neurological diseases, DNA array based comparative genomic hybridisation (array CGH) is a autoimmune diseases, and cardiovascular is a challenge. The use high resolution screening technique for the genome wide detection of of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) as markers in complex chromosomal imbalances. disease genes, and initiatives devoted to the identification and In order to cope with the increasing amount of array CGH data we mapping of SNPs throughout the human genome are ongoing. have developed a user-friendly and versatile tool for the normalization, SNPs or insertions and deletions in populations are detected by a visualization, breakpoint detection and comparative analysis of array combination of techniques such as sequencing and hybridization. CGH results. The program called CGHPRO is a stand-alone JAVA Sequencing is the preferred method to discover and confirm genetic application that guides the user through the whole process of data variation. Researchers who have chosen to sequence their gene of analysis. The import option for image analysis data covers several data interest have to invest considerable amount of time testing the primers formats. Various graphical representation tools assist in the selection they designed. To eliminate the time consuming step of designing, of the appropriate normalization method. Intensity ratios of each clone optimizing and validating of PCR primers for human disease genes, can be plotted in a size-dependent manner along the chromosome Applied Biosystems has developed VariantSEQr™ Resequencing ideograms. The interactive graphical interface offers the chance to System. Mutation profiling in humans by resequencing has been explore the characteristics of each clone, such as the involvement made simple by this system since it can be easily integrated into any of the clones sequence in segmental duplications. Circular Binary sequencing pipeline. The system takes advantage of the automated Segmentation and unsupervised Hidden Markov Model algorithms capillary electrophoresis platform, as well as reagents and SeqScape® facilitate objective detection of chromosomal breakpoints. The storage v2.5 software for mutation detection and report generation. of all essential data in a back-end database allows the comparative The universal PCR condition and sequencing protocol allows analysis of different cases. The diverse display options not only researchers to: ease the definition of shortest regions of overlap, but also simplify 1. Study genes with dense mutation spectrum and polygenic the identification of patterns of chromosomal aberrations. A special diseases script is dedicated to the recognition of clones that are mismapped or 2. Under take case-control studies. repeatedly show unreliable ratios. Variations in sequences known or suspected to exist in the human CGHPRO is a comprehensive and easy-to-use data analysis tool for genome can be detected easily and cost effectively. We describe array CGH. Since all of its features are available offline, CGHPRO may a new tool for mutation and SNP discovery that is simple and easy be especially suitable in situations where protection of sensitive patient to adopt, but most importantly employs a proven technique such as data is an issue. sequencing.Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics 371 P1334. Detailed 5kb density Haplotype Map of Chromosome 2 utility of Agilent’s whole genome CGH system using cell lines, complex and 4p tumor samples, buccal swabs, and whole blood. Comparison with A. Verner, M. Leboeuf, F. Chagnon, M. S. Phillips, V. Ferretti, T. J. Hudson, A. known BAC array data was noted where possible. The whole solution Montpetit; of genome-wide coverage on 44K arrays and optimized reagents and McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, Canada, protocols has implications for future diagnostic and prognostic use for Montreal, PQ, Canada. specific inherited diseases and cancer. Whole-genome association studies of common complex traits require genotyping of a large number of genetic markers, which makes such P1337. Molecular characterization of human Hubert gene located an approach expensive and time- and labour-consuming. Many on chromosome 5p13.2 studies have shown highly significant levels of linkage disequilibrium K. Kallassalu1, T. Haller2, E. Mihailov1, A. Reigo1, A. Metspalu1,3; and strong association between neighbouring single nucleotide 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Massachusetts Insti- polymorphisms (SNPs). These blocks of SNPs create haplotype tute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States, 3Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, blocks in the human genome. Generating the map of such haplotype Estonia. blocks will decrease the number of SNPs needed for genotyping and, We have found a novel human gene disseminated over 105 kb therefore, greatly facilitate the mapping and identification of disease- genomic DNA in chromosomal region 5p13.2. The gene has 40 exons causing genes. The HapMap project is collaboration between 8 groups and it encodes a putative protein Hubert (Human Uncharacterised But located in China, Japan, UK, USA and Canada. Our group focuses on Eventually Reasonable Transcript) of 2325 amino acids. Transcription creating the haplotype map of chromosomes 2 and 4p. These regions of the Hubert gene occurs in the direction from centromere to telomere. account for 10% of the genome. In the Phase I of the project, we have There are three alternative polyadenylation signals (AAUAAA) genotyped about 100 000 SNPs to complete a map with a density of downstream the stop codon in the sequence. 1 SNP for every 5kb in four populations: CEPH samples from Utah, To investigate the genomic organization of mouse and rat Hubert Yoruba from Ibadan, Nigeria, Han Chinese from Beijing and Japanese genes, we performed searches in mouse and rat genome databases. from Tokyo. All data are available to the public at http://www.hapmap. The localization on mouse chromosome 15A2 and rat chromosome org/. To manage the genotyping project from sample management to region 2q16 is in conserved synteny with the localization of human optimal SNP selection, data extraction and analysis our group has Hubert on chromosome 5p13.2. developed a web-based application, Nanuq. An algorithm has been The novel gene is located between genes nucleoprotein (NUP) 155 implemented to select the best set of tag SNPs from the HapMap data and NIPBL, the latter being mutated in individuals with Cornelia de for fine mapping and candidate gene genotyping approaches. Phase Lange syndrome (CdLS). II of the project will concentrate on better defining haplotype blocks by RNA in situ studies were performed on mouse embryos at E9.5, E10.5 creating higher density map of one SNP per 1kb. and E11.5. Our study demonstrated that Hubert is expressed in E10.5 and E11.5 mouse embryos, but not in E9.5. Expression was detected P1335. Genomic organisation and expression analysis of the in cephalic mesenchyme tissue only. murine basonuclin 2 gene Analysis of gene expression profiles across different tissues was E. Mihailov1, A. Reigo1, K. Kallassalu1, A. Metspalu1,2; performed using RT-PCR and Northern Blot. 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, We have not found any conserved domains or motifs in Hubert Tartu, Estonia. sequence on protein level using in silico analysis. From the experiments We describe molecular characterization and expression pattern of the and computer analysis performed so far we are not able to predict the mouse basonuclin 2 gene, a member of the basonuclin zinc-finger function of this novel gene and its protein product. Further analysis is family. The gene has been located in mouse chromosome 4, region necessary to elucidate the function of Hubert. C4 and we have found that it contains at least 8 exons spanning approximately 405 kb of genomic DNA. The longest transcript of the P1338. The EMBL-Bank database, and related EBI resources mouse basonuclin 2 gene encodes a putative 1106 aa protein with R. J. Vaughan, G. Cochrane, N. Faruque, V. Lombard, T. Kulikova, W. Zhu, R. six C2H2 zinc finger domains arranged as three adjacent pairs. The Apweiler; basonuclin 2 protein has also other functional domains, such as 3 European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. nuclear localization signals and a serine stripe. The EMBL-Bank database is maintained at the European Bioinformatics We have detected mouse basonuclin 2 mRNA expression in 3T6 and Institute (EBI), and stores nucleotide sequence data and associated NIH/3T3 cells using Northern blot hybridization and RT-PCR. Whole annotation. EMBL-Bank is part of the International Sequence mount in situ hybridization revealed expression in 10.5 and 11.5 Database Collaboration (INSD), sharing data with both Genbank and day mouse embryos, subsequent section of whole mount embryos DDBJ. Nucleotide sequence data can be submitted to EMBL-Bank via demonstrated specific expression in ventral dermomyotome and a dedicated web-based submission system, Webin, and data can be branchial arch region. Mouse MTC panel confirmed expression in 11.5 retrieved via FTP, or using SRS, an advanced search system allowing day embryos and also in 7, 15 and 17 day mouse embryos. In adult complex cross-database queries. mouse we have detected expression in a variety of tissues at different In addition to the EMBL-Bank primary dataset, several related levels. databases and services are available, including the Third Party Annotation dataset, the EMBL-Align database, the completed P1336. Human Whole Genome CGH Arrays Can Detect Copy genomes webserver and Genome Reviews. The Third Party Annotation Number Changes in a Variety of Human Samples dataset allows researchers to add annotation and/or sequence data R. H. Argonza-Barrett, C. Robbins, J. Bailey; to nucleotide sequences where they were not the original submitter Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, United States. (something which is not permitted within the EMBL-Bank primary DNA copy number changes have been implicated in causing dataset). Submissions must be published in a peer-reviewed journal, human inherited disorders and cancer. Array comparative genomic and must include new experimental evidence. The EMBL-Align hybridization (aCGH) allows whole genome coverage and ease of use database provides a public repository for both protein and nucleic compared to BAC arrays. Agilent’s CGH arrays offer high reproducibility acid sequence alignment data, storing alignments in a format which and sensitivity due to major technological improvements in the array is both human and computer readable. The complete genomes server slide surface, production robotics, labeling chemistry, and software gives access to hundreds of completed genome sequences, all of for quantification and data analysis. The introduction of optimized which are linked to either the original EMBL-Bank entries or Ensembl, reagents and protocols for target preparation, hybridization and while Genome Reviews provides complete genomes with additional labeling as well as software for data extraction and analysis has made manually annotated data derived from the UniProt Knowledgebase, the detection of changes in copy number such as duplications and InterPro and the GOA project, providing enhanced annotation of gross deletions highly reproducible and extremely sensitive. The sum coding sequence features. of these improvements now permits the high throughput analysis of various human DNA samples. Here we describe and demonstrate theGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 372 P1339. Expression profiling of peripheral blood cells in patients duplication is tightly linked to aneuploidy. Spontaneous abortions with different subtypes of spinocerebellar ataxias appear with the incidence of 12-15% in population. In spontaneous M. Walter, S. Pots, H. Stappert, L. Schöls, O. Riess, M. Bonin; abortions there are 25-60>% of chromosome abnormalities, and in Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany. most cases there are triploidies, tetraploidies and polyploidies. The Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are dominant, late onset hereditary genes associated with cell cycle abnormalities are p53, Brca1, Brca2, disorders characterized by a progressive ataxia that is variably Gadd45, human papillomavirus type E6 and E7 also leads to mitotic associated with other neurological symptoms. The clinical hallmarks defects. The theory of “two hits” for one unstable cell cycle resulting result from a progressive degenerative process that mostly affects the with aneuploidy is still in bases of these events. From the couples in cerebellum, brainstem and spinal cord. To date at least 25 different the genetic counselling process with normal karyotype and aneuploidy loci are associated with SCAs and related diseases. A large number in aborted material analysed by flow cytometry, we found CMV and of SCAs are caused by expanded CAG repeats within protein coding EBV reactivation or new infection in both parents before and/or during regions leading to polyglutamine tracts. pregnancy. We analysed those with aneuploidy in aborted material and Early detection of these disorders would enable both more effective significant serologic findings in both parents. A retrospective analysis diagnosis and treatment as well as a better understanding of was done over 500 couples with one or more spontaneous abortion pathogenesis and pathophysiological processes. Therefore, we need and 296 paraffin embedded samples were found. 41 placentas was easily accessible markers, which should i) differentiate between analysed by flow: 27 (66%) diploid and 14 (34%) aneuploid. From 290, patients with different SCA types and ii) be detectable allready in a 88 (30%) had IgM or/and high IgG for EBV and 12 (4%) for CMV. HPV preclinical state of disease progression. positive diploid paraffin embedded sample from one couple with three To achive this goal, we collected peripheral blood (PaxGene) of consecutive spontaneous abortions was found. patients with six different SCA types as well as controls for expression profiling. Here we report the results for SCA1, 2, 3 and 6. First, we P1342. First Cuban Predictive Testing Experience For established a protocol to reduce the globin messages with magnetic Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 2: A Psychological Follow-Up One Year Later. beads. After hybridization of the U133 plus 2.0 Affymetrix array, expression profiles for both controls and SCA patients were analysed. M. Paneque Herrera1, N. Santos Falcón2, L. Prieto Avlia2, L. Velázquez Pérez2, Differentially expressed genes were determined that can distinguish J. Sequeiros1, M. Fleming1; between control samples and SCA patients as well as a set of genes 1ICBAS-IBMC-CGPP, Porto, Portugal, 2Clínica para la Investigación y Rehabilit- which seperates SCA3 from SCA6 patients. Microarray results were ación de las Ataxias Hereditarias, Holguín, Cuba. validated using real-competitive RT-PCR. Objectives. The psychological impact evaluation after the predictive experience on descendants at risk of Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type P1340. Mirror Image DNA (L-DNA) For Improved Studies onZip- 2, as well as the description of the social and demographic profile Coded Universal Microarrays of the participants in the Cuban program. Methods. A descriptive R. Samaha1, N. C. Hauser2, R. Martinez3, J. Hoheisel3, K. Bashar Mullah1, K. J. investigation of series of cases was carried out with 150 individuals at Livak1, B. G. Schroeder1, S. Matysiak1; risk who received molecular diagnoses during the predictive protocol 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Genomics-Proteomics- started April 2001 and carried out until May 2002. Results The Screening, Fraunhofer IGB, Stuttgart, Germany, 3Functional Genome Analysis, average age of the participants was 39 years old, 65,3% of them were German Cancer Research Centre, Heidelberg, Germany. women. 83,6% of the participants were married or lived with a partner Universal zip-codes are a means to combine reactions that occur in and 78,3% of them had at least one child. The anxiety and depression solution with the ability to separate molecules on solid support such as levels decrease significantly with time, in direct relation with negative DNA-microarrays. To this end, the reactive partners - oligonucleotide diagnoses in the case of anxiety. Conclusions. The psychological primers in our case - are attached each to a unique DNA tag-sequence, well-being indicators improve significantly a year after the predictive whose complement (zip-oligomer) is presented on the surface of the experience, which psychosocial impact is favorable. At the same time, array. Due to their specific tag-sequences, the primers bind to distinct the participants assessment on their own experience is satisfactory. microarray positions and can thus be analysed independently. One difficulty is the selection of the tag sequences. The more complex P1343. Investigations of parmacogenetic features are an important part of predictive genetic counselling the mixture of reactive partners gets the more unique sequences are required. In addition, cross-reactivity to the DNA- or RNA-analyte has M. O. Mkheidze; to be avoided. We present here a zip-code universal array platform Medical Academy for postgraduate education, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- based on mirror image DNA (L-DNA). The advantage of the L-DNA tion. derivative used here is the fact that there is no interaction between the In memoriam Professor Eugene I. Schwartz L-form sequences and natural (D-form) nucleic acids. In consequence, Information on individual pharmacogenetic features (IPGF) as a part of cross-hybridisation is eliminated, while nevertheless strong and the genetic predictive counseling is the essential basis for prevention sequence-specific binding occurs between tag and complementary of various complications induced with medicines.. The aim of this study zip-probe. Synthesis of hybrid molecules of normal and L-form DNA is is to quantify the rate of four IPGF among St. Petersburg population: done using chemical standard procedures. butyrilcholinesterase (CHE, EC3.1.1.8, loci CHE1, CHE2), arylamine We show here the results of two basic applications of L-DNA universal N-acetyltransferase (AT, EC2.3.1.5), angiotensin-1-convering enzyme microarrays. In an epidemiologically motivated project, we analyse (ACE, EC3.4.15.1). Materials and Methods. Random blood samples candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are likely to (1350) were analyzed using routine agar gel screening test for CHE1S be disease-relevant by incorporation of labelled dideoxy-nucleotides. and CHE1D, spectrophotometric methods for identification of CHE1U, For transcriptional profiling of pathogens, gene-specific primers CHE1D, CHE1F, CHE1S; electrophoretic separation in 7,5%PAAG with the zip-code complement attached to their 5'-end are used for for identification CHE2(5+), Sulfamethazine acetylating method for the production of zip-tagged, labelled cDNA, following a two-dye acetylator phenotype (AT); insertion(I)/deletion(D) polymorphism of competitive hybridisation approach. the 16th intron of the human Ace gene was determined by PCR with DNA extracted from white blood cells and the product of amplification P1341. The role of viruses in reproduction and aneuploidy was analyzed with 8% PAAG electrophoresis and ethidium bromide V. Culic, G. Mijaljica, S. Miškovic, Z. Zegarac, M. Glavina, S. Culic, D. Pri- visualization Results. The frequencies of four PGICH are the morac; following: CHE1U - 0.980, CHE1D - 0.012, CHE1F - 0.008, CHE2(5-) Pediatrics Clinic, Department for Medical Genetics, 21 000 Split, Croatia. - 0.961 and CHE2(5+) - 0.039; AT rapid allele - 0.272, AT slow allele - 0.728; AceD allele - 0.491 AceI allele - 0.453. Groups of potential risk Each chromosome contains two centrioles which adhere to each have been determined and genetic individual information have been other through the cell cycle and normally separate only once during registered using special certificate. Hitherto, unfortunately, individual the G1-to-S cell cycle transition, resulting in centrosome duplication. pharmacogenetic information is unclaimed by most our physicians and Centrosome duplication is regulated by many intracellular events that medicinal management is done with ignorance of IPGF. are essential in maintaining genomic stability. Abnormal centrosomeGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 373 P1344. PKU neonatal screening in Leningrad province Following a very easy index. Bartolo our owl teacher introduce us from I. A. Ivanov1,2, T. S. Sova1,2, L. A. Ryamo1,2, M. O. Mkheidze1; the origin of life to the last new technologies by means of very clear and 1Medical Academy for postgraduate education, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- simple language aided by useful static and flash animated pictures. tion, 2District Children Hospital, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. The index web is: In memoriam Dr. Sophia P.Maximova * Introduction PKU neonatal screening has been put into practice by medical genetics * The origin of life service to have been stationed at District Children Hospital. Every year * Cell specialization cohort of newborns includes about 10-12 000 persons. Now 98-99% of * Chromosomes the infants are examined through PKU neonatal screening with blood * How do we acquire our inheritance dried on filter paper. The incidence of PKU is estimated at 1:6600 - 1 * What is heredity : 12262 live births in Leningrad province. Dietary management with * Types of inheritance modern Russian and import products like “Tetraphen”, “Phenyl-Free” * Why do disorders develop etc. is neonatally started. The goal for management of the infant with * What happens when our recipes combine with our partner´s PKU is to achieve and maintain blood PHE concentrations between 2-6 recipes?. mg/dL. All children with PKU (27) have long-term dietary management * And how can we use this vast knowledge and benefit from it?. and PHE level monitoring. Families with PKU probands have a * Origin of hereditary disorders. chance to look through a new brochure “Phenylketonuria” written by * Prenatal diagnosis techniques. M. Mkheidze (PhD, MD). DNA analysis and prenatal diagnosis are * Gene Therapy available with support of Laboratory of prenatal diagnosis (Chief of * Cloning Laboratory - academician, professor V. S. Baranov) of Institute of * Questions Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS. 10 children of our cohort with PKU * Links of interest have molecular diagnosis. * Further reading * Foreword P1345. Disease knowledge, reproductive attitudes, and * FORUM compliance to treatment among cystic fibrosis families in At this moment http://www.geneticsmadeeasy.com is currently Brittany (France). available on the Net in English and Spanish. Chinesse during 2005. M. De Braekeleer1, G. Rault2; P1347. Genetic screening for hereditary haemochromatosis 1Faculté de Médecine & CHU Morvan, Brest, France, 2Centre de Perharidy, in secondary schools: attitudes of the school community in Roscoff, France. Victoria, Australia Cystic fibrosis (CF) has an incidence of 1 in 2636 live births and a carrier M. Aitken1,2, S. A. Metcalfe1,2, M. B. Delatycki1,3, K. J. Allen1,4, A. A. Gason1,2; rate of 1 in 26 inhabitants in Brittany. A questionnaire was distributed 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2University of Mel- to the 506 patients (children, adolescents and adults) and/or their bourne, Department of Paediatrics, Parkville, Australia, 3Bruce Lefroy Centre for parents followed by the CF centers in Brittany and Loire-Atlantique. Genetic Health Research, Parkville, Australia, 4Department of Gastroenterology The return rate was 40.9%. The knowledge of clinical signs was rather and Nutrition, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Australia. good among patients and their parents (50-68.7%), but that of the genetic transmission was much better (81.4-93.7%). The knowledge of Community genetic screening programs can be offered in a variety the recurrence risk by the parents resulted in deciding against further of settings. Genetic screening for hereditary haemochromatosis has progeny or in reducing the number of children. 95.1% of the parents been the subject of significant debate in the literature. Nevertheless, were in favor of prenatal diagnosis, 41.2% having used it. 76.2% would it is the best example of a preventable disease for which genetic interrupt the pregnancy should prenatal diagnosis revealed that their predisposition testing is available. Secondary schools are a possible fetus had CF. All 123 respondents thought that genetic counseling was site to offer genetic susceptibility screening, as carrier testing for Tay useful but only 87.1% knew of its availability. Sachs disease and cystic fibrosis are currently successfully offered Some 97% of the 207 respondents agreed that the prescribed in this setting. Screening within the school system, as an alternative treatment was very important to maintain their health condition or that to the current workplace setting, could vastly increase the number of their child. However, 41.1% thought that they or their child took too of individuals exposed to both the education and the opportunity many drugs. Adolescents and adults were more likely than parents to be tested. Therefore, we aimed to determine the attitudes of the to regularly forget some part of the whole treatment. Compliance to secondary school community towards a haemochromatosis genetic physiotherapy declined among the three categories (from 95.2% to susceptibility screening program for students without offering testing. 72.2%). The quality of the relationship between the patient and the Students aged 16-17 completed a questionnaire both before and after health professionals can have a major impact in attaining a better an educational session during school time. Parents and teachers knowledge and a higher compliance to treatment. received written educational material and returned a questionnaire via Supported by grants from the “Fondation du Centre Hélio-Marin” in mail. Results from the questionnaire study revealed a positive attitude Roscoff and the “PHRC” toward genetic testing in schools and a high knowledge level for all participants. In conclusion, comprehensive education is essential to P1346. GENETICS MADE EASY: free divulgative web about inform students, parents and teachers of all relevant information. The human genetics results could inform future implementation and policy development through consideration of community attitudes. M. T. Solé-Pujol1, J. M. Carrera-Macia2, J. M. Cantú-Garza3, F. Solé-Ristol4, J. Antich-Femenias1; P1348. Genetic Tests under Scrutiny. Development of Criteria 1Centro Genética Médica, Barcelona, Spain, 2Instituto Universitario Dexeus, Integrated in a Questionnaire in an Interdisciplinary Austrian Barcelona, Spain, 3Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Guadalajara, Mexico, Working Group 4Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain. S. Jonas1, S. Schneider-Voss2, G. Endel3, E. Leitgeb4, S. Näglein3, D. Vybiral5, Genetics Made Easy, http://www.geneticsmadeeasy.com K. Wimmer6; is a non-profit informative web on human genetics that has been 1Institute of Technology Assessment, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, written with the aim of bringing the scientific community closer to the Austria, 2dialog gentechnik, Vienna, Austria, 3Association of Social Insurance general population. The web is a very useful teaching tool to clinicians Institutions, Vienna, Austria, 4Patients Representatives, Vienna, Austria, 5Fed- and other healthcare professionals, in order to complement personal eral Ministry of Health and Women, Department of Biotechnology & Genetic consultations as you will see throught the index web, regardless of Engineering, Vienna, Austria, 6Institute of Medical Biology, Medical University of their area of expertise, as genetically inherited disorders are known Vienna, Vienna, Austria. across all medical specialties. In the coming years the number of DNA tests that predict the risk of the The web contains all the information that any couple may need to know development of disorders with genetic influence will increase. Improved before embarking in parenthood, regardless of whether their children technology will make DNA testing more accessible. According to were normal or born with any hereditary malformation or disease.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 374 consumer protection and socio-economic implications there is a need an asset. This kind of tool offers several advantages, like interactivity, for regulating the approval procedure and cost transfer of those tests. adaptiveness, privacy, assessment, and vividness. At present, the plot In order to assess the potential benefits and risks an interdisciplinary of the program has been created, and it will be presented. It provides working group conceptualised a questionnaire regarding evaluation information about CF, genetic risk and genetic testing, and encourages criteria for (predictive) genetic tests. participant interaction by asking users to respond to questions, choose Under the aspect "Think genomically, act locally!" 39 questions based among various options within the program, and access information in on the established ACCE* criteria were adapted for the situation in the sequence and depth that they desire. Potential users of the CF Austria. The questionnaire consists of various questions concerning carrier test should, after using the program, be able to consciously the diagnosis of the disease, test parameter settings, the analytical choose whether they want to take the test or not. Steps involving and clinical validity, as well as clinical utility, and legal and social graphic design and software engineering are in progress. Ultimately, a implications. The preceding preamble gives a short introduction of the randomized trial comparing education by the computer with education detailed work of the participants, an overview of the actual situation of by trained genetic counselors will be performed. genetic tests and the legal situation regarding the approval of genetic tests in Austria. P1351. Cancers, co-morbidities and ageing in people with Down The replies of the applicants to these developed questions may syndrome help decision makers in health policy to form an opinion about the A. H. Bittles1, E. J. Glasson1,2, S. G. Sullivan1,3, R. Hussain1,4; acceptance or refusal of genetic tests and should help to make the 1Edith Cowan University, Perth, Australia, 2University of Western Australia, application and decision process more transparent. Also the way Perth, Australia, 3Chinese Center for Disease Control, Beijing, China, 4Univer- (discussion in an interdisciplinary working group) that was used to sity of New England, Armidale, Australia. deal with these circumstances (approval of genetic tests) could be a The prevalence of malignancies in people with Down syndrome is prototype of how to handle the discussion between different interest controversial, in part because of their major increase in life expectancy groups. over the last 50 years. In a comprehensive study of intellectual *Analytic and clinical validity, clinical utility, ethical, legal and social disability in Western Australia, linked health databases were used implications to determine the incidence of specific cancers in 1,298 individuals with Down syndrome (725 males and 573 females) during the years P1349. External Quality Assessment in classical cytogenetics: 1982 to 2001. No significant difference was observed between the 21 the Italian experience cancers diagnosed in the Down syndrome cohort and the 19 cases G. Floridia, V. Falbo, M. Salvatore, F. Censi, F. Tosto, N. Bruzzese, C. Maron- expected in the general population (SIR = 1.10; 95% CI, 0.68-1.68). giu, D. Taruscio; As in other populations, there was a highly significant increase in Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy. childhood leukaemias (n = 12) among Down syndrome patients Genetic testing services in the EU have substantially increased their (SIR = 61.61; 95% CI, 31-84-107.62). Eight other malignancies activity in the past few years. were diagnosed: cancers of the gastrointestinal system, malignant In 2002 Italian laboratories performing cytogenetic tests were 158, with melanoma, malignant brain tumour, testicular teratoma, cancer of an increase of 12% from 2000 (1); cytogenetic analyses performed in the conjunctiva, and Waldenstrom’s macroglobinaemia. The median 2002 increased of 34% from 2000(1). life expectancy of people with Down syndrome in Western Australia The Italian External Quality Assessment (IEQA) in classical cytogenetics now exceeds 58 years, and many of those diagnosed with cancer is an activity financially supported by the Italian Ministry of health and had additional health problems, including diabetes, hypothyroidism, coordinated by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità, (ISS). epilepsy and musculoskeletal disorders. It has been suggested that Cytogenetic Public Laboratories have been enrolled upon voluntary the cellular microenvironment in Down syndrome can protect against partecipation, covering all Italian regions(2). Four trials have been the development of certain solid tumours, such as breast cancer. performed until now and the number of participating laboratories However, with their continuing marked increase in life expectancy, it has been increasing (35 in 2001, 46 in 2002, 49 in 2003, 2004-trial seems probable that in future years people with Down syndrome will in progress). The EQA covers both prenatal and postnatal diagnosis, exhibit a higher incidence of adult-onset cancers and non-malignant including cancer cytogenetics. disorders associated with advanced age. This poses serious problems Laboratories send to ISS Jpeg images and the correspondent written both for Genetic Counselling and public education programmes. report. A panel of experts evaluate the analytical and the interpretative performances. P1352. Education of Medical Genetics in Czech Republic Overall images had a good level of quality, while reports were not P. Goetz1, I. Barta2, M. Cervinka3, R. Gailyova4, V. Jüttnerova3, M. Kohoutova5, homogenous and often missing important information. A standard J. Reischig6, J. Santavy7, Z. Sedlacek1, E. Seemanova1, I. Subrt6, A. Svoboda4; report format, in constitutional cytogenetics, has been proposed by 1Charles University, 2nd Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Charles consensus by the ISS and national experts. An overview of all results Univeristy, 3rd Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Charles University, will be illustrated and effects of the IEQA will be discussed. Faculty of Medicine, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic, 4Masaryk University, 1. Dallapiccola et al., Analysis 2/3. 2004: 301-304-available at http:// Faculty of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, 5Charles University, 1st Medical sigu.univr.it School, Prague, Czech Republic, 6Charles University, Faculty of Medicine, 2. Taruscio D. et al., Clin Chem Lab Med 2004; 42: 915-21. Plzen, Czech Republic, 7Palacky University, Faculty of Medicine, Olomouc, This work is funded by the Project “Test genetici: dalla ricerca alla Czech Republic. clinica”, Italian Ministry of Health (2003-2005) Historically the first three medical genetics lectures appeared as a part of the curriculum in Paediatrics at the former Faculty of Paediatrics P1350. Genetic analysis for cystic fibrosis: does it suit me? A (now 2nd School of Medicine) in Prague in 1967. blueprint for an interactive educational software At present there are seven medical schools in the Czech Republic, C. Castellani, B. M. Assael; teaching medical genetics to a variable extent. Most schools teach Cystic Fibrosis Centre - Ospedale Civile Maggiore, Verona, Italy. medical genetics on two levels: First, in the In the latest years there has been a huge hike in the number of Cystic theoretical part of the curriculum (1st and 2nd year), medical Fibrosis (CF) carrier tests. Ideally, any genetic test should be linked genetics is integrated in "Biology". Practicals are implemented to to an individual genetic counselling session. However, as the number train students in methods like pedigree analysis and risk assessment, of genetic tests available for clinical use continues to rise, the need methods of molecular genetics and cytogenetics and interpretation of for alternative educational and counselling methods is becoming their results, etc. Second, some medical schools implemented obligatory more and more pressing, both for CF and for other inherited diseases. subject "Clinical Genetics" into the clinical part of the curriculum, where Booklets and videotapes have been used with some success, but students solve practical problems, and learn about the importance of they lack interactivity, and often do not include sufficient information genetics in medicine. In addition, students are also offered optional to meet the requirements of informed consent. A computer-based courses like "Advances in Molecular Genetics", "Genetic Counselling program, although not a replacement for genetic counselling, may be and Clinical Cytogenetics", "Reproduction Medicine and ReproductionGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 375 Genetics", etc. by the child’s right not to know, as well as by psychological and medical The 3rd Medical School in Prague has a different, problem-oriented arguments. curriculum. Medical genetics is taught in the first cycle of integrated Implications for genetic education in these groups will be discussed. study (1st and 2nd year) within "Biology of the Cell" and "Genetics", and in the praeclinical part (3rd P1355. Genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity in Primary year) within "Theoretical Foundations of Clinical Medicine". Hyperoxaluria type I in Northern Israel We have a 3-year postgraduate training programme in clinical genetics T. Falik-Zaccai1, M. Khayat2, H. Mandel3, I. Weissman4; for MDs specialized in paediatrics, internal medicine, obstetrics etc. 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia and Rappa- Similar programmes exist for non-medical graduates working in port faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, cytogenetic and molecular genetic laboratories. Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel, 3Pediatric Metabolic unit, Rambam Medical geneticists are also involved in the education of the public, medical center and Rappaport faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, and in various self-help groups. 4Pediatric Nephrology unit, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia and Rappaport faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel. P1353. Written informed consent in predictive cancer genetic Primary hyperoxaluria type I (PH1) is a rare autosomal recessive inborn testing: challenges and pitfalls in clinical practice error of metabolism presenting clinical and genetic heterogeneity. PH1 M. Welkenhuysen1, M. Lacroix2, Y. Joly2; is highly prevalent in Northern Israel with approximately 2-3 new cases 1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium, 2Centre de each year. recherche en droit public, Montreal, PQ, Canada. We present 40 patients from 13 Muslim and Druze families. The Obtaining informed consent is a legal and ethical requirement for diagnosis was established based on the clinical presentation, genetic testing for late-onset diseases, including hereditary cancers. biochemical profile and molecular genetic analyses. Eight different However, laws and professional norms concerning written informed mutations were identified including 6 novel mutations. Patients from consent in clinical practice are often lacking. To explore written eleven families were homozygous for the causative mutation while informed consent procedures in predictive genetic testing for cancer, patients from 2 families were found to be compound heterozygotes. semi-structured interviews were conducted with 11 genetic counselors Inter and intra familial phenotypic differences related to age of onset from Toronto, Ottawa, Vancouver and the province of Quebec. and severity of disease, were observed among patients who shared Whereas the process of obtaining informed consent in cancer genetic an identical genotype. counseling was homogeneous, variability prevailed in the type of Molecular diagnosis of PH1 was established in 4 patients avoiding liver informed consent forms used: the genetic center’s own form, a third biopsy, and 1 prenatal diagnosis performed via CVS. party’s form (from a hospital lab or a commercial lab), a research form, Population screening for the PH1 local causative mutation was or no form at all. The use of third party forms complicates the issue of performed in two villages. In the first, 190 individuals were tested, the responsibility of clinical geneticists versus that of DNA-labs. and 6 carriers identified, resulting a carrier frequency of 1/31. In the Each participant described the goal of obtaining written informed consent second, 300 individuals were tested, 23 carriers were identified to in ethical and/or care related patient-centered terms, stressing that the result a carrier frequency of 1/13. Two couples at risk were identified form cannot replace the informed consent process. Most counselors and prenatal diagnosis (PND) offered. were reluctant to consider written informed consent as offering legal The high prevalence of PH1 in our region is probably the result of protection to genetics professionals. Overall, the advantages of written consanguineous marriages. Molecular analysis enables accurate informed consent were perceived as outweighing its disadvantages. diagnosis and comprehensive genetic counseling for families of Potential for improvement was mentioned, such as more room for affected individuals and couples at risk regarding the options of patients’ wishes regarding re-contact and disclosure to relatives and/ pre implantation and PND. If PND is undesired pre-emptive liver or health care professionals. The need for simple language and short transplantation is performed preventing end-stage renal disease and forms was emphasized. improving quality of life. Our results show that a more consistent approach is needed for obtaining written informed consent. To meet this requirement, the goals P1356. Who is developing UK human genetics policy? of written informed consent and the ensuing responsibilities involved B. G. Williams, F. L. Ticehurst, P. S. Harper; require clarification. Wales Gene Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Science knowledge and development of technologies in genetics are P1354. Opinions about predictive testing for hereditary breast changing rapidly which means that policy and legislation concerning cancer and Huntingon’s disease in several groups in Flanders. human genetics need to be up to date and responsive. M. Welkenhuysen, G. Evers-Kiebooms; In the UK, there is a wide range of both government bodies and Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium. professional organisations who contribute to forming guidelines and Sixty percent of eligible general practitioners (GPs), 37% of nurses/ policy recommendations which may subsequently lead to legislation midwives, 34% of scientists/technicians in human genetics, 44% of on human genetics. members of patient support groups for breast cancer (BC-group) and Knowledge about the policy makers and understanding the policy 78% of members of the Flemish Huntington association (HD-group) processes involved will help different groups in the UK to access, expressed their opinions regarding predictive testing for hereditary participate in and become a part of the policy making community. breast cancer (HBC) and/or Huntington’s disease (HD) (1) in an adult, Such groups include those representing families affected by genetic (2) in a 5-year old child at the parents’ request and (3) in a 16-year old conditions and those involved in genetics research and clinical adolescent at his/her own request. In total, 777 respondents completed services. This knowledge is also of interest and relevance to groups a questionnaire. outside the UK. In each group of respondents, the acceptability ratings for predictive This presentation will describe the main government bodies and testing for HBC and HD in an adult and in an adolescent are professional organisations, their relationships and their roles within the predominantly favourable. Predictive testing for HBC in an adult is rated policy making process of human genetics in the UK. as more acceptable than testing for HD, mainly because prevention and treatment exist for HBC. In their spontaneous explanations of their P1357. The Iranian Human Mutation Gene Bank website ratings, prophylactic mastectomy is mentioned in a negative way by M. Neishabury, Y. Shafeghati, K. Kahrizi, K. Jalalvand, S. Bany Hashemi, S. almost half of the GPs, nurses/midwives and the BC-group and by one Arzhangi, Z. Zahedi, M. K. Javan, H. Najmabadi; quarter of the scientists/technicians. Favourable ratings for testing an Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- adolescent were mostly explained by respect for personal autonomy. ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Everyone in the HD-group gave a negative rating for predictive testing The website of the Iranian Human Mutation Gene Bank represents in a child at the parents’ request, whereas negative ratings were a comprehensive source of information on DNA samples collected in observed for 45%-66% of the other groups. Respondents’ negative this bank during the last 6 years. These include DNA of individuals with opinions about testing a child at the parents’ request were motivated genetic disorders displaying Mendelian mood of inheritance studied inGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 376 Iran. A group of samples have been assigned to common, rare or novel P1360. Results of the Medical Genetics services in the South- mutations and some others belong to patients with clinical profiles Western part of Romania associated with particular genetic diseases but unidentified mutation. D. Stoicanescu, C. Gug, M. Mihaescu, M. Puiu, S. Farcas, V. Belengeanu; The new version of the software presents different grouping of genetic University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. disorders including Hemoglobinopathes, Neuromuscular disorders, The results of medical genetics investigations in the population of the Mental Retardations and Hearing loss. Apart from the personal data, South-Western part of Romania in the last 5 years are presented. which is strictly kept confidential, clinical profile for each individual Individuals were referred to the Medical Genetics services from and genetic data, including pedigree for each family is presented in Timisoara by medical personnel or came without any referral. Familial this database. In order to facilitate collaboration with other scientists pedigree analysis, clinical, paraclinical and cytogenetic investigation in the world with the same interests, we also display the information revealed: regarding our experimental projects at this center on some of these - A genetic cause in the majority of investigated couples with sterility genetic disorders. This DNA bank offers a free of charge sample and infertility. resource from a large heterogeneous population to all the scientists - Androgen insensitivity and congenital adrenal hyperplasia as the in the world, who are working on various aspects of genetic disorders prevalent causes of intersexualities. from prenatal diagnosis to gene structure and function. No commercial - Turner syndrome and its variants followed by Klinefelter syndrome as benefit is involved in establishment of this DNA bank. Please visit our the cytogenetic causes of hypogonadism. under construction website on http://www.IHMGB.com (Its link is also - Considering single-gene disorders, different types of available in HUGO official website). osteocondrodysplasia were predominant, followed by storage disorders and cystic fibrosis. Due the severity of the phenotype and the P1358. Solving genetic counselling dead end in two Duchenne psychological impact of the defects, rare disorders were diagnosed: muscular dystrophy families with the help of three novel Floating-Harbor and Ambras syndromes. microsatellite markers. - As we expected, the main cause of mental retardation was Down P. Khau van Kien, D. Thorel, C. Saquet, M. Claustres, S. Tuffery-Giraud; syndrome, followed by single-gene disorders. CHU, Montpellier, France. - Among non-syndromic birth defects, limb defects were most Despite important progress in direct Becker/Duchenne muscular frequent. Dystrophy (B/DMD) diagnosis, genetic counselling is occasionally - The majority of hematological malignancies were CML, followed limited when the causative mutation could not be identified. In such by acute leukemias. Conventional cytogenetic analysis was used for circumstances, indirect diagnosis is the only one feasible but can also monitoring these patients every 6 months.Conclusions: Couples with be seriously hampered by the huge size of the B/DMD locus and its sterility and infertility represented the majority of investigated persons, high recombination rates. This is particularly true in the 3' second their number increasing every year. The vast majority of patients came part of the DMD gene where only few markers of low informativity for cytogenetic analysis. An important percent of persons came without are available. All of these drawbacks are illustrated in the two families any referral, knowing about the genetic services from mass-media or we report here: index case deceased without available material, web-sites. high Bayesian estimated risk for the female relatives and absence of informativeness of the markers located in the 3' region of the B/DMD P1361. The Nowgen Network: an on-line system to promote locus. To solve the genetic counselling in both families we performed a national and international collaboration within the human systematic search of short tandem repeat sequences in the 3' region to genetics field detect novel polymorphic markers. Three sequences were selected: in A. C. Rose1, W. S. Johnson2, G. Wainwright2, J. McQuillian2, R. McDermott1, H. intron 67 (IVS-67), intron 76 (IVS-76) and in the 3' untranslated region, R. Middleton-Price1, D. Donnai1; 250kb downstream of the stop codon (3'-UTR). Labelled primers DNA 1Nowgen, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2MerseyBIO, Liverpool, United King- were designed to amplify these sequences from DNA of 78 control dom. subjects given a total of 108 chromosomes that were studied with The field of human genetics clearly benefits from the exchange of standard procedures. Observed allele numbering and frequencies information and the thorough debate of new developments. However, allowed inferring each marker's informativeness with calculation of the due to the rapid evolution of the area, there are problems associated heterozygosity and the Polymorphic Information Content (> 0.6). Their with the identification and dissemination of information and with the use allows to increase the reliability of the haplotypic analysis in the practicalities of debate with interested parties. To address these two families and to reasonably exclude risk in the female relatives. issues, Nowgen and its partner MerseyBIO have worked together to These markers provide new tools for efficient indirect diagnosis of B/ develop a technologically advanced website. Within the site, virtual DMD. communities of experts have been formed to support inter-institutional and interdisciplinary genetics initiatives. Members of the Nowgen team P1359. The Iranian Human Mutation Database work closely with these “Nowgen Network” communities to support M. M. Motazacker1, E. Taherzadeh1, Z. Husseini2, M. Kamyab2, H. Najmabadi1; their use of the system. Initially, a number of pilot communities have 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation been established to focus on clinical, ethical, legal, scientific and Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tebyan IT Institute, Tehran, Islamic educational issues associated with genetics. From a single point of Republic of Iran. access, users can utilise powerful web-based tools, allowing them Regional genetic databases provide scientists all over the world with to identify partners, obtain expert advice, debate issues and retrieve the valuable resource of specific information about the genetic structure personalised, current information. Automatic information retrieval tools of people from particular regions of the world in order to promote the use advanced software that can search web pages and many different diagnosis, treatment and basic research of genetic disorders. The file types. Community interactions are supported by features that allow Iranian population consists of different races, tribes and religions and on-line collaboration, including multi-user, real-time conferencing and has a highly heterogeneous gene pool and mutation spectrum, which, chat facilities. Importantly, the website can accelerate information in many cases, can also be extrapolated to the mutation spectrum of retrieval, support collaborations and debate without geographical people in the neighboring countries within the Middle East. The Iranian limitations and facilitate the dissemination of knowledge in support of Human Mutation Database (IHMD), established in February 2004, is the worldwide genetics community. a collection of information about reported (published or submitted) mutations and related polymorphisms found within the Iranian P1362. Genetic education. Acceptance to testing for genetic population. We have created it to make this wealth of genetic data predisposition - part 3 - The Final more available to researchers, healthcare providers and to patients A. Shopova, S. Shopova, G. Stoyanova; and their families. The IHMD is accessible through the World Wide Web Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. at: http://www.uswr.ac.ir. So far, data have been submitted regarding This presentation is the third closing part of five-year study over attitude more than 392 mutations related to 95 genetic diseases with distinct of Bulgarian people towards the possibilities and achievements of genes. References and authors are also listed by the mutation. genetic science.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 377 The first part, that included women, health-care workers (non-genetics) performance of speech regarding near future studies. Concluding, was "Acceptance of testing for genetic predisposition to breast cancer: these results establish that genetic screening can provide an etiologic 1.The attitude of medical professionals." diagnosis, which highlights a counseling importance, and may provide The second part covered the opinion of medical or biological students a prognostic on performance after cochlear implantation, as has been and was titled " Acceptance of testing for genetic predisposition: 2.The hypothesized in previous studies. attitude of academical youth to PS DNA t for autosomal dominant inheritable late onset diseases. P1365. Unstable aberrations as biomarker of exposure in At this third level we expanded our study in the base genetic workers handling X-rays machines aknowledgments of pupils from specialized in biology high schools M. M. Noditi; and their tutors. Institute of Public Health, Timisoara, Romania. In conclusion this study compares the three groups - doctors, students Biologic effects seen after moderate and low doses of ionizing radiation and pupils mainly towards: are almost invariably the result of damage to the genetic apparatus. 1. Information sources Workers, including those handling X-rays machines as part of their 2. Level of attractiveness of the genetics as a field for future work jobs are routinely monitored. The chromosomal aberrations analysis 3. Personal choice in genetic case situation of peripheral blood lymphocytes could be an important source of information for cytogenetic injury following occupationally exposure P1363. Lack of evidence for association of the endothelial nitric to ionizing radiations. Chromosome breaks can interact pairwise in oxide synthase gene polymorphisms 4VNTR and Glu298Asp and an exchange in an asymmetric fashion to form dicentrics, rings, and idiopathic recurrent miscarriage. interstitial deletions. M. V. Vasilakou1, E. Konstantakou1, E. Konstanti1, V. Velissariou2, A. Hatzaki3, Blood samples were collected from 40 workers and chromosomal K. Lamnissou1; aberrations were analyzed from 500 metaphases per person. The 1Dept of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Dept of results were compared with those obtained from 60 control individuals Cytogenetics"Mitera" Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Dept of Molecular Biology, selected to match at least the age and sex and who had never "Mitera" Hospital, Athens, Greece. been occupationally or therapeutically exposed to ionizing radiation, Lack of endothelium-derived nitric oxide is associated with vasospasm non-ionizing radiation or chemical mutagens. The total frequency and vascular infraction. In the present study we investigated the of chromosomal aberrations and the frequency of dicentrics and relationship between idiopathic recurrent miscarriage and two acentric fragments were higher in the exposed group than in controls. polymorphisms (4VNTR and Glu298Asp) of the gene encoding for Dicentrics were not recorded in 29 occupationally exposed people endothelial nitric oxide synthase (ENOS). In a prospective case-control within the imposed number of scored metaphases. The highest value study, 126 women with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage and 161 of 2 dicentrics in 500 metaphases was found in one case. Dicentrics healthy controls were studied. We used the PCR method to identify the frequency was not directly correlated with the duration of employment different alleles of the intron 4 VNTR polymorphism of ENOS gene and in the exposed group. PCR-RFLPs method to genotype the individuals for the Glu298Asp Analysis of chromosomal aberrations could be used in the assessment polymorphism of the same gene. For the 4VNTR polymorphism the of possible damages to cell genome that may occur in occupational frequencies of bb, ab, aa, were 0.75, 0.24, 0.01 in the patient group and exposure to ionizing radiation. 0.73, 0.24, 0.03 in the control group, respectively. For the Glu298Asp Chromatid Chromosomal aberrations polymorphism the frequencies of the three genotypes (GG, GT, TT) No. Group aberrations (% ± SD) were 0.42, 0.45, 0.13, respectively, for the patient group and 0.49, cells (% ± SD) Total breaks dic ace 0.46, 0.04, for the control group. The dada between the two groups 0.53 ± 0.03 0.11 ± 0.02 0.01 ± were analyzed by chi-square test. Control 30,000 1.54 ± 0.07 0.006 0.23 ± 0.03 We found no significant differences in the frequencies between the 1.38 ± 0.08 0.33 ± 0.04 0.07 ± patient group and the control group for both the studied polymorphisms. Exposed 20,000 1.59 ± 0.09 0.02 0.98 ± 0.07 Conversely to previous results by others, the dada of this work do not support a role for the 4VNTR or Glu298Asp polymorphisms of ENOS P1366. 'Three years of genetic counseling experience in Firat gene as a genetic determinants of the risk of idiopathic recurrent University Medical Genetics Department' miscarriage. H. Akin1, I. Tekedereli2, F. Ozkinay1; 1Ege University Medical Faculty, İzmir, Turkey, 2Firat University Medical Faculty, P1364. Molecular study in Brazilian cochlear implant recipients Elazig, Turkey. E. L. Sartorato1, T. V. Christiani1, R. Leite2, P. Porto2; Genetic counseling is the communication of information and advice about 1Universidade Estadual de Campinas/CBMEG, Campinas - São Paulo, Brazil, inherited conditions and a person seeking such advice is called a consultand. 2Universidade Estadual de Campinas/Disciplina ORL-HC, Campinas - São Our basic principal for genetic counseling process is to collect the patients Paulo, Brazil. or consultands data, illuminate the consultands without being directive, thus, The most common form of non-syndromic autosomal recessive provide making their own decisions. In the light of this principal, the main deafness is caused by mutations in the GJB2 gene (encoding objective of this study is to determine the factors affecting their decisions connexin 26). Recently, a deletion truncating the GJB6 gene (encoding and the harmony of the consultands with process and counselor, to achieve connexin 30), near GJB2, called del (GJB6-D13S1830) has also been the data to reveal counseling feasibility and finally, share this experiences described normally accompanying mutations in another allele of the with other counselors. GJB2 gene. Amongst all the mutations described to date, 35delG in One hunred sixty seven consultands who were referred to our medical the GJB2 gene is the most common and has been found in virtually genetics department for genetic counseling from July 2001 to May 2004, all of the populations studied. Preliminary data suggest that pathologic were taken into the study. changes due to GJB2 mutations do not affect the spiral ganglion cells, We have analyzed the data for parameters such as gender, referral status, which are the site of stimulation of the cochlear implant. Besides, number of sessions, satisfaction, harmony and consent for prenatal the survival of the spiral ganglion cells is believed to be an important diagnosis and selective termination. determinant of the outcome after surgery. Therefore, we have studied It has been evaluated the status of harmony of the consultands using a 42 nonsyndromic deaf patients with unknown etiologies in order questionnaire including accepted criteria, 89.8 % of the consultands seemed to determine the prevalence of GJB2 and GJB6 gene mutations in to be harmonious with the counselor and his explanations , but 10.2 % of the patients undergoing cochlear implantation surgery. As a result, we consultands were inharmonious. found 13 individuals with GJB2 mutation including two new mutations In this study, we have also evaluated the consultands’ information status in the gene (W172X and K168R), and one patient homozygous for and affecting factors about their condition before their genetic conseling the del(GJB6-D13S1830) mutation. In a follow-up study, the cochlear sessions.We have determined that 61.7% of the consultands had no implant patients with positive mutations will be compared to a group information, 24.6 % of them partially and 13.8% of them fully informed. It has of deaf individuals with unknown etiologies aiming at analysing the been emphasized striking findings about our genetic counseling experienceGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 378 P1367. The Italian External Quality Assessment in molecular within a family is highly variable and even obligate gene-carriers without genetic testing coordinated by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità symptoms are described. This markedly reduced penetrance makes D. Taruscio, V. Falbo, N. Bruzzese, F. Censi, G. Floridia, M. Salvatore, F. counselling difficult since the cause of the disorder is still unknown Tosto, G. Vincenti; and no diagnostic test is available. Here we report on a large Iraqi Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy. family with affected members in at least 3 generations. We describe During recent years, there has been a growing interest in quality and illustrate the variability of phenotypical and radiological findings. assurance of genetic testing There are several EQA schemes funded The most severe affected person has bilateral tibial aplasia with club- either by international groups or by national governments or by private foot deformity and oligodactyly but normal upper limbs. Milder affected subscription(1). The Italian External Quality Assessment (IEQA) in individuals have uni- or bilateral split hands with or without hypoplastic molecular genetic testing is financially supported by the National Health big toes. The mildest manifestation reported in this family was an System and coordinated by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità (ISS). individual with abnormal big toes only. In addition an obligate carrier Public Laboratories have been enrolled, covering all Italian regions without clinical symptoms who has 3 affected children was identified. and participation is voluntary(2). The IEQA scheme covers Cystic As a consequence, regarding genetic counselling we suggest to Fibrosis, Beta-Thalassemia and Fragile-X, for which gene testing is evaluate the family history very carefully in patients with only minimal requested very often in Italian laboratories,(3) and the adenomatous symptoms like short big toes. Furthermore, if an apparently unaffected polyposis coli gene. person has an affected parent or if one of his parents can be assumed Four trials have been performed and the number of participating to be a gene-carrier, the risk for an affected child is maximally 8.6% per laboratories has been increasing (41, 50, 56 in 2001, 2002, 2003 se [Majewski et al., Hum Genet 70:136-147, 1985] but could be 50% at respectively; 2004 trial ongoing). worst. Therefore, prenatal ultrasound examination is important also in Laboratories have to i) test, for each disease, six validated samples ii) unaffected parents with that familial constellation. send back to ISS, within two months, raw data, interpretation of results and a final written report. P1370. Cystic Fibrosis: an interactive educational software for For each disease, a panel of national experts evaluated all data. teaching the disease Overall the evaluation reveals that analytical accuracy is good; C. F. Amaral, C. H. Lambrea, D. Tavares, D. Uzeda, D. Puntar, E. Monteiro, C. however, written reports were not homogenous and often missing L. A. Paiva; important information. A standard report format has been proposed Genetics and Molecular Biology Unit, UNIRIO, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. by consensus by the ISS and national experts. An overview of all the Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a severe chronic autosomal recessive disease, results will be illustrated. with an incidence of up to 1:2000 in Caucasian populations. Since (1) Ibarreta D. et al., Nat.Biot. 2004 Brazil is a multiracial mixed population, we have investigated the (2) Taruscio D. et al., Clin Chem Lab Med 2004. notification of CF as primary cause of death in Brazil. We came to the (3) Dallapiccola et al., Analysis 2/3. 2004 conclusion that CF was underestimated mainly in inland parts of the This work is funded by the Project “Test genetici: dalla ricerca alla country. One explanation was that CF symptoms, such as pulmonary clinica”, Italian Ministry of Health (2003-2005). infection, diarrhea and malnutrition, were also common causes of death of non-CF infants in Brazil; and another possibility was that P1368. An External Quality Assessment scheme for genetic the physicians working in the interior of Brazil were not acquainted testing of Fragile X syndrome. with the disease. In order to divulge the disease, we have developed V. Biancalana1, P. Steinbach2, S. Stenhouse3, S. Patton4, R. Elles4; easy educational software, in Portuguese language, for teaching the 1Laboratoire Diagnosic Génétique, Strasbourg, France, 2Abteilung Humange- signs, symptoms and the molecular basis of the disease. For that, we netik, Ulm, Germany, 3Molecular Genetics, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 4National have developed an interactive software using the following programs: Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom. Microsoft Power Point, Corel Trace, Corel Draw, WindowsMetaFile Fragile X syndrome (FRAXA) is the most common cause of inherited and Flash Player version 5.0 r 30 (Macromedia, Inc.). The software mental retardation with an incidence estimated at 1 in 4000-9000 was totally produced by a group of six undergraduate medical students males and 1 in 7000-15000 females. The most frequent mutation seen as an activity of the Molecular Biology Course. The presentation, in in FRAXA is an expansion of a CGG repeat in FMR1 gene. Genetic Power Point, had 19 slides with theoretical text on CF, x-ray images of testing for this expansion is routinely offered in diagnostic molecular normal and CF lungs, microscopic images of CF pancreas and three genetic laboratories. In 2001, a pilot External Quality Assessment original interactive animations showing the mechanism of action of (EQA) scheme for FRAXA was offered by the European Molecular CFTR (Cystic Fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) protein. Genetic Network (EMQN) and 16 laboratories from 16 countries applied Therefore, the slide show saved on CD disc can be easily replicated to take part. Since this successful trial, the number of participants has and used for teaching transport across cell membrane and also as increased each year with 54 participants from 22 countries in 2004. divulgation of CF to Health Care professionals. A wide variety of methods is used and two different marking criteria were applied for the laboratories which perform the full genotyping P1371. The European Skeletal Dysplasia Network (ESDN) (usually by Southern blot) and the laboratories which only perform - A model for increasing access to genetic testing of rare conditions. a pre-screeening by PCR method. Each year 3 DNA samples were sent out for analysis, some of the cases were chosen in order to give J. Taylor, ESDN project administrator, on behalf of:1, M. Briggs2, R. Elles1, the opportunity to the participants to appreciate particular problems in G. Jackson1,2, G. Mortier3, P. Coucke3, M. Wright4, J. Goodship4, J. Bonaven- genotyping. Error rates were calculated from the total number of alleles ture5, M. Le Merrer5, V. Cormier-Daire5, L. Ala-Kokko6, M. Mannikko6, M. Ma- analysed by all laboratories. The scheme will be described in full and java6, B. Zabel7, J. Spranger7, G. Wildhardt7, A. Superti-Furga8, L. Bonafe8, A. the results of both genotyping and interpretation will be discussed. Zankl8; Lessons drawn from the development of the scheme should be useful 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Manchester), Manchester, United for laboratories involved in this field. Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Centre For Cell Matrix Research, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4International Centre for Life, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom, P1369. Intrafamilial variability in autosomal dominant tibial 5Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 6University of Oulu, Oulu, aplasia with ectrodactyly. Finland, 7Children’s Hospital, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 8Centre A. Bohring1, H. H. Wetz2, J. Horst1; Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland. 1Institut für Humangenetik, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Mün- Skeletal dysplasias are a diverse group of genetic diseases affecting ster, Germany, 2Klinik für Technische Orthopädie und Rehabilitation, West- the development of the osseous skeleton. Because skeletal dysplasias fälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Germany. are rare and exhibit extensive clinical variability and genetic Aplasia of the tibia with ectrodactyly (OMIM 119100) is a rare heterogeneity, accurate diagnosis is a challenge for the non-expert. malformation. In most families this disorder follows an autosomal To provide equity of access to diagnostic experts we have established dominant pattern of inheritance. The phenotype of affected individuals the European Skeletal Dysplasia Network (ESDN). The ESDN hasGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 379 adopted two approaches; the research component of the project with PKU for initiation dietary management. There is no solution of the focuses on identifying the genes, mutations and disease processes serious problem of the atypical and maternal PKU in St.Petersburg. that underlie skeletal dysplasias, whilst the diagnostic component Maintaining lifelong compliance with Phe-free formula is not discussed. integrates a network of expert clinicians and laboratories. Since January Amino acid analysis of high quality and DNA analysis for confirming 2002 the ESDN has received 1513 patient referrals from 23 EU and PKU diagnosis are rare and very expensive. There is no constant team 10 non-EU countries. The causative mutations have been identified recruited different specialists, including dietician, for long-term contact. in 503 patients following 1066 diagnostic tests. Furthermore, the Some parents and probands do not understand PKU problems clearly development of a custom built secure web-based case management and accurately. To have own web site, newsletter, modern handbooks, system allows clinicians to refer cases to the ESDN from anywhere booklets, hot-phone number is the requisite condition of successful in the world. Through the ESDN Case Manager, a clinical description management of PKU families and x-rays are assessed by the ESDN’s panel of expert reviewers and an initial clinical diagnosis is confirmed or suggested. Patient DNA P1374. Inheritance Pattern in Congenital Heart Disease samples are then sent to the appropriate ESDN partner laboratory S. M. Kalantar1, S. M. Seyedhassani1, M. Behjati2, M. Rfiee2; for molecular diagnosis. This is the first pan-European approach to 1Research and Clinical Center for Infertility of Yazd, Yazd, Islamic Republic of the diagnosis of rare diseases, and therefore has major implications Iran, 2Hear research and Clinical Center of Yazd, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. for the delivery of diagnostic services in the EC for the 21st Century. Background: About 0.8% of live births are complicated by The model established by the ESDN is applicable to the diagnosis and cardiovascular malformations. Most of these anomalies appear to have management of any group of rare disease. a multifactorial or polygenic etiology. About 5-7%of cardiovascular www.ESDN.org malformations result from a chromosomal defect and about 3% of ESDN is funded by the European Union and the Swiss Government them has a single gene disorder. The aim of this study is to determine genetic patterns influencing congenital heart disease (CHD). P1372. The Canadian Molecular Cytogenetics Platform : Materials & Methods: We studied 203 consecutive patients suffered Developing Informatics Security and Access Resources from CHD being referred to cardiovascular research center during 10 C. Chassigneux, R. Duaso Calés, M. Lacroix, B. Knoppers, P. Trudel; months. Familial pedigree, Clinical and paraclinical data of patients Centre de Recherche en Droit Public, Montréal, PQ, Canada. were evaluated. The Canadian Molecular Cytogenetics Platform (CMCP) is an Results: There were 90 male and 113 female in this study (mean age infrastructure partnership of 13 major research facilities that supports = 5.48).The most common malformations were VSD (19.2%), ASD the research of leading clinical investigators and basic scientists. (11.8%), PDA (11.2%) and TOF (10.3%). Of these patients, 70 patients For example one of its projects, Genomic Tools for Diagnosis and had a positive familiar pedigree with CHD. About 71% were born from Evaluation of Mental Retardation, aims to evaluate high-resolution consanguineous marriage of different degrees (76% third degree). BAC microarray comparative genomic hybridisation as an alternative In 67%of cases at least one more relatives had the same problem method of identification of chromosomal abnormalities in individuals while in one family another 4 relatives found to have CHD. The highest with mental retardation. It will compare samples from affected inbreeding coefficient (13.28) was found in one family and 39.9% had individuals, mostly children, and their family members with those from 6.25=<F. The inheritance pattern in this patients included Autosomal an ethnically diverse group of unaffected adults. Dominant (5.7%), Autosomal Recessive (5.7%), Sex Linked (2.9%) The CMCP is building a system for the collection, storage and sharing and positive pedigree without inheritance pattern (86%). of clinical and research data and specimens from 18 centres throughout Conclusion: The result can help to physicians and genetic counselor Canada. Before research is undertaken, an Informatics Security and to realize the contribution of inheritance pattern in congenital heart Access Platform is being developed by the Genetics and Society disease and in to recognition and prevention of subsequent CHD and Project of the Centre de recherche en droit public at the Université in setting priorities of screening in individual cases. de Montréal. Its goal is to ensure that the research supported by the CMCP is conducted in accordance with current legal and ethical P1375. The Inheritance Pattern of Blind People Supported by standards. Can such a collaborative network creating both local and Rehabilitation Organization centralised databases adequately protect participants and yet ensure M. R. Besharati1, S. M. Seyedhassani1,2, S. M. Kalantar1,2, J. Effati3,2; the highest scientific quality ? Beginning with an analysis of potential 1Research and Clinical Center for Infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, risks with regard to confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data, 2PAYAM an N.G.O for prevention of infermities, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, the informatics access and security resource is defining the necessary 3Rehabilitaion organization, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. safeguards for samples and data. A code of conduct, of principles Objective: Visual loss is one of the most important of infirmities, affecting and policies; standard operating procedures; conflict of interest and about 514000 people in Iran. The aim of this study was to explore the copyright/intellectual property guidelines; and an informed consent frequency of the types of blindness and the role of inheritance patterns template and process are being developed. implicating autosomal and X-linked disorders in this. Materials & Methods: In this clinical and cross sectional study, a genetic P1373. St.Petersburg society of the parents with PKU children counseling program was performed for patients that were supported (ORDI-PKU) by the Yazd Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Organization, The A. I. Ivanova1, T. I. Sokolova1, O. S. Egidarova1, M. O. Mkheidze2; subjects were referred to Genetic Counseling Center during 9 months 1ORDI-PKU, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical Academy for post- by Yazd Blind’s N.G.O. Based on genetic counseling, familial pedigree graduate training, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. and other clinical and paraclinical data, containing ophthalmologic In memoriam Irina V. Butomo assessments were accumulated. The society of the parents with PKU children (ORDI-PKU) was founded Results: In 109 patients, 73 and 36 patients were males and females, in 2002 in Saint-Petersburg, Russia. Cooperation of PKU families is a respectively. The mean age was 24.62 (SD=10.49). In these patients, very important fact in St.Peterburg history of PKU. The main aim of 66 had a positive pedigree of blindness. 66.1% (72 patients) were born ORDI-PKU is to create adaptation system for children with PKU, to co- from a consanguineous marriage in different degrees (58.1% in third ordinate parents activity and to make a bridge between PKU families degree). There was inheritance pattern in these cases with autosomal and geneticists and other physicians.Only fifty two families with PKU dominant (10.6%), autosomal recessive (56.1%), sex linked (15.1%), children are members of our society. Only 30% of them are the active positive pedigree without inheritance pattern (18.2%). There were members and participants of the different projects of our society. Our 13 blinds in familial pedigree as autosomal dominant inheritance in close cooperation with the Center of Medical Genetics, the Department one proband. The most common types of blindness were retinitis of Medical Genetics of the Medical Academy for Postgraduate Training pigmentosa (32.1%), and microphthalmia (16.5%). ensures modern medical and diet management. We have financial Conclusion: Familial marriage was related to in expression of blindness support for purchase different Phe-free powders. All children with in our patients. (P = 0.00 & odds ratio = 2.75).The results provide PKU are under geneticists observation, this medical care is free of information for physicians and genetic counselor to realize contribution charge. Unfortunately, there is no possibility to hospitalize an infant of inheritance pattern in blindness.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 380 P1376. Thalassemia and Prenatal Diagnosis: Example of Iran, during the processes of sampling, genetic testing, interpretation, and prevention program & its peculiarities reporting of results. M. T. Akbari1,2; The introduction of international standards for quality and competence 1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Depart- in laboratories, together with a growing interest in accreditation of ment of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Tarbiat laboratories, has increased the need for a better understanding of quality Modarres, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. management and quality assurance. The International Organization Molecular genetic testing in Iran was initially introduced in 1992 for Standards (ISO) defines quality as ‘the degree to which a set of through performing prenatal diagnosis (PND) of β-thalassemia. This inherent characteristics fulfils requirements’. The EUROGENTEST acted as a catalyst for thalassemia prevention program. When we network aims to help and guide medical genetic laboratories in order started doing PND inside the country, the need to provide PND as to better understand this type of ‘standards language’ that is used by the ultimate preventive measure was evident. However, the legal, accreditation bodies. religious and official frameworks to deal with the aftermath of such a An educative website will be constructed with links for each EU country diagnosis; i.e. abortion therapy were not sanctioned yet. β-thalassemia to relevant information on accreditation bodies, contact persons, with over 15000 registered cases, 5000 more non- registered cases, coordinates of the national standardization institutes, and explanations estimate of three million carriers, expensive treatments and stigmas of terminologies. Furthermore, a database will be prepared to publicize and psychosocial problems made it an obvious target for prevention. with relevant information on quality assurance in European laboratories. A thalassemia prevention program was in action since early 1990s. Finally, a study is planned to calculate the ‘real cost’ for implementing The aim of that program was to identify the at-risk carrier couples and maintaining a quality management system in a genetic service by blood testing premaritally and persuade them not to get married. laboratory. Nevertheless, the outcome was not satisfactory : less than a third of the couples accepted the recommendation and the majority went P1379. Telegenética: an online consultation service for health ahead with their marriage options. So, the risk of affected newborns proffessionals. remained, and ineffectiveness of the program made itself apparent. M. Del Campo Casanelles, B. Gener Querol, J. Del Valle Dominguez, V. Ro- This was because it lacked the offer of PND to the at-risk couples. This driguez, L. A. Perez Jurado; defect was finally rectified in 1997 and the offer of PND to the at-risk Genetics Unit. Department of Experimental Science, Universitat Pompeu couples was incorporated in the program. Adoption of such a policy Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. has paved the way for a more comprehensive approach in prevention Telegenetica is an online consultation service in clinical genetics open of genetic disorders in general. This article provides an account of the to registered professionals who seek diagnostic support or specific past and present situation of prevention program for genetic disorders information for a patient, in spanish. The website contains specific in Iran. forms to guide non-genetics specialists in clinical interview and examination. The consultations are directly replied by two certified P1377. Estonian Womens´Attitude to Prenatal Diagnosis genetics specialists. For those cases without a firm diagnosis, the K. Muru, T. Reimand, M. Sitska; patients are included in an online discussion board of collaborating Medical Genetics Center, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia. genetics specialists. The program is directly linked to Orphanet, the Aim: To investigate pregnant womens´ experience prenatal counselling European online database in rare disorders, coordinated in Spain by in connection with prenatal diagnosis (PND). this same group. During the initial 18 months of Telegenetica, 179 Methods: We gave questionnaires to two group of pregnant women: health professionals have registered: 142 physicians, 14 biologists, 3 group A - women aged 37 years and over; group B - women under 37 pharmacists, 3 teachers, 2 psychologists and 2 nurses. Pediatricians, years who had received II trimester biochemical serum screen-positive obstetricians, geneticists and family doctors submitted most result. consultations. The service is presented to the patient as a confidential Results: Most of the women of group A and half of group B knew about and anonymous specialist consultation, but the referring doctor is PND before pregnancy. The main source of information had been responsible for providing genetic counselling or referring the patient to gynaecologists and midwives. The main reasons for having an invasive a Clinical Genetics service. A specific diagnosis has been established procedure were the assurance for having healthy baby and the doctor’s for over 50% of cases submitted. A satisfaction questionnaire for advice. The women in group A were more satisfied with the information participating professionals and patients, and a pilot study for the blind given at genetic counselling, than group B. 99% of women in group A evaluation of the patients referred online has been completed and and 71% in group B knew about methods and risks of PND. All women reflects high levels of diagnostic efficiency, as well as physician and in group A and 91% in group B asked for genetic counselling. The main patient satisfaction. The referring physicians perceived this service feelings after the procedure was satisfaction with decision and that the as a diagnostic support but also as a valuable educational tool for procedure wasn’t so harmful. Most of the women said that they would acquisition of basic knowledge in clinical genetics. The specialists undergo PND during another pregnancy. At the time of the test, more discussion board has provided new diagnoses and fulfilled the than half of participants (55%) would choose a legal abortion if the test educational expectations of the participants. indicated an abnormality in the foetus. Conclusion: Women in the age risk group are satisfactorily informed P1380. Is consent required for immunohistochemistry and microsatellite instability testing of tumour samples? probably because PND is well known among them. For group B PND came unexpectedly and it is most probably difficult to cooperate for C. L. Gaff1,2, I. Frayling2, A. Clarke1, M. T. Rogers2; amniocentesis because of fear. However all women were sure, that 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Insti- prenatal diagnosis was necessary. tute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom. One central purpose of the informed consent process in the delivery P1378. Quality Management and Quality Assurance in Molecular of genetic testing within clinical services is to help ensure that the Genetic Testing Laboratories. client understands the personal, medical and familial implications of E. Dequeker1, S. Berwouts1, J. J. Cassiman1, M. A. Morris2; performing the test. Written consent is a prerequisite for cancer genetic 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium, 2Medical Ge- testing and is usually provided after genetic counselling. netic Service, Geneva University Hospital, Switzerland. Immunochemistry for mismatch repair proteins (IHC) and microsatellite Genetic testing services in Europe have substantially increased their instability (MSI) testing of tumours suggest if mismatch repair gene activity in the past few years. Testing for genetic diseases has rapidly defects contributed to a family history of HNPCC-related cancers and moved from the laboratory into medical practice and, in this process, are particularly useful for assessment of families who do not meet issues of quality require adequate attention. The organization of annual the modified Amsterdam criteria. Therefore, they may be considered external quality assessment schemes in Europe, complemented by screening tests as they identify a subgroup of individuals eligible for regional workshops on quality, has demonstrated that quality assurance diagnostic genetic testing. The All Wales Cancer Genetic Service is essential in order to minimize errors in genetic services. It has been provides IHC and MSI testing after genetic counselling and written conclusively shown that errors and deficiencies can occur everywhere consent is obtained.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 381 It is not feasible for genetic services to see all individuals who may P1383. Diagnostic procedure for the assessment of hereditary be eligible for MSI/IHC. Testing could be initiated by a surgeon on prosopagnosia the basis of suggestive family history, by a pathologist for tumours M. Grueter, B. Welling, J. Horst, I. Kennerknecht, T. Grueter; showing features consistent with an HNPCC phenotype or as part of a Institut für Humangenetik; Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Ger- program to test all colorectal tumours diagnosed under a specified age. many. The consent process in each of these settings differs from standard Prosopagnosia is a selective impairment in the visual learning and practice in genetics. recognition of faces. There is a hereditary type of prosopagnosia We consider the practice and purpose of consent in each of these without any detectable brain damage or malformation, which has settings. We ask if there should be consistency in the consent process, an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. It is the only known regardless of the context in which MSI and IHC are initiated, or if the hereditary disorder of higher visual cognitive functions. There has different settings require different approaches to consent. been no standard diagnosic procedure so far for this disorder, because most researchers only saw single cases. We assessed 36 cases of P1381. Education, Genetic Counselling & Congenital hereditary prosopagnosia in order to develop a standard diagnostic Malformaitons in Iran procedure. We compiled a checklist of symptoms in three groups: R. Mokhtari1, A. Bagga2; Group one contains six leading symptoms, where at least five must 1NON, Tehran - iran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2University of Pune, India - Pune, be present. Group two contains five facultative symptoms, of which India. at least two must be present. Group three is a list of symptoms, The central place in bioethical decisions actually belongs to the patient. which are usually not associated with isolated prosopagnosia. If three The research was undertaken studying 800 cases from different areas or more of these symptoms in the latter group are present, a face of Tehran in two year's span of data collection with the aim of studying recognition deficit is probably not caused by hereditary prosopagnosia. the role of education of the parents in preventing the spread of certain The diagnostic procedure has been verified independently by other genetic disorders in Iranian population. And also to study the present researchers. It could be shown, that the subjective symptoms are position of genetic counseling in Iran and their utility by people. indeed accompanied by an objective face recognition deficit. This is Analysis of data on educational level of the patient's parents who the first diagnostic checklist for the hereditary prosopagnosia and can consulted genetic clinics revealed that around 41% had secondary help to establish a standard diagnostic procedure for this common level of education. 15% were well educated while 12% were illiterates. hereditary disorder. Majority (98.8%) of them referred to these clinics by their consulting doctors. 1.2% who went on their own had certain level of education, P1384. Biological Effects and Health Risks of Cell Phone majority were well educated and professionals. Radiation In one of the main genetic centers, a total of 2246 patents came for R. M. Rodrigues1, C. L. Campanhol1, V. C. O. Franco1, M. G. Lins2, J. K. Hein- genetic counseling before marriage and mostly were related. Nearly rich1; 23%came for reconfirming the abnormality of their affected child. 16% 1CAISM/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2CPqD Foundation, Campinas, Brazil. came for having repeated abortions. 15% came because of being Concerns about non ionizing radiation have been reported, especially infertile and wanted to know if there is any genetic cause behind that. considering possible biological effects and health risks to individuals 12% came for counseling as they already had an affected child and exposed to this sort of radiation. The objective of this study was to wanted to have another child again. accomplish a critical and systematical review of published articles and Central to prevention is the recognition of causes, which in Iran to analyze, qualitatively, the in vitro, in vivo and epidemiological results emerges out to be predominantly consanguinity in Marriage partners. about the effects of the non ionizing radiation in cells, individuals and Best of programs are bound to fail if they lack attention to development populations. Two hundred and twenty one Medline-indexed scientific of positive attitudes towards prevention in both the people and the articles were reviewed. In vitro findings reported DNA and protein professionals. expression damage, increasing cellular proliferation as well as the increase in aneuploidy of certain chromosomes and cell division P1382. BRCA analysis - pitfall in finding the index patient asynchrony even that the majority of results are yet conflicting. DNA B. Welling, T. Neumann, I. Kennerknecht, S. Preisler-Adams, B. Dworniczak, damage was also verified by the REFLEX study (in a joint effort from J. Horst; European countries) and is also supported by our study considering Institut für Humangenetik, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Ger- effects in cells and tissues caused by non ionizing radiation. many. Epidemiological studies pointed to other effects, as headaches, We report on a family with breast cancer affected members in two sleeplessness, dizziness and cognitive effects, which were found, generations. The usual procedure after respective genetic counselling also, in in vivo studies. Some studies suggest that this kind of radiation is to test an “index patient” within the family who is an affected first might induce acoustic neuromas (a benign tumor). Although there are or second degree relative of the risk asking woman. Our chosen plenty of data about the problem, few conclusions could be delineated. index patient (maternal aunt to risk asking woman) who had breast It was proved that radiation induces a biological response but it is still cancer at age 49 years showed no mutation in the BRCA1/2 genes. unclear if it is a real health risk. As the radiation problem is still new In concordance with the usual German genetic test criteria we offered for the population to know its effects, users and governments should no further analyses in this family. A few months later the younger sister take a precautionary approach until its major effects could be finally of our risk asking woman was diagnosed with breast cancer at the understood. age of 45 years. She is the first affected family member in the third SUPPORT: FUNTTEL generation. We decided to offer a gene test although no mutation was found in the first index patient. Surprisingly we found a mutation in the P1385. 'To know yet not to know': preimplantation genetic BRCA2 gene. A subsequent analysis in our risk asking woman showed diagnosis of inherited prion diseases the same mutation. Since the father of the sisters who is still alive V. Meiner, N. Weinberg, A. Safran, I. Lerer, M. Sagi, M. Sagi, H. Rosenmann, does not carry the mutation it must have been inherited maternally. D. Abeliovich, N. Laufer, A. Simon; Therefore, the breast cancer disease in our first analysed index patient Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel. seems not to be related to the inherited form of breast cancer in this Genetic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a fatal degenerative family. Because of this pitfall in choosing the “right” index patient it brain disorder with autosomal dominant inheritance and near 100% seems to be of interest to discuss whether the German genetic test penetrance. Jews of Libyan origin have an increased incidence of CJD criteria should be extended in the sense of testing every affected due to a common founder mutation. We report preimplantation genetic family member. diagnosis (PGD) by exclusion for CJD in embryos from a daughter of an affected patient. The daughter did not wish to learn her carrier status, yet wanted to have non-carrier children. Following an IVF procedure, embryos that inherited the non-affected parent's haplotype were identified and transferred. PGD by exclusion for CJD provides aGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 382 non routine option for individuals who wish to avoid the transmission of P1388. Genetic counselling for thalassemia and the mutant gene without revealing their own carrier status. haemoglobinopathies for immigrants in Emilia-Romagna and PGD by exclusion is a significant option in light of potential discrimination north-east Italy and fear of stigmatization of the Libyan Jewish community where M. Lucci, A. Sensi, A. Venturoli, B. Dolcini, M. Taddei-Masieri, C. Trabanelli, A. the incidence of CJD is 100 times higher than worldwide incidence Ravani, P. Prontera, A. Ferlini, E. Calzolari; (50 per million as opposed to 0.5 per million). By implementing such Genetica Medica, Ferrara, Italy. technology these families may be able to halt the transmission of this Immigration in the European Community, either from countries of devastating, non-treatable disease and to avoid ethical dilemmas other continents or from other part of Europe, implies that the national concerning predictive testing. health systems should face specific problems considering the cultural differences in the ethnicities. Hemoglobinopathies, one of the most P1386. Developing curricula based on learning needs: genetics common autosomal recessive disorders in the world, is a disease to education for specialist registrars in non-genetics specialties. deal with preventive actions, identifying the carriers and providing S. Burke1, P. Farndon2, H. Thomas1; genetic counselling. In the last five years, 210 counselling sessions for 1Centre for Research in Medical and Dental Education, Birmingham, United risk of thalassaemia and haemoglobinopathies have been performed Kingdom, 2NHS Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, for immigrants at the Medical Genetic Service of Ferrara, for residents United Kingdom. in Emilia Romagna and in North Eastern Italy. This group is about 10 % Background: In June 2003 the Department of Health, England, of the total counselling provided for these diseases in the considered published a White Paper, “Our Inheritance, Our Future”, setting out a period. 59 % of immigrants are of African origin (in particular countries strategy to prepare the NHS for changes in healthcare that could result of Guinea Gulf and North Africa), 21% are European (mostly from from the Human Genome Project. It recognises a need for improved Albania), 13 % are Asiatic, 7 % are from central and south America. 12% genetics training at all levels of medical education. of total consultations were performed for singles, 14% for couples prior Summary of Work: The study aim was to develop a genetics curriculum to pregnancy, 74% for couples during a pregnancy (49% of the couples for specialist registrars in dermatology, cardiology and neurology. of this group resulted at reproductive risk). The request for prenatal Curriculum development was informed by three sets of data. Firstly, diagnosis was different between the European group and the African a mapping exercise of current genetics education, including curricula one: a uniform choice for prenatal diagnosis in the European group, a analysis, interviews with educators, and a survey of specialist registrars more articulated request in the African one. The collected data about in the selected specialties. Secondly, focus groups with specialist the wide spectrum of molecular defects, the different pregnancy’s time registrars in the selected specialties in the West Midlands and South of referral to counselling and the previous knowledge of risk seem to Western deaneries. Thirdly, an online modified Delphi survey of a condition differently the reproductive choices in various ethnic groups. national sample of consultant geneticists and specialty consultants. Summary of Results: Collection of the three sets of data enabled an P1389. Do midwives think genetics is important? Implications evaluation of the synergy between current teaching of genetics up to of their views and confidence for the provision of genetics SpR grade and their identified learning needs in the modern health education. service. Priority areas for teaching and learning have been identified C. Bennett1, A. Metcalfe2, J. Haydon1, P. Farndon1; and strategies for effective delivery developed. 1Centre for Education in Medical Genetics, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Uni- Conclusions: Curriculum development is often based on the opinions versity of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. of a small number of experts. This project demonstrates an alternative In the UK, midwives are the primary healthcare providers for women model, in which curriculum development draws on a wide range of during pregnancy, childbirth and the early postnatal period. An data sources. Such an approach has highlighted the need for genetics understanding of genetics is therefore important. However, studies education for specialist registrars to be based on learning needs, have shown that midwives receive little genetics education. To inform focused on agreed priorities, and made relevant to each specialty. the development of relevant genetics education, this study examined midwives’ views of the importance of genetics and their confidence. P1387. Genetic services in public health A questionnaire was sent to all midwives in four maternity units in the O. Timchenko1, V. Galagan1, O. Lynchak1, T. Pokanevych2, O. Gorina2, O. West Midlands (N=817). Clinical scenarios covered genetic conditions Metenko2, O. Tkachenko2; relevant to midwifery practice (cystic fibrosis, Turner syndrome, 1Institute of Hygiene and Medical Ecology, Kiev, Ukraine, 2Centre of protection Duchenne muscular dystrophy). Genetic activities were listed for each of mother's and children's health of Kiev region, Kiev, Ukraine. scenario, such as “Explain to Kelly how cystic fibrosis is inherited” Purpose: the improvement of public health in field of medical and “Identify whether Sarah should be referred to specialist genetics genetics. services”. For each, midwives rated the importance to midwifery clinical Methods. Genetic monitoring system works since 1999, it consists of practice and their personal confidence to carry out the activity using a territorial (Kyiv and Kyivska region) registers of newborns birth defects bipolar rating scale. (2840 cases), spontaneous abortions (3363 cases), sterile marriages The response rate was 51%. Questions were categorised into ‘clinical’, (1268 cases, sterilitas I). Risk factors influence was estimated by odds ‘psychosocial & ethical’ and ‘biological’. Midwives rated all categories ratio (OR) with 95% confidential interval. important in clinical practice. However, personal confidence was rated Results. The number of patients for genetic consulting has increased low or fairly low. Confidence was lower for biological and clinical 1,5 times during the studied period. Time for congenital pathology questions than psychosocial questions. Most (89%) were interested or diagnostics decreased. It was find out that parents infectious diseases very interested in genetics courses. There was no significant difference increase probability of birth defects among newborns, spontaneous for interest in genetics education with age, clinical grade, maternity abortions, sterile marriages (OR=3,42 (2,38-4,97); OR=4,56 (3,23- unit, education background or previous genetics education. Those with 6,37); OR=17,79 (12,31-24,50) correspondingly). Endocrine pathology some genetics education were more interested in longer courses than also increases such risks: OR=3,17 (2,26-4,45); 2,78 (1,93-4,00); 5,78 others. (3,84-8,68) correspondingly. These findings have been used to provide genetics courses for It was detected that spontaneous abortions (till 12 weeks of gestation) midwives that enable them to meet the demands of their role. risk increases of women live in the radioactive polluted regions of Kyivska region (OR=1,36 (1,09-1,71), and mechanisms of this P1390. The psychological effect of BRCA1/2 genetic testing: A phenomenon should be investigated. prospective study Conclusions. Concerted action of doctors, health care managers E. Dagan1, S. Gil2; and scientists within genetic monitoring system allowed to decrease 1Dept of Human Genetics, Rambam Medical Center and Dept of Nursing, Uni- foetus reproductive losses risk 1,36 times (1999-2003 in comparison versity of Haifa, Haifa, Israel, 2Dept of Nursing and Social Work, University of with 1994-1998): spontaneous abortions rate decreased 1,45 times, Haifa, Haifa, Israel. stillbirth rate and early neonatal (first 6 days) death rate decreased The long-term psychosocial effects of genetic counseling and testing for 1,12 and 1,48 times correspondingly. families at high risk for developing breast/ovarian cancer are importantGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 383 issues relevant for applied clinical research. 160 high risk Jewish professionals. They include understanding what patients expect to find women, were pre and post counseling evaluated regarding distress out about genetics from the different health professionals they meet, levels, coping style usage and social support. Mean age ranged and using patients’ experiences to demonstrate the clinical utility of from 32.7+4.7 (for the asymptomatic BRCA1/2 mutation carriers) genetics. to 54.4+12.9 (for non-carriers diagnose with breast cancer), with The Centre has a collaborative multidisciplinary team with expertise significant differences (F=18.7; p<.001). Ethnic origin was attributed by in educational theory and practice, communications, information country of birth of the case, her parents and both sets of grandparents. technology, evaluation and event management. Initial work Based on results of genetic testing, participants were divided into four programmes centre on three NHS staff groups (medical practitioners; subgroups: breast cancer-affected BRCA1/2 mutation carriers (n=16), nurses, midwives and health visitors; and pharmacists) and focus on breast cancer-affected non-carriers (n=66), asymptomatic BRCA1/2 assessing genetics educational needs, developing and evaluating mutation carriers (n=16) and asymptomatic non-carriers (n=62). curricula, competency frameworks and educational resources; Pre- genetic testing analysis showed that, breast cancer-affected encouraging the integration of genetics into pre- and post-registration women expressed the highest levels of distress (0.8+0.3 for mutation courses and continuing professional development carriers and 0.8+0.7 for non-carriers) and social support (5.6+0.6 for Recognising the need to work through the existing professional bodies, mutation carriers and 5.1+0.6 for non-carriers). Whereas, post genetic providers of training and education, and not overloading curricula, the testing results showed that only asymptomatic BRCA1/2 mutation Centre is working in close co-operation with many organisations. It is carriers were effected by genetic testing as reflected in increased levels especially important to keep responsibility for provision of education of somatization (1.3+0.9), depression (1.3+0.8), anxiety (1.3+0.8), and within current mechanisms and providers. Through being based in on the GSI (Global Severity Index) (0.8+0.8), and use the avoidance a regional genetics service, we can incorporate rapid advances in coping style (4.9+0.5). Regression analysis revealed three predictors genetic practice into the educational initiatives. of distress levels: breast cancer status, mutation carrier status, and www.geneticseducation.nhs.uk use of the avoidance coping style. These findings indicate that in Israeli asymptomatic BRCA1/2 mutation P1393. EuroBioBank, the leading European Network of DNA, carriers, oncogenetic counseling and testing has profound psychosocial Cell and Tissue Banks for Rare Diseases: results of the first two effect. This subset of individuals should be targeted in future studies years of activity. aimed at stress reduction. L. Politano1, C. Angelini2, F. Bignami3, O. Cohen4, J. H. Di Donato5, A. Felice6, C. Guitart Arnau1, C. Guitart Arnau7, M. Izquierdo8, V. Karcagi9, J. C. Laurent10, P1391. X-linked mental retardation Italian network H. Lochmuller11, H. Lochmuller11, M. Meznaric Petrusa12, M. Moggio13, M. I. Meloni1, C. Pescucci1, F. Mari1, I. Longo1, F. Ariani1, M. Bruttini1, E. Scala1, R. Mora14, M. Posada8, F. Salama3, C. Verellen Dumoulin15, C. Jaeger16; Caselli1, K. Sampieri1, A. Renieri1, X. L. M. R. Italian network2; 1Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy, 2University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 1Medical Genetics, Dept. of Molecular Biology, Universtiy of Siena, Siena, Italy, 3Eurordis, Paris, France, 4TIMC, Grenoble, France, 5Genethon, Evry, France, 227 clinical centers and 9 laboratories as found at http://www.xlmr.unisi.it, Italy, 6University of Malta, La Valletta, Malta, 7Teamlog Sa, Grenoble, France, 8IIER, Italy. Madrid, Spain, 9NCPH, Budapest, Hungary, 10BET, Marseilles, France, 11MTCC, The X-linked mental retardation Italian network includes 27 clinical Munich, Germany, 12University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 13IRCCS, Mi- centers and 9 laboratories. It collects clinical information and lan, Italy, 14INNCB, Milan, Italy, 15UCL, Brussels, Belgium, 16AFM, Paris, France. biological materials of mentally retarded males negative for FRAXA EuroBioBank (EBB), the leading European network of DNA, Cell and and chromosomal and subtelomeric rearrangements. The following Tissue Banks for Rare Diseases was established in 2000 thanks to XLMR genes are presently analyzed: RSK2, ARX, IL1RAPL, XNP, the collaboration of 16 partners from 8 countries, in order to improve OPHN1, ACSL4, AGTR2, FMR2, SLC6A8, MECP2, NLGN3 NLGN4, accessibility of human biological resources. PQBP1. Whenever possible, enzymatic tests or metabolite dosage The project was funded by the EC in 2002 for 3 years, under the 5th are employed. If mothers’ DNA is available, X-inactivation status Framework Programme (QLRI-CT-2002-02769). is analyzed. In familial cases, exclusion mapping or classic linkage The expected results are: to optimise the use of existing collections analyses are performed. A dedicated web site has been created for and encourage the creation of new ones; to enhance collaborations in the network (http://www.xlmr.unisi.it). General information on the site medical and scientific communities in the field of rare disorders affecting is publicly available. Specific information can be accessed only from about 30 million citizens in Europe; to develop specific research and network members and includes: 1-Detailed clinical data; 2- Location of diagnostic tools; to define new therapeutic methods. biological samples; 3- Laboratory results. At present, the network has The first 2 years were dedicated to identifying and localising the collected DNA and lymphoblastoid cell lines of 103 XLMR cases (28 existing biological material, to standardising and promoting quality familial, 13 likely familial and 63 sporadic). Linkage analysis allowed banking practices, developing a network Charter, Material Transfer to define a possible new locus in Xq27 in a family. Exclusion mapping Agreement and Standard Operator Procedures, to distributing quality in small families allowed to exclude several loci addressing mutation material and associated data to users. analysis to the remaining genes. Skewed X-inactivation in the mother A web site dedicated to the network activities (www.eurobiobank. was found in 5 sporadic and 8 familial cases, addressing mutation org) was created with a restricted area reserved to communication analysis to specific genes. Creatine blood dosage was elevated in and collaborations among partners of the network (EBB Intranet). 4 cases suggesting a SLC6A8 mutation. Creatine dosage in urine of Information on the EBB network has circulated through leaflets, these patients will confirm this hypothesis. Standard mutation analysis articles in patient magazines and posters or oral communications of the other genes has been performed in 1/3 of the cases and no at international congresses. Several scientific papers have also mutations have been found until now. Telethon (n°GTF02006) and acknowledged EBB. Fondazione Mariani grants to A.R. The EBB network is a successful, structural model for supporting scientific exchanges and cooperation. It was awarded the "Newropeans P1392. The NHS National Genetics Education and Development 2004 Grands Prix" for "Research and Technology", for having Centre: principles and challenges significantly contributed to the democratization of the European Union, P. A. Farndon, H. Burton, M. Kirk, A. Li Wan Po, H. Thomas; closing the gap between European citizens and the EU construction. NHS Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, United King- dom. P1394. The EMQN pilot external quality assessment (EQA) scheme for the spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) The Department of Health in England is developing a strategy to prepare for healthcare changes that could result from the Human J. Sequeiros1, S. Seneca2, J. Cerqueira3, P. Magalhães3, I. Silveira1, R. Elles4, Genome Project. Recognising a need for improved genetics training M. Morris5, S. Patton4; at all levels of the NHS, it has established the National Genetics 1IBMC and ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Education and Development Centre to provide a focal point. Brussels, Belgium, 3IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 4EMQN, Manchester, United King- The Centre has a large task ahead, but has identified key principles, dom, 5Hôp. Univ. Genève, Genève, Switzerland. designed to recognise and engage the everyday practice of healthcare In 2004, a pilot EQA scheme for the SCAs was organized for EMQN.Therapy for genetic disease 384 This was the first EQA to deal with a group of related disorders (as QC materials and facilitate information exchange and communication opposed to single diseases or methodologies). Thirty-three labs, from on QC materials development, contribution, verification, distribution, 17 countries (from Europe, Israel and Canada) participated. Three and needs assessment. This CDC based Genetic Testing Quality mock clinical cases were used: one confirmation and one exclusion Control Materials Program (GTQC) has designated a QC Materials of a clinical diagnosis of MJD(/SCA3), and a presymptomatic test for Coordinator (QCMC) who will provide continuing support and SCA2 (the two most frequent spinocerebellar ataxias); 32 labs sent in coordination to improve QC material availability. The QCMC will 1) their reports, and many included raw data and a brief description of facilitate the identification, procurement, development, verification methodology, as requested. There was a wide variation in size of the and distribution of needed QC materials; 2) facilitate exchange of QC- (normal and expanded) repeats, but only one gross genotyping error related information; and 3) explore collaborative efforts for ongoing (in the PST for SCA2). Two labs determined repeat size but did not needs monitoring and materials development. A GTQC website, report it, while four may not have assessed it at all. We checked reports available in March, 2005, will serve as an interactive communication for the presence of essential items, such as major identifiers, referral tool to link users, providers, potential contributors, developers, and information, methods, results, interpretation and recommendations, resources of QC materials and to inform the community about the and general layout. Just 14/32 labs included all major report items, availability of QC materials of clinical and public health interest. and only four respected all desirable items: one lab included only The CDC convened three working meetings in 2003/04 to identify one identifier; three labs did not identify clearly both alleles; two did specific areas of need, develop recommendations for practical not have a clear analytical result; all included some kind of clinical approaches and establish a sustainable, collaborative process to interpretation, but seven did mention the implications for relatives, make QC materials available to the genetic testing community. three did not recommend counselling and two did not recommend These efforts will provide a sustainable, community-based process to further testing, where appropriate; seven labs apposed only one make verified quality control materials available to the genetic testing signature. Some labs inappropriately genotyped other (unrequested) community. loci. Genotyping and interpretation scores were devised to help assess this year’s full scheme. P1397. A quantitative approach to estimation and interpretation of pheno-caryotype relations in chromosome syndromes P1395. Population genetics: governing international endeavors V. I. Ivanov, S. D. Nurbaev, L. Y. Levina, V. G. Antonenko; M. Deschênes, C. S. Sallée; Natl.Res.Centre Med. Genet., Moscow, Russian Federation. Centre de recherche en droit public, Montréal, PQ, Canada. Application of principal component method of multifactorial analysis to In an era where biobanking activities are developing at an increasing real estimation of phenotypic variation in patients with partial autosomal pace, research being undertaken not only on small cohorts for specific aneusomies is described. Data on 2345 respective patients from earlier diseases but also at the level of whole population or communities to elaborated database “CHRODYS” were used. Phenotypic correlations explain human genetic variation, the need for researchers to go beyond between the examined chromosome disorders were quantitatively their national boarders and collaborate in international endeavours is estimated. By means of the applied analysis integral “portraits” of each accrued. Several international research projects, are engaging in an kind of the examined autosomal aneusomies could be revealed. The effort to promote the exchange of scientific knowledge and technologies, applied method differentiated up to 87 % of the aneusomies in the and the advancement of genomic research. The Public Population sample by the first three principal components. Specific differences Project in Genomics (P3G) wishes to connect leading population between the integral phenotypes of the aneusomies were found. projects and create a common ground for exchanging and comparing Unique diagnostically significant combinations of birth defects and datasets through the establishment of a knowledgebase for voluntary microanomalies could be revealed for all the studied kinds of partial sharing of research tools with a view to possible harmonization in order autosomal trisomies and/or monosomies distinguishing not only to increase statistical power, cross talk between studies and validation the chromosome number, but the chromosome arm, too. These of results. combinations of traits were found in the great majority of patients with Large-scale population biobanks pose ethical, legal and social the given kind of chromosome disorder. High diagnostic value of the challenges, success resting on public trust through the implementation method in distinguishing the chromosome syndromes was shown. The of balanced transparent and accountable governance and monitoring obtained results may serve a basis, alongside with genetic, cytogenetic, structures. For international initiatives such as P3G, the international and molecular genetic data, for the development and optimisation of exchange of data raises multiple and complex issues. For instance, the diagnosing and monitoring of patients with chromosome disorders in governance structure, management and monitoring mechanisms must genetic clinics. not only comply with national standards and policies and the structure of the individual projects involved but must also be compatible with its international vocation while ensuring public adherence. This poster will identify these and other challenges for the P3G consortium and P1398. Clinical benefit of Fabrazyme® (agalsidase beta) in Fabry propose potential avenues for proper transparency, accountability and disease: Results of the Phase 4 Study monitoring of such international projects. R. J. Desnick1, J. Bultas2, S. Waldek3, W. Wilcox4, C. Whitley5, M. McDonald6, R. Finkel7, S. Packman8, D. Bichet9, D. Warnock10, B. Brenner11, M. Banika- P1396. A sustainable community process to improve availability zemi1; of appropriate, verified quality control (QC) materials for genetic 1Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 2University Hos- testing pital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Hope Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, L. V. Kalman, B. Chen, I. M. Lubin, J. Boone; 4Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5University of National Center for Health Marketing, Division of Laboratory Services, Centers Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 6Duke University, Durham, NC, for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States. United States, 7Children's Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 8University The expansion of molecular genetic testing in clinical and public health of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, 9Hospital du Sacre-Coeur, practice has increased the need for appropriate, verified quality control Montreal, PQ, Canada, 10University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, United (QC) materials for quality assurance, test validation, proficiency testing States, 11Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. (PT), and development of new genetic tests. However, despite the Fabry disease is an X-linked recessive disorder in which deficient growing test volume and the rapidly increasing number of tests being activity of α-galactosidase A leads to pathogenic accumulation of offered, the necessary QC materials are not available for many tests. neutral glycosphingolipids, primarily globotriaosylceramide. Enzyme The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in collaboration replacement therapy (ERT) with Fabrazyme® has been shown with members of the genetic testing community, including commercial to reduce accumulations in plasma and in lysosomes of renal, and academic genetic testing laboratories, government agencies, cardiac, and dermal cells. To assess clinical outcomes, a Phase 4 professional organizations, industry, academic institutions, cell banks multinational, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was and proficiency testing (PT)/external Quality Assessment (EQA) conducted in Fabry patients who exhibited mild-to-moderate renal programs, has developed a program to improve public availability of disease but had no prior ERT. Using 2:1 randomization, 51 patientsTherapy for genetic disease 385 received biweekly infusions of 1 mg/kg Fabrazyme and 31 received (ulcerations, infections, invasion of profound tissues). placebo, with a median treatment period of 18.5 months. The primary Conclusions: Although prognosis is usually excellent in the vast efficacy endpoint was time to first clinically significant renal, cardiac, majority of cases, certain patients with hemangiomas may develop or cerebrovascular event. Results showed that Fabrazyme reduced severe complications and/or need serious medical interventions. the risk of any clinically significant event by 43% in the Intent-to-Treat population (including all randomized patients; n=82) and 46% in the P1401. Inhibition of KRIT1 Expression in Endothelial Cells by Per-Protocol population (excluding major protocol violators; n=74). RNA interference: A Model of Cerebral Cavernous Malformation Baseline proteinuria was the most predictive factor for occurrence O. Guzeloglu Kayisli1, M. Gunel2, G. Luleci1; of renal (p=0.001) and all (p=0.015) clinically significant events, and, 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and after adjusting for the baseline imbalance in proteinuria between the Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Yale University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Fabrazyme and placebo groups, the risk reduction for Fabrazyme- Neurosurgery, New Haven, CT, United States. treated patients increased to 53% (p=0.058) in the Intent-to-Treat and Mutations in KRIT1 gene (Krev1 Interaction Trapped gene 1) cause to 61% (p=0.034) in the Per-Protocol populations. Beneficial effects familial Cerebral Cavernous Malformation (CCM), an autosomal of Fabrazyme on serum creatinine levels and estimated GFR were dominant disorder affecting primarily the central nervous system more pronounced in patients who began ERT at less advanced stages vasculature. CCM is characterized by a single layer of endothelium of renal dysfunction. These findings indicate that Fabrazyme therapy without normal intervening brain parenchyma or mature vessel wall exerts a positive impact on clinical outcomes and emphasize the elements. Despite the identification of KRIT1 as the gene mutated in benefit of early therapeutic intervention in Fabry patients. CCM1, the function of KRIT1 remains elusive. Recent studies aimed at understanding the function of the KRIT1 have demonstrated that P1399. Overall efficacy of agalsidase alfa in Fabry disease: it encodes a microtubule-associated protein and that it also interacts results from FOS - the Fabry Outcome Survey with ICAP-1α. These data place KRIT1 at the cross-roads of signaling M. Beck1, A. Mehta2, G. Sunder-Plassmann3, U. Widmer4; between the cytoskeleton and the ECM, potentially mediating the 1University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Department of Haematology, London, complex interaction between the extracellular and intracellular milieu. United Kingdom, 3Medical University, Vienna, Austria, 4University of Zurich, To gain a better understanding of a detailed description of the role Zurich, Switzerland. of KRIT1 during cellular process, we inhibited KRIT1 expression Background: Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder in bovine aortic endothelial and HeLa cells by RNA interference. caused by deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme α-galactosidase A. Using this technology, we explored the possibility that KRIT1 is This multisytem progressive disorder leads to major organ failure and involved in capillary tube formation. We found that suppression of premature death. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is now available, KRIT1 expression resulted in decreased invasion, cell proliferation and FOS - the Fabry Outcome Survey - has been established to monitor and increased apoptosis of endothelial cells. Interestingly, reduced the efficacy and safety of such therapy with agalsidase alfa. KRIT1 expression also promoted decreased capillary tube formation Methods: FOS data were analysed to determine the effect of in 3 dimensional culture system as one of the best model of in vitro agalsidase alfa on the kidneys and heart and on health-related quality angiogenic system. Based on these results, KRIT1 may take an active of life (HR-QoL). role in capillary formation. Furthermore, reducing KRIT1 expression in Results: As of November 2004, 638 patients were enrolled in FOS endothelial cells showed that utilization of siRNA oligonucleotides to from 11 European countries. Multivariate analysis of all the available reduce expression of KRIT1 may be a useful approach to understand creatinine data in FOS (n = 2800 measurements) showed a significant the pathogenesis of cerebral cavernous malformation. negative correlation between serum creatinine levels and the duration of agalsidase alfa treatment. Additionally, longitudinal data from 12 P1402. Reversal of gene expression profiles in the patients with a baseline GFR of 60-90 ml/minute revealed a significant Phenylketonuria mouse by adeno-associated virus mediated decrease in renal function in the year before treatment, which was gene therapy halted by 1 year of treatment with agalsidase alfa. Importantly, renal H. J. Oh1, H. J. Lee1, J. W. Park2, H. S. Lee3, S. K. Koo1, S. C. Jung2; function was maintained in the second year of treatment. Cardiac 1Division of Genetic Disease, National Institute of Health, Seoul, Republic of structure (left ventricular mass and mean ventricular wall thickness) Korea, 2College of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Republic of and function (midwall fractional shortening) were also significantly Korea, 3Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. improved after 1 and 2 years of agalsidase alfa treatment. Sustained Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive metabolic improvements in HR-QoL, assessed using the European Quality of Life disorder caused by a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). Questionnaire (EQ-5D), were reported during 2 years of treatment. The accumulation of phenylalanine leads to severe mental and Conclusion: Analysis of FOS data has confirmed the significant clinical psychomotoric retardation, and hypopigmentation. Phenylalanine benefits of ERT with agalsidase alfa in patients with Fabry disease. restriction diet prevents irreversible damage if instituted from birth. P1400. Retrospective overview of 412 cases of hemangiomas Besides dietary therapy, several studies including gene therapy have C. Jurca, M. Bembea, A. Jurca, S. Bembea, C. Skrypnyk, O. Mitisor; been performed to develop methods that can efficiently remove excess Clinical Children Hospital, Oradea, Romania. phenylalanine. In this study, we identified transcription changes in Background: Hemangiomas are frequent during infancy. These are effective treatment of PKU by the AAV-mediated delivery of a human benign lesions which in some instances are difficult to classify either PAH transgene. Oligonucleotide arrays were used to define gene as tumors, hamartomas or malformations. expression profiles of Pahenu2 mice treated with and without AAV- Objective: To identify clinical, genetic, and evolutive forms of mediated gene therapy. Therapeutic effectiveness was verified by hemangiomas as well as complications and therapy-related enzyme activity and plasma phenylalanine level (253.3 ± 104.9 μM) problems. before microarray analysis. The gene expression profile, involved in cell Lot of Study and Methods: We observed 412 cases of hemangiomas cycle, immune reaction, cell adhesion, Ca++ transport, lipid metabolism, during 20 years (1984-2004) at the Clinical Children’s Hospital Oradea. oxidative stress response and reproduction, was altered in the brain of For each case, we made a clinical, genetic, therapeutic and evolutive untreated mice. In accordance with phenotype reversal, this altered evaluation. gene expression pattern was reversed in the brain of Pahenu2 by AAV- Results: We classified our cases using three criteria: 1. clinical forms mediated gene therapy. Actually, many similarities were observed in (tuberous, cavernous and angiomatous); 2. number of hemangiomas expression patterns between in treated Pahenu2 mice and wild type (single vs. multiples); 3. solitary hemangioma(s) vs. those associated mice. This study may provide more comprehensive understanding with certain syndromes. We also divided cases by length of observation about molecular level of PKU pathogenesis, results in possibility of time: five, ten and more than ten years of follow-up. A large majority better therapeutic approach. of hemangiomas are tuberous, single and solitary. The evolution was with partial or complete spontaneous resolution in the first five years in more than 90% of cases. Therapeutic intervention was required in only 9% of cases, and complications developed in less than 1% of casesTherapy for genetic disease 386 P1403. Phase II Trial of Pirfenidone in Adult Patients with deficiency is found in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis and leads to Neurofibromatosis Type 1 and Paraspinal and Plexiform cholesterol and cholestanol accumulation in peripheral tissues resulting Neurofibromas in neurological manifestations and possibly premature atherosclerosis. D. Babovic-Vuksanovic, K. V. Ballman, V. V. Michels, P. S. McGrann, N. M. We overexpressed the human CYP27A in mice (CYP27tg) and Lindor, B. F. King, J. Camp, V. Micic, N. Babovic, P. K. Edwards, R. J. Spinner, examined whether crossing these animals to apoEKO mice would B. P. O'Neill; reduce atherosclerosis. These studies showed a non significant Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. reduction in atherosclerosis in CYP27tg on an apoEKO background as Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant, progressive compared to littermates without CYP27A overexpression. genetic disorder characterized by diverse clinical manifestations. In order to focus on the contribution of macrophage CYP27A to Plexiform neurofibromas are major cause of morbidity in patients with atherosclerosis we performed bone marrow transplantations from NF1. The histopathology of these tumors is complex, with diverse CYP27tg, C57BL/6J, and apoEKO donors into apoEKO recipients. cellular content and large amount of fibrous tissue, suggesting that Apo E expression levels in bone marrow derived macrophages events related to fibrogenesis might constitute a point of molecular from CYP27tg and C57BL/6J animals was sufficient to reduce vulnerability. Pirfenidone is a novel agent that exhibits potent anti-fibrotic hypercholesterolemia (190mg/dl and 200mg/dl compared to activity in vitro and in vivo. We performed a pilot, open-label phase II 1740mg/dl). Mean lesion area from cross sections showed reduced trial of pirfenidone in adults with NF1 and paraspinal and plexiform atherosclerosis in CYP27tg bone marrow recipients as compared neurofibromas to determine the effect on tumor size and to evaluate to C57BL/6J recipients (65μm2 and 533 μm2, respectively). No toxicities of this agent when taken on chronic schedule. Pirfenidone Sudanophilic aortic lesions were demonstrated in either CYP27tg or was administered orally in dose of 2400 mg/day for 24 months. Tumor C57BL/6J recipients. IL6 assays suggested a borderline shift towards size was monitored by a 3-D Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). an inflammatory pattern in CYP27tg recipients. Seventeen patients completed 2 years of treatment. Six patients had Although apoE expression levels in macrophages from CYP27tg and symptomatic improvement of pain, three had improved neurologic C67BL/6J donors were sufficient to reduce hypercholesterolemia and function, while others remained stable without evidence of disease thus decrease atherosclerosis in apoE deficient mice, preliminary progression. One patient developed malignant peripheral nerve measurements suggest an atheroscleorsis protective role for CYP27A. sheath tumor after completed 24 months of therapy. Seven patients On the other hand, excess oxysterols in macrophages may promote were excluded from the study: three due to toxicity, two due to lack of IL6 secretion and contribute to inflammation in addition to their putative compliance with follow-ups, and two due to persistent pain. Overall, role in cholesterol efflux. pirfenidone was well tolerated. Lack of disease progression during 24-months of therapy in majority of patients is reassuring. However, P1406. First cases of biotinidase deficiency in Russia given unknown natural history of these tumors, longer follow-up and S. V. Mikhaylova1, G. V. Baydakova2, E. Zakharova2, E. Il'ina1; larger population of treated patients are needed to determine the role 1Russian Child Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research centre for of pirfenidone in therapy of NF1-related tumors. Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Biotinidase deficiency (BD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of biotin P1404. Investigation of gene delivery with branched polylysine- recycling. The clinical features of untreated individuals commonly based carriers include seizures, hypotonia, alopecia, developmental delay, ataxia, P. L. Il'ina1, A. A. Egorova1, I. I. Tarasenko2, A. N. Baranov3, E. A. Lesina4, A. V. breathing problems, hearing loss, optic atrophy and skin rash, ketolactic Kiselev3, I. A. Gur'janov2, G. P. Vlasov2, V. S. Baranov3; acidosis and organic aciduria. The disease can be treated successfully 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2In- with biotin supplementation (between 5 and 20 mg per day). The most stitute of Macromolecular Compounds, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, common mutation that causes profound BD is a deletion/insertion 3Ott Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa- (G98:d7i3). tion, 4Saint-Petersburg State University,Ott Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecol- In the recent two years in our neurological department 3 patients ogy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. have been detected with profound BD. The disease was confirmed by Search for efficient carriers, which are able to deliver genes into enzyme studies and mutation analyses in the BD gene. Two patients eukaryotic cells and to provide their expression seems to be very with zero activities were homozygous for the G98:d7i3 mutation and important for gene therapy. Our study relates to two groups of branched one was compound geterozygous for frequent mutations G d7i3/ 98 polypeptide compounds (superbranched polylysines and dendritic R538C. Clinical symptoms in our patients are similar: onset of disease polylysines). All vehicles were tested for their ability to bind and protect on first months of life, combination of neurological symptoms (seizures, DNA from enzymatic degradation and for their transfection capacities hypotonia, developmental delay, stridor, hearing loss) and cutaneous in vitro. Modification of the basic carrier D1 (K -K-K-KKA) with findings. All patients have demonstrated the dramatic improvements 16 8 4 2 palmitoic acid residues resulted in increased transfection efficiency. after two weeks of biotin (10mg/day) therapy. First the cutaneous Modification of D1 with arginine and amphipatic peptide fragment symptoms and the seizures resolved, than signs of visual and hearing (compound DFP4) and increasing of generation number up to five improvement began to be seen. (compound D5) did not lead to significant augmentation of transfection No clear genotype/phenotype correlation was detected. One of the efficacy. Transfection efficacy of compound from the second group patients homozygous for the frameshift muation G98:d7i3 showed - superbranched polylysine - was very low ( 0,1%). The analysis of severe and the second one - mild clinical symptoms and better intracellular distribution of certain biotinilated DNA-carrier complexes response for therapy. suggests hampered DNA translocation from endosomes to cytosol as These are first three cases of profound BD which were diagnosed and one of the main reasons for such low transfection capacity. Actually, successfully treated in Russia. the addition of endosomolytic agents - chloroquine or endosomolytic peptide JTS-1 - to the composition of polymer DNA-vehicles results in P1407. Enzyme replacement therapy in Fabry disease : 5- to 50-folds increase in transfection efficiency. Thus modification of beneficial clinical effect in a patient with severely impaired polypeptide structure provides a perspective tools in development of kidney function. effective modular DNA vehicles. D. P. Germain; Department of Genetics, HEGP, Paris, France. P1405. The role of sterol 27-hydroxylase in atherosclerosis: Fabry disease (FD, OMIM 301500) is an X-linked lysosomal storage bone marrow transplantations in genetically modified mice disease caused by a deficiency of alpha-galactosidase. Two recent M. Shaham, K. Meir, L. Weiss, S. Reich, M. Zeira, E. Butbul, E. Leitersdorf, V. randomized trials have underlined the beneficial effect of enzyme Meiner; replacement therapy (ERT) on biochemical parameters in patients with Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel. FD. However, although several case reports and uncontrolled studies Sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27A) is a mitochondrial enzyme involved have claimed clinical benefits, very few controlled data on clinical in bile formation, however its extrahepatic expression has been efficacy have been documented yet. implicated in novel mechanisms of cholesterol efflux. CYP27A We report the case of a 46-year male patient whose severely impairedTherapy for genetic disease 387 renal function was stabilized with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Results : Prior to enzyme replacement therapy, kidney function deteriorated rapidly from normal (serum creatinine : 125 µmol/L in July 1999) to moderate (creatinine 275 µmol/L in April 2002) and severe kidney insufficiency (serum creatinine 382 µmol/L in December 2002) when ERT was initiated. The patient was subsequently followed during 26 months of ERT with algasidase beta (Fabrazyme®). The dose recommended by the manufacturer (1mg/kg of body weight every other week) was initially administered during 6 months. Serum creatinine reached a peak of 562 µmol/L in June 2003. A doubling in the regimen (1 mg/kg weekly) was initiated for another 20 months in an attempt to rescue the kidney function. It is remarkable that although kidney function is still slowly deteriorating (creatinine value : 541 µmol/ L in January 2005) the patient is still not on dialysis. To our knowledge this is the first observation of clinical efficacy of ERT in in a Fabry patient with severely impaired renal function, potentially emphasizing the importance of the dose administered.