ESHG Plenary Lectures  PL1.Dissecting the molecular pathology of coeliac disease PL4.Recent discoveries in the genetics of common diseases: C. Wijmenga; selection and population history Complex Genetics Section, DG-Dept. Medical Genetics, University Medical K. Stefansson; Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. deCODE Genetics, Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland. Coeliac disease has become one of the best-understood immune- No abstract received . related disorder . The disease presents in the small intestine and results from the interplay between multiple genes and gluten, the triggering PL5.Genetic causes of Vascular malformations environmental factor . HLA class II genes explain 40% of the heritable M. Vikkula; risk. Recently, we reported significant and replicable association to a Human Molecular Genetics, Christian de Duve Institute & Université Catholique common variant located in intron 28 of the myosin IXB (MYO9B) gene . de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. Homozygosity for the at-risk allele confers a 2 .3 higher risk to disease Vascular malformations are localized errors of vascular development . (P = 1 .55 x 10-5) . MYO9B is an unconventional myosin that contains They are often identified on the skin as “birthmarks” of various sizes a Rho-GTPase activating domain which can negatively control Rho and shapes . They usually slowly grow with the growth of the child . They proteins. Rho proteins are involved in cytoskeletal modifications and may also be encountered in other organs, such as the liver, intestine tight junction assembly suggesting a role of MYO9B in the epithelial and the brain . The lesions are consisted of tortuous vascular channels barrier . Hence, the genetic association may point to a primary of various types, with continuous endothelium surrounded by various impairment of the epithelial barrier, and may explain why immunogenic numbers of support cells . Most of these lesions occur sporadically, yet gluten peptides are able to pass through this barrier . A recent sometimes as part of a syndrome or as an inherited disorder . Genetic microarray study revealed enhanced neutrophil recruitment into the studies of such families have lead to the identification of a number of small intestine in both active and remission patients, further confirming genes that can cause vascular malformations . our hypothesis of a genetic impairment of the intestinal epithelial Our first discovery was the identification of the TIE2/TEK gene barrier . Hence, ongoing genetic studies are currently focusing on tight- encoding an endothelial receptor tyrosine kinase to be responsible junction genes involved in epithelial barrier function . These studies are for hereditary mucocutaneous venous malformations (“cavernous being complemented with gene expression studies using intestinal hemangioma”) . As a continuation to this work, we unraveled that a biopsies from coeliac patients and control individuals . Interestingly, loss-of-function mutation in the VEGFR3 gene, encoding the vascular MYO9B is also an attractive candidate gene for other inflammatory endothelial growth factor 3 receptor, is responsible for congenital disorders since increased permeability of the epithelial barrier is also hereditary lymphedema . We also linked mutations in the KRIT1 seen in e .g . multiple sclerosis, type 1 diabetes and asthma . gene to cutaneous capillary-venous malformations associated with cerebral cavernous malformations . More recent work has lead to the PL2.circadian biology identification of mutations in glomulin to be responsible for hereditary J. Meijer; glomuvenous malformations (“glomangiomas”), SOX18 mutations Dept. Molecular Cell Biology, group Neurophysiology, LUMC, Leiden, The Neth- to cause lymphedema-hypotrichosis-telangiectasia syndrome and erlands. RASA1 mutations to cause a newly recognized disorder, which The earth’s rotation causes 24-hour cycles in many aspects of the associates atypical hereditary capillary malformations to arterio- physical environment, while the earth’s revolution around the sun venous anomalies (CM-AVM) . causes seasonal changes . Most living systems have developed As the function of the genes identified using reverse genetics is circadian clocks to anticipate changes in the environment . Circadian often unknown, in vivo models are crucial for further dissection of the rhythms can be observed in many tissues and organs, and are molecular pathways involved in these disorders . Such models will present at the level of gene expression, transmitter and hormone enable direct evaluation of the developmental function and significance concentrations, enzyme activity, physiology and behavior . Light is the of the genes in vasculogenesis and angiogenesis . In addition, murine most important entraining signal from the environment and subserves models could serve for screening of novel therapeutic modalities . entrainment to both daily and annual cycles . In mammals, circadian rhythms are driven by a pacemaker located in the suprachiasmatic PL6.Huntington’s disease: molecular pathogenesis and nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus . Individual neurons of the SCN are therapeutic approaches capable of generating circadian patterns on the basis of a molecular G. Bates; feedback loop in which ‘clock genes’ are inhibited by their protein Medical and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, King’s College London, products . The molecular oscillations result in circadian rhythms in London, United Kingdom. membrane properties, resulting in rhythmic patterns in electrical Huntington’s disease (HD) is an inherited, progressive neurological impulse frequency of SCN neurons . Electrical impulse activity is disorder caused by a CAG/polyglutamine repeat expansion for which an important output signal of the clock . We record electrical activity there is no effective therapy . We have developed and characterised patterns in brain slices and in behaving animals implanted with mouse models of HD that recapitulate many features of the human microelectrodes, and investigated the ability of the SCN to code for disease and have predicted novel aspects to human pathology . We are -and synchronize to- daily and annual cycles . We obtained evidence currently using these models to better understand molecular events that the SCN is composed of multiple single cell oscillators, and that in disease pathogenesis including somatic repeat instability and the temporal distribution of these oscillators can be reconfigured by transcriptional dysregulation among others. Since the identification of environmental changes . Within the SCN, sub-regions show different the HD mutation, new targets for therapeutic intervention have been rates of entrainment to a shift in light-dark cycle, with the ventral SCN identified. We have established a battery of quantitative protocols for shifting more rapidly than the dorsal SCN . In addition, we show that the preclinical assessment of compounds in the R6/2 mouse model areas outside the SCN can contribute critically to the resynchronization of HD . Histone deacetylase inhibitors have emerged as potential HD rate of the circadian system . We conclude that different properties of therapeutics and are being assessed . the circadian system arise at different levels of organization within the organism . While generation of circadian rhythms can be explained at PL7.systems biology approaches for the study of aging and age- the molecular level, synchronization to environmental signals requires related diseases neuronal networks . R. Baumeister; ZBSA – Freiburg Center for Systems Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, PL3.impact of genetic testing on breast cancer care, new Germany. developments In the past years the various genome projects succeeded in delivering H. Meijers-Heijboer; a rapidly increasing amount of gene information . However, the Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotter- necessary functional analysis of this data with traditional research tools dam, The Netherlands. is far too slow to make optimal use of this information . In particular, it No abstract received . is required to understand the networks of gene regulations and protein interactions in order to interprete the phenotypic consequences of ESHG Plenary Lectures  e .g . mutants associated with disease . For this purpose, we have of processing speed in the domain of EEG and ERP measures failed established a research platform using the soil nematode C. elegans to genetically correlate to IQ, even when we found them to be highly to study the genome-wide consequences of genetic mutations . heritable . With regard to corticocortical connectivity, linear (EEG We exploit this model for the analysis of genetic components and coherence) and non-linear (synchronization likelihood) synchrony signaling pathways affecting cellular and organismal aging and for in brain activation has been tested so far . As with ERP latencies, the functional interpretation of mutants associated, in humans, with substantial heritability was found, but these connectivity measures age-related degenerative disorders like Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s were only modestly correlated to IQ . Disease . C. elegans is particularly suited for the fast and genome-wide It is concluded that the endophenotype strategy is completely valid in characterization of (disease-relevant) gene functions and networks, theory but hard to put into practice . and it allows the testing of functional alterations in an otherwise intact organism . In addition, automation of particular experimental setups s03.Gene Expression signatures identify clinically relevant increases the throughput of data acquisition . The unique set of genetic, subgroups of cancer - Examples from colon and bladder molecular, and genetic tools available for this organism, in combination T. Orntoft; with the high degree of sequence conservation between C. elegans Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark. and human genomes, aims at greatly enhancing our understanding of It has been a frustration in the clinical handling of cancer patients, that age-related disorders . two highly similar looking cancers (same TNM stage, same histology) in two different individuals may show distinctly different disease PL8.Humanity‘s Genes courses . Two get a deeper look into the properties of cancers we have S. Brenner; used a large prospectively collected tissue bank with clinical follow-up Brenner Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, data, as well as modern microarray technology and bioinformatic data United States. mining . No abstract received . A number of gene expression signatures have been identified mainly in bladder and colon cancer using cross validation and a maximum PL9. making eyes: lessons from ocular malformations likelihood method . For bladder cancer we have signatures for stage, V. van Heyningen; progression, surrounding carcinoma in-situ, recurrence, treatment MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. response etc. They have been identified on high density Affymetrix Charles Darwin considered the eye an “organ of extreme perfection” . GeneChips and validated on independent test sets of patients using The genes implicated in eye development are highly conserved across in-house gridded oligonucleotide microarrays . A multicenter European phyla . Study of ocular malformations led us to identify three major validation spanning from Spain to Sweden has been initiated and data transcription factors which cause severe ocular malformations, in some from the first 400 patients will be reported, based on less than 500 cases with accompanying brain anomalies. PAX6 haploinsufficiency genes in total . was shown to cause human aniridia; SOX2 and OTX2 were identified As end points we have used either clinical upstaging based on as significant causative genes for anophthalmia and microphthalmia. TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) classification, or a clinical risk score Detailed analysis of the mutations and observed phenotypes has that detects aggressive tumors early . In colon cancer we generated highlighted key genetic mechanisms which we are pursuing using signatures for MSI/MSS, for heredity in MSI cases, as well as for model organisms, predominantly mouse and zebrafish. Continuing predicting recurrence . exploration of patient mutations has also convinced us that humans For some of the differentially expressed genes we have made in-vitro provide excellent models for defining gene function and interactions. cellular studies of their biological function, and found several related to The search for additional candidate genes contributes significantly apoptosis or migration . to the discovery of developmental pathways . Potential mechanisms Individualized medicine is now a possibility as more and more drugs are for environmental modification of phenotype are also emerging in our being available for each cancer disease, and also individually planned studies . Our results illustrate the invaluable contribution made to our follow up strategies are emerging . It requires, however, that we can understanding of basic biology, as well as to clinical management, by differentiate between individual tumors, in terms of their predicted the study of human disease, directly and in model organisms . behaviour and treatment response . Gene expression signatures seem to be a promising tool for this purpose if used in a correct way . EsHG concurrent symposia s04.Ectodermal dysplasias M. Mikkola; s01.Analysis of quantitative trait loci Developmental Biology Program, Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki, Finland. H. Göring; Ectodermal dysplasias (ED) represent a large group of rare genetic Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, Department of Genetics and disorders with developmental abnormalities of the ectoderm and its SNPRC, San Antonio, TX, United States. derivatives such as teeth, hairs, nails, and sweat glands . Currently, No abstract received . in less than 30 of the approximately 200 EDs described to date the causative gene has been identified. Extensive recent progress s02.Endophenotypes for cognitive ability has been made in understanding the biology of EDs associated with mutations in p63 and ectodysplasin (Eda) signalling pathway . E. de Geus, D. Boomsma, S. van der Sluis, D. Smit, D. Posthuma; Mutations in Eda cause the most common form of EDs, the X-linked Dept. Biological Psychology & Centre for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Re- anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, which is now known to involve search, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Population variation in higher order cognitive ability, assessed by deficient activation of the transcription factor NF-κB. Eda/NF-κB psychometric IQ, is largely determined by genetic variation . Recent signalling is required for the early stages of ectodermal organogenesis whole genome searches have suggested that the high heritability of - novel findings on this pathway will be discussed. Mutations in p63, IQ derives from many genes with small effect . An endophenotype a transcription factor similar to tumour suppressor p53, have been strategy may help counter the low power in linkage analyses implied described in a number of autosomal dominant EDs including EEC by such a polygenic scenario . We aimed to develop endophenotypes (ectrodactyly-ED-clefting) and AEC (ankyloblepharon-ectodermal for cognition in three domains of brain characteristics: bulk, speed and dysplasia-clefting) syndromes. p63 deficient mice die at birth and are connectivity . Brain volumes, both total gray and white, showed the featured by absence of stratified epidermis and lack of teeth, hairs, required correlation to IQ which also proved to be entirely genetic in and mammary glands . Two fundamentally different types of p63 origin . Strong sex differences in the relationship between IQ and brain proteins are made: those containing an N-terminal transactivating volume, however, may complicate their use as endophenotypes . In (TA) domain similar to that found in p53 and those lacking this domain the domain of procesing speed, a measure of early visual processing (ΔN). However, the relative contribution of the different p63 isoforms speed, visual inspection time, was correlated to performance IQ in epithelial organogenesis has remained an enigma . We have used entirely through an underlying genetic factor . However, other indices mouse as a model to analyze the function of p63 . Unexpectedly, we ESHG Plenary Lectures  found that the ΔN isoforms are expressed at high levels in embryonic s09.Genetics of variation in human gene expression ectoderm at all stages of the development of skin and its appendages, V. G. Cheung; teeth and hairs . Comparative in situ hybridization approach revealed Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, several genes that lie downstream of p63 . The connection of p63 to Department of Pediatrics, Philadelphia, PA, United States. other pathways implicated in EDs will be addressed . No abstract received . s05.ichthyosis s10.taste Genetics: insights in individual taste Worlds with P. Steylen; implications for Diet and Health University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. B. Tepper; No abstract received . Department of Food Science, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, United States. s06.Genetics of skin pigmentation and pigmentary diseases Taste is critical for the identification and selection of food and is therefore R. Spritz; essential for human survival . Humans have an innate preference for Human Medical Genetics Program, University of Colorado Health Sciences sweet taste, a source of calories, and an innate aversion to bitter taste, Center, Aurora, CO, United States. which might protect against the consumption of toxic substances . Aside Because of the immediate visual impact, genetic disorders of from these innate responses, there are large individual differences pigmentation and the wide variation of normal pigmentation of humans, in taste preferences that are thought to be genetically determined . animals, and plants have long drawn the interest of geneticists, The ability to taste bitter thiourea compounds and related chemicals breeders, and the general public . Oculocutaneous albinism is perhaps is a well-known human trait . The majority of individuals perceive the first genetic disorder ever described, and represents the first enzyme these compounds, typified by the bitterness of 6-n-propylthiouracil deficiency ever identified. Piebaldism is thought to be the first trait for (PROP) and phenylthiocarbamide (PTC), as moderately-to-extremely which a pedigree was presented . The inheritance of red hair was one bitter . Approximately 30% of the population is taste blind to these of the first normal human traits studied by early geneticists. Recent substances . PROP/PTC tasters are more sensitive to a wide range years have seen remarkable progress in this field. In the mouse, more of oral sensations including other bitter tastes, sweetness, spiciness than 130 genes are known to influence the pigmentary phenotype, and of chili peppers, astringency of alcohol and the texture of fats . Tasters most of these have now been identified. In humans, five genes are now typically show lower preferences for foods with these taste qualities known for pure oculocutaneous albinism and twelve for oculocutaneous than non-tasters who show the opposite set of responses (lower taste albinism associated with various systemic manifestations (Hermansky- sensitivities and higher preferences for these sensory qualities) . We Pudlak syndrome, Chediak-Higashi syndrome, or Griscelli syndrome) . have used PROP tasting as a screening tool to understand genetic Seven genes are known to cause human congenital white-spotting variation in food preferences that may have long-term implications disorders (piebaldism and various types of Waardenburg syndrome), for diet and health . We have shown, for example, that the non-taster and another four have been mapped but not yet identified. All of phenotype is associated with higher fat and energy intakes in children these human pigmentary diseases have direct parallels in the mouse, and higher body weights in adults, especially women. These findings as well as in many other mammalian species . There has also been suggest that the PROP/PTC bitter taste phenotype may be a marker considerable recent progress in understanding the genetics of the for increased weight gain and obesity . most common human pigmentary disorder, vitiligo, an acquired white- spotting disorder of autoimmune origin that is highly associated with s11.Genetics of smell various other autoimmune/autoinflammatory diseases. Several genes D. Lancet; have been epidemiologically associated with vitiligo, and at least two Crown Human Genome Center, Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann others have been identified by genetic linkage and positional cloning, Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. perhaps opening up new avenues to treatment of this common disorder . No abstract received . Finally, evidence is mounting that some of these pigmentary disease genes may also play roles in normal variation of human pigmentation- s12.Genetics of pain perception of the hair, the skin, and the eyes, opening the door to study of these A. Dahan; incredibly rich and complex human phenotypes . Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. No abstract received . s07.mechanism and medical implications of RNA surveillance by Nonsense mediated decay s13.Genetic control of infectious disease in humans A. Kulozik; A. Hill; Universitätsklinik für Kinder- und. Jugendmedizin, Heidelberg, Germany. Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford U, Oxford, United King- No abstract received . dom. No abstract received . s08.RNA splicing in cancer J. P. Venables; s14.mice, microbes and models of infection Institution of Human Genetics, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom. R. Balling; More than 90% of protein coding transcripts undergo removal of introns Institute für Säugetiergenetik, GSF, Neuherberg, Germany. and splicing together of exons . This process depends on recognition No abstract received . of multiple signals, especially within 200 nucleotides of exon-intron boundaries, and mutation of these signals is thought to account for s15.From idiopathic infectious diseases to novel primary around 15% of genetic disease . ‘Alternative splicing’ is the process immunodeficiencies whereby the majority of genes encode more than one polypeptide . J. L. Casanova1,2; Despite being from the same gene these variant proteins can be 1Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine des Maladies Infectieuses, Université de functionally antagonistic and choreographed changes in isoform Paris René Descartes-INSERM U550, Faculté de Médecine Necker, Paris, balance can lead to specific modes of differentiation. In several tumour France, 2Unité d’Immunologie et d’Hématologie Pédiatriques, Hôpital Necker types the ratio of splice variants, in genes involved in proliferation, Enfants Malades, Paris, France. apoptosis or motility, is altered and has independent prognostic Primary immunodeficiencies are typically seen as rare monogenic value . Moreover, inducing splice form imbalances characteristic of conditions associated with detectable immunological abnormalities, tumours can lead to malignant behaviour in cultured cells . Therefore resulting in a broad susceptibility to multiple and recurrent infections unbalanced alternative splicing of multiple target pre-mRNAs caused caused by weakly pathogenic and more virulent microorganisms . By by dysregulation of splicing factors could be the primary cause of opposition to these conventional primary immunodeficiencies, we cancer in some instances . describe non-conventional primary immunodeficiencies as Mendelian conditions manifesting in otherwise healthy patients as a narrow ESHG Plenary Lectures 6 susceptibility to infections, recurrent or otherwise, caused by weakly countries encompasses people from a variety of cultures including pathogenic or by more virulent microbes . Conventional primary those in which group perspectives can be valued more highly than immunodeficiencies are suspected on the basis of a rare, striking, clinical those of the individual . Embedding value-behaviour consistency at phenotype and are defined on the basis of an overt immunological the heart of informed choice could therefore be inappropriate when phenotype, often leading to identification of the disease-causing evaluating decision making across cultural groups . gene. Non-conventional primary immunodeficiencies are defined on Studies in the US, Europe and Australia show that uptake of screening the basis of a more common, less marked clinical phenotype, which for fetal abnormalities is lower amongst women from minority ethnic remains isolated until molecular cloning of the causal gene reveals a groups. It is commonly assumed that this lower uptake reflects more hitherto undetected immunological phenotype . Similar concepts may negative attitudes towards testing in these women . Using a validated be applied to primary immunodeficiencies presenting other clinical measure of attitudes towards testing we found no difference in features, such as allergy and auto-immunity . Non-conventional primary attitudes towards undergoing the test but rather a lower consistency immunodeficiencies thus expand the clinical boundaries of this group between values and action in women from South Asia compared with of inherited disorders considerably, suggesting that Mendelian primary white women. One interpretation of these findings is that women from immunodeficiencies are more common in the general population than minority ethnic groups are less likely to act consistently with their values . previously thought, and may affect children with a single infectious, Another explanation is that the measure of values did not capture the allergic, or autoimmune disease . values importance to women from South Asia, a culture characterised more by collectivism than individualism . If this is the case it raises a s16.constitutional aneuploidy and cancer predisposition question of whether acting in line with collectivist values can or indeed N. Rahman; should be incorporated into the more individualistically based concept Institute of Cancer Research, Section of Cancer Genetics, Surrey, United King- of informed choice . dom. No abstract received . s21.shared decision making in clinical genetics. A. Lucassen; s17.spindle checkpoint proteins and their multiple roles in Wessex Clinical Genetic Service, Southampton, United Kingdom. regulating chromosome segregation One of the main aims of a clinical genetic service is to offer patients C. E. Sunkel; informed choices . Historically, a delivery mode of ‘non-directive IBMC, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, counselling’ has been advocated in part to distance the speciality from Portugal. any association with the eugenic movement but also because there Accurate segregation of chromosomes during cell division is essential was little evidence basis for effectiveness of particular interventions . to maintain genomic stability . Cells have developed a surveillance As such an evidence basis accumulates and as more and more mechanism that monitors attachment of chromosomes to the spindle complex diagnoses and predictions can be made, counselling through and delays anaphase onset until chromosomes congress properly . ‘shared decision making (SDM)’ has been advocated . SDM is thought The basic signalling components of the Spindle Assembly Checkpoint to be particularly appropriate in situations of uncertainty where (SAC) have been shown to be and include the Bub and Mad family several reasonable clinical alternatives exist; the patient and clinician of proteins . When chromosomes are not correctly attached, these explore these and come to a shared decision on a course of action proteins o provide an inhibitory signal that prevents activation of the which incorporates the patient’s life experiences and intuitions . This ubiquitin dependent ligase complex (APC/C) inhibiting mitosis exit . process thus enhances autonomy by informing the consent process . We have set out to dissect the SAC in Drosophila through functional However, there are several characteristics of clinical genetics that studies of Bub3, BubR1 and Mad2 . The results indicate that apart from may make shared decision more difficult to achieve than in other their function in the SAC, these proteins appear to have other roles areas of medicine . Guilt, worry about stigma or discrimination may during mitosis . make decisions in genetics more difficult and the underlying concepts In vivo studies show that Mad2 is required during mitosis for the correct and mechanisms may be more difficult to understand than non- timing of prometaphase independently of kinetochore localization . genetic tests . The shared nature of genetic test results among family Bub3 was found to be involved in entry and progression through mitosis members may mean that one result points to others who might benefit by preventing premature degradation of cyclins and BubR1 appears from interventions . Certain interventions (such as thyroidectomy to regulate the stability of kinetochore-microtubule interaction during in MEN2 carriers) may be so much more beneficial than any other prometaphase . Furthermore, genetic analysis of BubR1 has revealed alternative, that the decision making model moves to a professional that the SAC it self is required during early embryo development, as recommendation . Such challenges to autonomy and decision making well as for the arrest of the polar body after meiosis. We also find that will be explored . BubR1 is essential during early stages of female meiosis to prevent chromosome missegregation . Overall our results suggest that SAC s22.Age-related macula degeneration proteins are used in different cellular and developmental contexts to C. Klaver; maintain genomic stability . Erasmus MC, Polikliniek Oogheelkunde, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. No abstract received . s18.Regulating mitosis by proteolysis J. Pines; s23.Parkinson disease and LRRK2 Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK, Cambridge, United Kingdom. T. Gasser; No abstract received . Dept. of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Re- search, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. s19.cascade screening: whose information is it anyway? Genetic findings in rare inherited forms of Parkinson’s disease (PD) G. de Wert; have greatly contributed to our understanding of the molecular Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands. pathogenesis of this disease . No abstract received . We have recently identified mutations in the gene for LRRK2 (leucine- rich repeat kinase 2) as the so far most common cause of dominantly s20.Autonomy and prenatal testing decisions inherited PD . Mutations are located in highly conserved domains of the gene . The LRRK2 protein belongs to the ROCO protein family, and E. Dormandy, T. Marteau; includes a ras domaine (ras of complex proteins) and a protein kinase King’s College London, London, United Kingdom. The importance of acting in line with individual values is central to domain of the MAPKKK class and several other major functional the principle of autonomy, a highly valued, individualistic concept, domains . Extensive sequencing of families and sporadic patients by governing encounters in medicine in developed countries . The many groups now shows that LRRK2 mutations account for about congruence between values and action is also central to the concept 10 to 15% of dominant PD, and for 1 to 2% of typical sporadic late- of informed choice . Increasingly the patient population in developed onset PD . Pathologically, most patients show brainstem dopaminergic ESHG Plenary Lectures  degeneration accompanied by typical Lewy body pathology, but based on a detailed analysis of two human-genomes by paired-end occasionally the picture is that of a diffuse Lewy body disease, nigral clone sequence analysis . Our data suggests that this form of variation degeneration without distinctive histopathology and even progressive is common within and between primate species and preferentially supranuclear palsy . occur within duplicated and often gene-rich regions of the genome . Recent analyses showed that LRRK2 is an active kinase, and that The nature and pattern of such variation will likely be an important pathogenic mutations may actually increase kinase activity, potentially consideration in genetic association studies of human disease . opening up novel approaches to therapy . s26.Deconstructing deletion syndromes: new techniques and s24.APP locus duplication causes autosomal dominant early- old karyotypes onset Alzheimer disease with cerebral amyloid angiopathy C. van Ravenswaaij-Arts; A. Rovelet-Lecrux1, D. Hannequin1,2, G. Raux1, N. Le Meur3, A. Laquerrière4, Dept. Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijme- A. Vital5, C. Dumanchin1, S. Feuillette1, A. Brice6, M. Verceletto7, F. Dubas8, D. gen, The Netherlands. Campion1,9, T. Frebourg1; New molecular cytogenetic techniques like arrayCGH and MLPA 1Inserm U614-IFRMP, Faculty of Medicine, Rouen, France, 2Department of were primarily introduced to search for submicroscopic chromosome Neurology, University Hospital, Rouen, France, 3Laboratory of Cytogenetics, aberrations in patients with unexplained mental retardation . However EFS Normandy, Bois-Guillaume, France, 4Department of Pathology, University these techniques may also improve phenotype-genotype studies Hospital, Rouen, France, 5Department of Pathology, University Hospital, Bor- in microscopically visible chromosome aberrations . The exact deaux, France, 6Inserm U679, Salpétrière Hospital, Paris, France, 7Department determination of breakpoints needed for these studies used to be of Neurology, University Hospital, Nantes, France, 8Department of Neurology, very time-consuming and only feasible for rather common cytogenetic University Hospital, Angers, France, 9Department of Research, CHSR, Sotte- syndromes . Size and localisation of the chromosomal aneuploidies ville les Rouen, France. can nowadays be determined with very high accuracy by tiling path The development of Alzheimer disease (AD) in patients with trisomy arrayCGH in one single test run . 21 led us to hypothesise that the APP locus located on chromosome With the availability of very high-resolution genotyping, phenotyping 21q21 might be affected by gene dosage alterations in a subset of with an equally high accuracy is needed to fully benefit from the demented patients . We therefore analysed the APP gene using advantages of these new techniques . The combination of high- QMPSF (Quantitative Multiplex PCR of Short Fluorescent Fragments) resolution genotyping with detailed phenotyping will enable us to in 12 unrelated autosomal dominant early-onset Alzheimer disease localise genes for specific traits in cytogenetic syndromes. Examples (ADEOAD) cases without PSEN1, PSEN2 or APP mutation, 70 are the determination of the critical region for congenital aural atresia unrelated familial late onset AD cases and 100 healthy control with a size of 2 .3 Mb on chromosome 18q22 .3 and the critical region subjects . We found a duplication of the APP locus in 5 families with for trigonocephaly on 9p22 .3 . High quality and standardized collection ADEOAD and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) . Among families, the of molecular cytogenetic and detailed clinical information will also duplicated segments had a minimal size ranging from 0 .58 to 6 .37 Mb enable aneuploidy studies in less common chromosomal aberrations . and contained from 5 to 12 annotated genes . Dementia of AD type Van Buggenhout nicely demonstrated that accurate phenotyping and (mean age of onset 52 ± 4 .4 years) was associated, in some cases, genotyping in as less as four patients can already reveal a small region with lobar intracerebral haemorrhages . Remarkably, retrospective of interest for a behavioural phenotype (2q32 .3) . examination of the patients harbouring the chromosome 21 segmental A short overview of classical phenotype-genotype studies in duplication did not reveal any clinical feature suggestive of Down chromosomal syndromes will be presented followed by a review of syndrome . Brains from patients with APP duplication presented studies using new techniques . Advantages and limitations of the abundant parenchymal and vascular deposits of Aβ peptides. These new approach and the need for sophisticated phenotyping and data data demonstrate that APP gene dosage alteration APP is sufficient collection will be discussed . to induce Aβ deposits and ADEOAD associated with CAA. This validates the amyloid cascade model according to which AD results s27.segmental Duplications in 22q11 mediate Deletions, from an abnormal production and/or aggregation of the Aβ peptide. translocations and Genomic instability After the report of alpha synuclein triplication in Parkinson disease, B. Emanuel; this is a further evidence that gene dosage alterations are involved Division of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, The Children’s Hospital of in the genetic determinism of neurodegenerative disorders caused by Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. protein or peptide accumulation . No abstract received . s25.segmental Duplication and Human Genome Variation s28.Probing the genetic basis of human brain evolution E. E. Eichler; B. Lahn; Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medi- Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University cine, Seattle, WA, United States. of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States. The abundance of segmental duplications within the human genome No abstract received . (~4%) with relatively high sequence identity (>95%) suggests that duplicative transposition or gene conversion of large segments of s28.Vertebrate chromosome evolution since our last common DNA must have been a relatively common form of genetic variation ancestor during hominoid evolution . Moreover, the presence of such large H. Roest Crollius; blocks of sequence at multiple regions creates the opportunity for non- DYOGEN group, CNRS UM8541, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France. allelic homologous recombination events that may have significantly All vertebrates derive from a common ancestor that lived about 450 restructured the genome in ancestral and present-day populations . I million years ago. The genome of this ancestor was modified by will present a survey of structural variation within the human population chromosome rearrangements in different lineages, and the exquisite within these regions of the genome based on two different approaches . details provided by the availability of the genome sequence for many Using BAC-based array comparative genomic hybridization, I will modern vertebrate species makes it possible to deduce most of these present a survey of copy number variation of these regions within the chromosome rearrangements . For example, the sequence of the human population and show that such regions are particularly enriched pufferfish Tetraodon nigroviridis genome showed with great clarity that for large-scale variation. The analysis identifies ~40/130 regions that a whole genome duplication took place in an early fish ancestor that appear to be “recalcitrant” to copy number changes among normals-21 possessed only 12 chromosomes . The two signatures of this event of which are discovered to be variant among probands with idiopathic materialize when examining the distribution of duplicated genes on the mental retardation . We suggest that some of these represent novel 21 Tetraodon chromosomes on the one hand, and when comparing genomic disorders . Using paired-end sequence analysis, I will provide the distribution of human and Tetraodon genes on the other hand . a first generation view of finer-scale structural variation within the A systematic comparison of gene organisations between fish and other human genome (inversions, deletions and insertions > 10 kb in length) vertebrates thus provides a powerful basis to reconstruct their ancestral ESHG Plenary Lectures  genome and trace its evolution in the fish, bird or mammalian lineages. studies point to a lack of baseline knowledge of genetics in the general The general scenario follows some striking patterns, such as slow rate population and confirm the need for a strong informational component of rearrangements along the fish and bird lineages, and a faster rate to the service . However, qualitative research has indicated that along the mammalian line and provides a reference framework to important outcomes from the client’s perspective also relate to changes follow the distribution of genes and gene families in different lineages . in psychological adaptation to the genetic condition or genetic risk . These studies were the foundation for the development of the Genetic s30.the complexity of human genes Healthcare Outcomes Questionnaire . Six main factors contributing to R. Guigo, and the ENCODE (ENCyclopedia Of Dna Elements Project Consor- the outcome of the service from the client’s perspective . These were tium) Genes & Transcripts Analysis Group; labelled i) enhanced understanding ii) positive psychological change Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Institut Municipal d’Investigació Mèdica-Uni- iii) respect for autonomy iv) adaptation v) disequilibrium and vi) value versitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. of contact . These outcomes are relevant to a range of healthcare Transcribed regions have been long been regarded as a distinguishing services and could be used to counter the argument for genetic characteristic of functional portions of the human genome . Increasing exceptionalism . experimental evidence, however, indicates that larger portions of the genome are being transcribed than originally believed . As part of s33.What works, and why, in Genetic counselling? the need for the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) project, the sites of theory transcription in the non-repeat sequences across a representative S. Michie; 1% of the human genome has been determined in a large number of Department of Psychology, and Institute for Human Genetics and Health, Uni- different cell line/tissue samples using of high throughput transcription versity College London, London, United Kingdom. interrogation technique . In addition, a detailed annotation of the protein To judge the quality of genetic counselling, we need to know its coding content of the ENCODE regions has been obtained through objectives, and be able to measure them . Arguably, establishing quality a combination of computational, experimental and manual methods . requires measuring process as well as outcome . To improve the Overall, at least 90% of the ENCODE regions appear to transcribed quality of genetic counselling, we definitely need to measure process. as primary nuclear transcripts, and about 15% are present as mature Thus, developing quality requires the ability to answer “What do we processed polyadenylated transcripts . Interestingly up to 30% of these want to achieve?” (outcomes), “How do we know when we’ve achieved sites of transcription have not been previously identified. Explorations it?” (measures) and “How did we achieve it?” (process) of the 5’ annotated boundaries of the protein coding genes completely Decisions about what outcomes to measure can be made on pragmatic contained within the ENCODE regions revealed that a large fraction grounds e .g . what patients, health professionals and/or policy makers of them initiate their transcription in a tissue-specific manner at consider to be desirable outcomes . Decisions about what processes to unannotated distant sites: 30% of these distal alternative exons extend measure require knowledge of relevant theories e .g . of communication, more than 100,000 bp away, often overlapping regulatory regions of risk perception and decision making . Without this, attempts to improve other upstream genes . Overall, through these studies, a complex genetic counselling will be a rather “hit and miss” affair, and there will organization of lattice-like networks of transcription across the genome be limited possibilities of integrating and accumulating our knowledge . is revealed . Developing a theoretical understanding of the processes of genetic counseling will help us build a picture of “What works for whom under s31.separating means from ends: turning back to the goals of what circumstances?” genetic counseling The advantages of using an explicit theoretical framework will be S. Shiloh; illustrated by an atheoretical evaluation of the process and outcome National Institutes of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute, of genetic counseling, and a theoretically based study of informed Social & Behavioral Research Branch, Bethesda, MD, United States. choice . The quality of genetic counseling must be related to the definition of its goals. A modern definition of genetic counseling sees it as s34.targeting the DNA repair defects in tumours a psycho-educational process centered on genetic information, in A. Ashworth; which the goal is to facilitate clients’ ability to use genetic counseling The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer in a personally meaningful way that minimizes psychological distress Research, London, United Kingdom. and increases personal control . Consequently, psycho-educational About one in nine women in the Western world develop cancer process measures and commonly studied amount and accuracy of of the breast and at least 5% of these cases are thought to result the information gained in genetic counseling should be regarded as from a hereditary predisposition to the disease . Two breast cancer predictor variables of the ultimate outcomes defined by measures of susceptibility (BRCA) genes have been identified and mutations in personal control, coping and well being . Separating information from these genes account for most families with four or more cases of decision as outcomes of counseling is artificial, since information is breast cancer diagnosed before the age of 60 . Women who inherit provided in genetic counseling not as an end in itself, but as a means loss-of-function mutations in either of these genes have an up to 85% of facilitating a personally satisfactory decision. Research findings risk of breast cancer by age 70 . As well as breast cancer, carriers of will be presented on the helpfulness of the information received in mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are at elevated risk of cancer of the counseling for facilitating counselees’ decisions, and on the level of ovary, prostate and pancreas . The genes are thought to be tumour perceived personal control following genetic counseling and its effects suppressor genes as the wild-type allele of the gene is observed to on subsequent coping . be lost in tumours of heterozygous carriers . Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 have significant roles in the maintenance of genome integrity via roles s32.Listening to consumers in genetic healthcare - an audit tool in the repair of DNA damage via homologous recombination . The to support measurement of outcomes specific DNA repair defect in BRCA-mutant cells provides opportunities H. Skirton; for novel therapeutic approaches based on selective inhibition of Faculty of Health and Social Work, Taunton, United Kingdom. functionally interacting repair pathways . These approaches may also Evaluation of the outcomes of healthcare is an important component be applicable to sporadic cancers harbouring DNA repair defects . of both service audit and clinical research . Genetic services do not Progress towards developing these ‘synthetic lethal’ approaches will conform to a traditional health service model and assessment may be discussed . be more challenging than it is for many other services because of the lack of readily-measurable outcomes . An effective way of assessing S35.Exploring the role Wnt/β-catenin signaling in intestinal and consumer needs and evaluating services from the client’s perspective mammary cancer stemness is required . Changes in reproductive behaviour, knowledge of C. Gaspar1, P. Franken1, C. Breukel2, L. Molenaar1, R. Smits1, M. van der Valk3, recurrence risk figures and satisfaction with the consultation have all R. Fodde1; been used as outcome measures in the past . However, at least some 1Dept. of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus University Medical of these constructs may be inappropriate because they contradict the Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Center for Human & Clinical Genetics, philosophy of client choice that underpins genetic healthcare . Previous Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Department of ESHG Plenary Lectures  Experimental Animal Pathology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, is responsible for the enhanced resistance of ErbB2 overexpressing The Netherlands. cancer cells towards chemotherapeutic agents . Peptide aptamer Breast and colon cancers are generally thought to arise from normal interference with AKT activation resulted in the restoration of regular epithelial tissues through a stepwise accumulation of genetic alterations sensitivity of breast cancer cells to taxol . in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes . However, this model does not take into account other essential characteristics of human s37.On genes speech and language cancers, namely their vast intratumor cellular heterogeneity and the S. Fisher; role played by a minority of cells, the cancer stem cells, in determining Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford University, Oxford, United local invasion into surrounding tissues and distant organ sites . The Kingdom. Wnt/β-catenin signal transduction pathway is known to play a central Genes that are implicated in speech and language impairment can role in self-renewal and differentiation during embryonic development, provide molecular windows into neural mechanisms contributing to and in the maintenance of many stem cell niches in adulthood . human communication . We have shown that people who have FOXP2 Accordingly, mutations in several Wnt-genes are rate-limiting to trigger missense or nonsense mutations develop major problems with tumorigenesis in the corresponding tissues . controlling the complicated mouth movements needed for speech, To study how different dosages of Wnt signaling activation may along with deficits in many aspects of language and grammar. The influence multi-organ tumorigenesis, we have generated several gene encodes a conserved transcription factor that appears to help hypomorphic alleles of the Apc tumor suppressor gene by gene regulate development of a subset of neuronal circuits in a wide range targeting . Notably, while in general Apc mutations result in intestinal of non-speaking vertebrates, but evidence suggests that its role may cancer both in man and mouse, the novel Apc1572T mutation, resulting have been modified during human evolution. It is emphasised that in a 175 kDa truncated protein lacking the axin-binding motifs but still FOXP2 is not the mythical “gene for language”, but instead represents encompassing 3 β-catenin down-regulating domains, does not lead one piece of a complex evolutionary puzzle, involving multiple factors . to predisposition to intestinal tumors . However, the majority of Apc+/ My laboratory are using FOXP2 as an entry point for investigating 1572T females spontaneously develop multi-focal and rapidly growing neuronal pathways underlying speech and language acquisition, by mammary tumors . Notably, Apc1572T mammary tumors also form lung adopting a range of complementary functional genetic techniques, from metatstases . Both the primary tumors and their metastases were cell-lines to mutant mice . The FOXP2 story shows that understanding found to encompass myoepithelial, squamous, and luminal epithelial of language origins requires a multidisciplinary perspective, integrating types, and were classified as lobular carcinomas with different degrees psychology, neuroscience, genetics, developmental biology and of metaplastic squamous differentiation . As previously observed for evolutionary anthropology . intestinal cancers, intracellular β-catenin accumulation, the earmark of canonical Wnt signaling activation, was found to be heterogeneous s38.molecular, cellular, and circuit mechanisms underlying the within the tumor mass . However, when lung micro-metastases (20- storage of remote memories in cortical networks 100 cells in size) were analyzed by IHC and compared with the A. J. Silva; macrometastases and with the primary mammary lesions, differentiation Departments of Neurobiology, Psychiatry and Psychology, Brain Research was found to be significantly reduced whereas almost every cell Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, United States. showed cytoplasmatic and/or nuclear β-catenin accumulation. These While the molecular, cellular and systems mechanisms required for results indicate that the specific Wnt signaling dosage encoded by the the initial processing of memory have been intensively investigated, Apc1572T mutation differentially affects homeostasis of the mammary those underlying remote storage remain elusive . I will present stem cell compartment and triggers tumor initiation, progression, neuroanatomical, pharmacological and genetic results demonstrating and metastasis possibly by activating cancer stem cells . These novel that specific areas of the cortex play a critical role in remote memory. data will be discussed also in view of recent results from our and Imaging of activity dependent genes shows that specific areas of the Dr . S . Robine’s (Paris, France) laboratories indicating a similar role cortex are activated by remote memory and that this activation is for Wnt/β-catenin signaling in establishing cancer stem cells in an impaired by a null alpha-CaMKII mutation that blocks remote memory . Apc1638N/KRASV12G mouse model for intestinal tumorigenesis and liver Accordingly, reversible inactivation of specific cortical structures in metastases (KP Janssen, et al ., submitted) . normal mice disrupts remote memory without affecting recent memory . Additionally, a genetic screen revealed several mutations that affect s36.interference with signal transduction events emanating specifically remote memory without disrupting acquisition or initial from the ErbB2 receptor sensitizes breast cancer cells to taxol hippocampal-dependent consolidation . induced cell death B. Groner, C. Borghouts, C. Kunz; s39.Dyslexia Georg Speyer Haus, Institute for Biomedical Research, Frankfurt, Germany. G. Schulte-Körne; The ErbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase is overexpressed in approximately Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Philipps 30 percent of breast tumor cases and its overexpression correlates University, Marburg, Germany. with an unfavorable prognosis . A major contributor to this course of Dyslexia is a specific disorder in learning to read and spell which is the disease is the insensitivity of these tumors towards chemotherapy . not the direct result of other disorders such as mental retardation or Monoclonal antibodies, inhibiting the ligand induced activation of lesser impairments in general intelligence, gross neurological deficits, the receptor and tyrosine kinase inhibitors acting on the intrinsic uncorrected visual or auditory problems, or emotional disturbances or enzymatic activity of the intracellular domain have been developed inadequate schooling . as targeted drugs. Both have been shown to be beneficial for breast A genetic involvement in dyslexia has long been evident from studies cancer patients. We targeted a third aspect of receptor function; its showing familial clustering of the disorder and more recently through association with intracellular signaling components . For this purpose twin studies. Linkage studies have identified several chromosomal we selected peptide aptamers which specifically interact with defined regions of interest . Genetic loci have been mapped to at least nine domains of the intracellular part of the receptor . The peptide aptamers different chromosomes (DYX1-DYX9) by several independent studies . were selected from a random peptide library using a yeast two-hybrid Candidate genes have so far been proposed for DYX1(DYX1C1, system with the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain of ErbB2 as a bait ROBO1) and DYX2 (VMP, DCDC2, KIAA0319, TTRAP, THEM2) . construct . We investigated the functional consequences of the aptamer One of the major difficulties in dissecting the genetic aetiology of interaction with the ErbB2 receptor within tumor cells . The aptamer learning disorders is that the clinical definitions comprise a number sequences were either expressed intracellularly or introduced into the of heterogeneous conditions and phenocopies . In order to investigate cells as recombinant aptamer proteins . The aptamers co-localized with genetically informative endophenotypes in a German multicenter study the intracellular domain of ErbB2 within cells . They reduced the extent a broad spectrum of dyslexia related phenotypes including phonological of AKT kinase induction upon heregulin treatment of the cells . AKT is decoding, phoneme awareness, orthographic processing, short-term a signaling component downstream of the heregulin induced ErbB2- memory, rapid naming and mathematical abilities were investigated in ErbB3 heterodimer in MCF-7 breast cancer cells . High AKT activity large sample of 287 German dyslexia families . The interrelationship ESHG Concurrent Sessions 0 between the component phenotypes using correlation and principal s42.concepts of cardiac development component analyses (PCA), estimated familiality for phenotypes as A. Moorman; well as for the factors suggested by PCA were investigated . Department of Anatomy & Embryology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, In the future, a multidisciplinary project (www .neurodys .com) will The Netherlands. investigate the biological basis of dyslexia by mapping dyslexia In this presentation we discuss the formation of the synchronously susceptibility genes, identifying risk-conferring genes used to contracting chambered heart from a peristaltically contracting understand gene-gene and gene-environment interactions and gene- linear heart tube . It is proposed that members of the T-box family of specific contributions to a variety of neurobiological correlates of transcription factors play a crucial role in the formation of the building dyslexia . Further, the environmental risk factors will be investigated plan of the formed heart . Tbx5 may confer veno-arterial polarity to the and the neuroscientific basis providing the prerequisites of reading heart tube, whereas Tbx2 initially and Tbx3 in later developmental and spelling development and the central stages of becoming a fluent stages prevent the cardiac inflow tract, atrioventricular region, reader will be studied . These combined efforts will improve the basis outflow tract, as well as the cardiac inner curvatures from chamber for the development of successful diagnostics and therapies . differentiation. With the exception of the outflow tract that becomes incorporated into the ventricles, these regions contribute to the cardiac s40.New insights into molecular genetics of ARVc conduction system. Tbx1 specifically is involved in the formation of B. Gerull; the outflow tract, whereas Tbx18 is involved in the formation of the Max-Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany. systemic venous tributaries . Patients with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) One of the most fascinating aspects in the formation of the heart often present with unexplained ventricular arrhythmias, syncope or is the very early development of the electrical patterning as can be sudden cardiac death, the most feared clinical manifestation of disease . registered by the ECG, which is the registration of the rhythmic waves ARVC is pathologically characterized by progressive replacement of of depolarising activity over the cardiac muscle . In the mature heart cardiac myocytes with fibrofatty tissue and occurs in rare syndromic the conduction system is held responsible for the rhythmic excitations and, more commonly, non-syndromic forms . Syndromic forms of and contractions . However, in chicken embryos a sinusoidal type of ARVC (e .g . Naxos disease and others) are caused by mutations ECG can already be derived from the linear heart tube stages at about in plakoglobin or desmoplakin . Non-syndromic forms are mostly two days of development onward, and less than one day later when transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait . Three rare disease genes chamber formation has just been initiated, an adult type of ECG can encoding the cardiac ryanodine receptor, TGFß3 and desmoplakin can be monitored . cause autosomal dominant transmitted ARVC . Additional disease loci The question can thus justifiably be asked whether the presence of an have been suggested containing still unknown ARVC disease genes . adult type of ECG in these early embryonic hearts implies the presence Recently we have identified a very common disease gene for ARVC, of a conduction system. Generally, the conduction system is defined as plakophilin-2 (PKP2) . the system of specialized myocardial tissues responsible for initiation Based on observations that Pkp2 deficient mice died early between and propagation of the sinus impulse . If we accept this functional E10-11 due to reduced trabeculation, disarrayed cytoskeleton, ruptured definition, then the early embryonic heart has a conduction system, cardiac walls with blood leakage into the pericardial cavity, we screened which is already in place, because there is an adult type of ECG . On ARVC patients for defects in PKP2 . In 32 of 120 ARVC (26%) patients the other hand, if we would apply strict anatomical and histological insertion, deletion, nonsense, missense, and splice site mutations definitions, the embryonic heart undeniably lacks a conduction system. were identified in the human PKP2 gene . Western blot analyses in a This field of tension concerning the recognition of the conduction case of a deletion PKP2 mutation revealed reduced amounts of PKP2 system using physiological versus anatomical / histological criteria has suggesting haploinsufficiency as genetic mechanism. The observation led to many controversies in the field of the development of the ‘cardiac of severely affected adolescents (including young individuals suffering specialized tissues’, which largely relate to definitions and semantics. from sudden cardiac death) and mutation carriers who remained In this contribution we discuss the specification of the embryonic areas healthy until old age points to a highly variable disease penetrance in that will become chamber and those areas that will not form chambers the presence of PKP2 mutations . and participate in the formation of the distinct components of the conduction system . s41.the role of tbx1 in DiGeorge syndrome A. Baldini, Z. Zhang, L. Chen, F. Vitelli, E. A. Lindsay; Institute for Biosciences and Technologies, Texas A&M University Health Sci- EsHG concurrent sessions ences Center, Houston, TX, United States. The 22q11 .2 Deletion / DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) is a relatively common c01. Genomewide Quantitative trait Association study of “genomic” disorder that results from heterozygous deletion of a 3 Mbp Cardiac Repolarization (QT-interval) Identifies and fine maps a segment of chromosome 22 . Of the more than 30 genes deleted in this QtL to the cAPON/NOs1AP Gene syndrome, TBX1 is the only one that has been found to be mutated A. S. Pfeufer1, D. E. Arking2, W. Post2, W. H. L. Kao2, M. Ikeda2, K. West2, C. in some patients with a DGS-like phenotype, suggesting that TBX1 Kashuk2, M. Akyol3, S. Perz3, S. Jalilzadeh1, T. Illig3, C. Gieger3, H. E. Wich- haploinsufficiency is a major contributor to the syndrome’s phenotype. mann3, E. Marban2, P. M. Spooner2, S. Kaab4, A. Chakravarti2, T. Meitinger1; The main cardiovascular abnormalities in DGS and Tbx1 mouse mutants 1TU Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Johns Hopkins Medical Institutes, Baltimore, concern the aortic arch and the cardiac outflow tract (OFT). Using a MD, United States, 3GSF National Research Center, Neuherberg, Germany, series of engineered alleles of Tbx1 in the mouse, we have gathered data 4LMU Munich, Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany. suggesting that the pathogenetic mechanisms underlying the two types Aim: To map QTLs for cardiac repolarization - QT-interval (QT) - we of defects are different . Aortic arch and great arteries patterning is more performed a genomewide SNP association study using 100k arrays . sensitive to Tbx1 dosage than OFT morphogenesis, and requires Tbx1 in QT is normally distributed with heritability >30% and - if unregular - pharyngeal epithelia early in embryonic development . OFT morphogenesis predisposes to sudden cardiac death . Some of its QTLs from candidate requires Tbx1 function in the pharyngeal mesoderm and at a slightly gene display strong interaction with gender . QTc_RAS is QT corrected later developmental stage . Tbx1 is required, cell non-autonomously, for for covariates heart rate, age and gender . the formation of the pharyngeal arch arteries that later remodel into the Method: From the population-based KORA S4 survey (n=3,966 after aortic arch . An Fgf8-Tbx1 interaction is critical for the remodeling of these exclusion criteria, including n=2,007 women) 103/103 women were arteries . Concerning OFT development, our data demonstrated that Tbx1 selected from QTc_RAS distribution extremes (below 7 .5th and above is required to sustain proliferation of cardiomyocyte precursors destined 92 .5th percentile) - to avoid gender confounding - and were genotyped to the OFT . Loss of function of the gene in those cells resulted in severe for 88 .500 SNPs with CR>0 .85 and MAF>0 .025 (phase I) . 60 most morphogenetic defects of the OFT . In addition, cell fate mapping experiments significant SNPs (p<1e-4) were genotyped in additional 200/200 showed that Tbx1 mutation also affects cell lineage distribution within the women (phase II). 7 SNPs significant at (p<5e-3) in combined phase I right ventricle, a potential mechanism for the observed malalignment of and II where screened in the remaining n=3,366 of S4 (phase III) . the ventricles with the OFT . Results: Only one SNP in the 5’ region of the CAPON/NOS1AP ESHG Concurrent Sessions 1 gene clearly exceeded the genomewide significance level (p<1e-7). heterogeneity of this condition is supported by the identification, We successfully replicated that association in n=2,646 independent initially by classical linkage analysis and more recently by comparative individuals from KORA F3 follow up of survey S3 (p<1e-11) . genomics, of nine genes (BBS1 to 9) implicated in cilia assembly or Conclusions: We identified a QTL of QTc_RAS in the CAPON/ function . NOS1AP gene . The QTL modulates QT interval by about +6 ms and A large consanguineous Lebanese family living in a small village with explains 1 .5% of trait variance . Future replication attempts as well as 9 individuals affected with Bardet-Biedl syndrome was studied . A interaction analyses will depend on large datasets . Unravelling the classical linkage analysis combined to a SNP homozygosity mapping genuine architecture of human QTLs will help to devise even more analysis identified a complex pattern of mutations in BBS genes. In one efficient strategies to confirm entire spectra of QTLs for any given sibship of the pedigree a BBS2 homozygous mutation was identified human quantitative trait . and in three other sibships of the same family a mutation was identified in a novel BBS gene . A last sibship with only one affected individual c02. mutations in the facilitative glucose transporter GLUt10 disclosed two mutations in the new gene . The analysis of this family alter arterial patterning and cause Arterial tortuosity syndrome challenged traditional and SNP linkage because of two loci implicated, P. J. Coucke1, A. Willaert1, M. W. Wessels2, B. Callewaert1, N. Zoppi3, J. De three mutations identified and to date no triallelism. Backer1, J. E. Fox4, G. M. S. Mancini2, M. Kambouris5, R. Gardella3, F. Fac- Unlike other BBS genes , the new gene is vertebrate specific and chetti6, P. J. Willems7, R. Forsyth8, H. C. Dietz9, S. Barlati3, M. Colombi3, B. would have been missed by comparative genomics approaches that Loeys1, A. De Paepe1; were successful for other BBS genes . This gene is mutated in at 1Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Gent, Gent, Belgium, 2Depart- least 20 % of families , a level similar to the BBS1 gene and much ment of clinical genetics, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Division of Biology and higher than for the other known BBS genes, with immediate diagnostic Genetics,University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 4North Shore University Hospital, consequences . New York, NY, United States, 5Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States, 6Department of Pathology,University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 7Gendia, Ant- c04. A genome-wide sNP association study of rheumatoid werp, Belgium, 8Department of Pathology, Gent, Belgium, 9McKusick-Nathans arthritis (RA) validates the DNA pooling approach Institute of Genetic Medicine, John Hopkins university, Baltimore, MD, United J. S. Lanchbury1, A. Gutin1, V. Abkevich1, T. Merriman2, S. Steer3, K. Timms1, States. T. Tran1, D. Shattuck1, M. Skolnick1; Heritable connective tissue disorders comprise a diverse group 1Myriad Genetics, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2University of Otago, of genetic conditions associated with molecular defects involving Auckland, New Zealand, 3GKT School of Medicine, King’s College, London, structural components of the collagen and elastic fibers. A subset United Kingdom. of these conditions presents with arterial aneurysms, a major The human genome can now be screened for 500,000 or more cause of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality . Arterial tortuosity SNPs using microarray-based technologies . Cost is a major barrier syndrome (ATS) is an autosomal recessive connective tissue disorder to widespread application of these tools for complex-disease genetic characterised by arterial tortuosity, elongation, stenosis and aneurysm association studies . We developed a robust, cost-effective DNA formation of the major arteries due to disruption of elastic fibres in pooling approach to genome-wide SNP analysis using the Affymetrix the medial layer of the arterial wall . Using homozygosity mapping Centurion and Illumina Infinium microarrays and tested whether we a candidate gene was mapped in a 4 .1 Mb region on chromosome could detect the association signals for HLA and PTPN22 loci in two 20q13 .1 . Haplotype sharing between families originating from the RA populations . same geographical region narrowed the candidate region to 1 .2 Mb Power to detect an association depends strongly on precise containing 7 genes . Mutations in one of these genes, SLC2A10, measurement of the hybridization intensities and the corresponding encoding the facilitative glucose transporter GLUT10, were identified allele frequencies . We developed a new approach to estimate allele in 6 ATS families. We found that GLUT10 deficiency is associated frequency with high precision . Using this approach the allele frequency with upregulation of the TGFß pathway in the arterial wall, a finding for a typical SNP on Affymetrix Centurion and Illumina Infinium also observed in Loeys-Dietz syndrome, in which aortic aneurysms microarrays can be estimated with standard deviation of 2 .0-2 .5% . associate with arterial tortuosity. The identification of a glucose We compared power to detect association using our DNA pooling transporter gene responsible for altered arterial morphogenesis is novel approach with power to detect association based on individual and surprising in view of the previously suggested link of GLUT10 with genotyping . The difference between the two approaches was 2% in a type 2 diabetes . Our data might shed new light on the mechanisms modeled example which will be presented . causing micro-angiopathic changes associated with diabetes and We hybridized pooled DNA from RA patients and appropriate controls suggest that therapeutic compounds intervening with TGFß signaling from New Zealand and United Kingdom . Using a strategy that evaluates represent a new treatment strategy . consistency of association signal across the two populations, SNPs close to HLA-DRA and PTPN22 showed significant evidence of c03. An extended consanguineous BBs family with two mutant genome-wide association . The combination of random (Affymetrix) genes, 3 mutations and no triallelism allows identification of a and gene-targeted (Illumina) sets of SNP markers offers an enhanced novel major BBs gene opportunity for genome-wide discovery . The minimal loss of power H. J. Dollfus1, V. Laurier2, J. Muller3, C. Stoetzel1, N. Salem4, E. Chouery1, S. using the DNA pooling approach facilitates the widespread use of Corbani4, N. Jalk4, E. E. Davis5, S. Rix6, J. Badano5, C. Leitch7, C. Leitch7, A. high-content SNP microarrays for a variety of disease association and Verloes8, P. Beales6, O. Poch3, D. Bonneau9, A. Mégarbané4, N. Katsanis5, J. population genetics applications . Mandel3; 1Laboratoire de génétique médicale - Faculté de Médecine Université Louis c05. copy Number Variation of NCF1 Gene is associated with Pasteur, Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire de génétique médicale - Hôpitaux Rheumatoid Arthritis but not with Psoriatic Arthritis Universitaires de Strasbourg., Strasbourg, France, 3Institut de Génétique U. D. Hüffmeier1, H. Burkhardt2, C. T. Thiel1, J. Lascorz1, M. Streiter1, B. et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Strasbourg, France, 4Laboratoirede Böhm2, R. Holmdahl3, H. Schulze-Koops2, A. Reis1; Génétique, Université Saint-Joseph, Beyrouth, Lebanon, 5McKusick-Nathans 1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 2Institute for Institute of Genetic Medicine and Molecular Biology and Genetics, John Hop- Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine III, kins University, Baltimore, MD, United States, 6UCL Institute of Child Health, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 3Section for Medical Inflammation Molecular Medicine Unit, London, United Kingdom, 7McKusick-Nathans Institute Research, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. of Genetic Medicine and Molecular Biology and Genetics, John Hopkins Uni- OBJECTIVE: Loss of NCF1 gene, encoding one of the subunits of versity, Baltimore, MD, United States, 8Service de génétique médicale -Hôptal the NADPH oxidase complex, occurs due to unequal crossing-over Robert Debré, Paris, France, 9Service de génétique médicale - CHU Angers, with one of the two neighbouring pseudogenes in some patients with Angers, France. autosomal-recessive chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) . In a rat The phenotype of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is defined by the model of arthritis a missense polymorphism of Ncf1 was associated association of retinitis pigmentosa, obesity, polydactyly, hypogenitalism, with arthritis severity and shown to reduce the oxidative burst of the renal disease and cognitive impairment. The significant genetic NADPH complex . We hypothesized that lower copy number of NCF1 ESHG Concurrent Sessions  might be a susceptibility factor for arthritic disease . search under a dominant model using age dependent penetrances . METHODS: To determine copy number variation we developed a We confirmed four known loci on chromosomes 1 (LOD = 4.2 between quantitative PCR multiplex assay based on Taqman technology . Three D1S498 and D1S484), 6 (LOD = 2 .9 between D6S1610 and D6S257), cohorts - 199 rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, 375 psoriatic arthritis 10 (LOD = 2 .6 between D10S1686 and D10S185) and 12 (LOD = 1 .7 patients (PSA), 282 controls - were screened . between D12S345 and D12S85). We also identified two novel loci on RESULTS: Performance was robust in the majority of DNAs, but as in chromosome 3 (LOD = 4 .3 at D3S1569) and 7 (LOD = 3 .2 between previous quantitative methods DNA quality was critical . Interestingly, D7S484 and D7S510) . These linkage signals are currently under copy number varied between 1-5 gene copies . In all cohorts we further investigation by fine mapping. In conclusion, we developed observed a higher frequency of heterozygous deletion carriers (1 .1-9 .1 an algorithm that can split large pedigrees into manageable sub-units %) than expected from previously reported estimations of heterozygous and preserves maximum information about relationships . The ability carriers of CGD (0 .2 % or 1:500) . Fisher’s exact test revealed a highly to identify known loci in the isolated population provides a strong significant difference between RA patients and controls: 9.1 % vs. 1.1 proof of principle . Furthermore, we suggest two novel LOAD loci on % (p < 4 .9 x 10-5), while frequency of NCF1 deletion carriers in PSA chromosomes 3q23 and 7p13 . patients was similar to controls . CONCLUSIONS: Our observation of reduced NCF1 copy number c08. Genetic background of neurocognitive traits in as a susceptibility factor for RA is based on relatively small patient schizophrenia and bipolar disorder - an association study in numbers and therefore needs independent confirmation. If confirmed twins our findings provide evidence of an involvement of NADPH oxidase in O. P. H. Pietiläinen1, T. Paunio1, A. Loukola1, A. Tuulio-Henriksson2, T. Kiese- the pathogenesis of RA . ppä2, W. Hennah1, J. A. Turunen1, J. O. Peltonen1, K. Silander1, J. Lönnqvist2, J. Kaprio2,3, T. D. Cannon4, L. Peltonen1,5; c06. Breaking loops for linkage analysis in complex pedigrees 1National Public Health Institute, Department of Molecular Medicine, Biomedi- T. I. Axenovich; cum, P.O.Box 104, FIN-00251 Helsinki, Finland; e-mail: tiina.paunio@ktl.fi, Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. Helsinki, Finland, 2National Public Health Institute, Department of Mental Health Recurrent inbreeding is a common feature in various populations, and Alcohol Research, Helsinki, Finland, 3University of Helsinki, Department of including isolated and immigrant populations resulting in pedigree loops Public Health, Helsinki, Finland, 4UCLA, Departments of Psychology and Psy- and high frequency of recessive diseases . Likelihood-based linkage chiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5Univer- analysis is a conventional approach to genetic mapping . The Elston- sity of Helsinki, Department of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland. Stewart algorithm used for complex pedigrees, however, is sensitive to Susceptibility to schizophrenia (SZ) and bipolar disorder (BPD) is the presence of pedigree loops . In case of multiple loops, approximate influenced by numerous genes affecting a variety of brain functions. methods are to be used . One of them is based on breaking loops Some of these may be inherited in a predisposing configuration without by coping certain individuals and conditioning of likelihood of zero- resulting in a clinical phenotype, however affecting the function of the loop pedigree on phenotypes of copied individuals . The selection of relevant brain systems . Twins represent ideal study subjects to address breakers is usually based on the number of their possible genotypes . the genetic background of neurobehavioral traits disturbed in SZ and This approach is not effective when many members of pedigree are BPD as they share the same environment during the fetal period unobserved or when large number of loci are analysed . and early years of their lives . We tested several variables measuring We propose to select the loop breakers on the basis of loss of pedigree neurocognitive functions in a Finnish twin study sample consisting informativity induced by loop breaking . We used the classical graph- of 59 SZ twin pairs (8 concordant, 51 discordant), 20 BPD twin pairs theory Kruskal approach for selection of optimal loop breakers . In (5 concordant, 15 discordant) and 62 control twin pairs matched for our method a pedigree is represented as a graph with edges wich age, sex and demographics . We analyzed 27 SNPs in three candidate correspond to the people who are the members of two nuclear families genes reported to be associated with SZ: NRG1, DTNBP1, and AKT1 . and thus connect them. The weight of each edge is defined based on We used linear regression with age, gender, presence of psychosis, the loss of pedigree informativity as measured by mean relationship zygosity, and the co-twin being affected as covariates . Among the after the elimination of this edge from the graph . We estimated tested neuropsychological variables, four related to verbal learning and the loss of pedigree informativity in a series of inbred families with memory showed association with SNPs of AKT1 (p< .006) . Suggestive hundreds of loops under different algorithms of loop breaking and association was also observed for various memory functions and a demonstrated that our algorithm provides minimal loss of information . SNP of DTNBP1 (p< .01) . The associated traits are known to be We implemented our method in a software LOOP_EDGE (http://mga . affected in SZ and BPD and our study further highlights the importance bionet .nsc .ru/nlru/) . of quantitative neurocognitive features as endophenotypes for these diseases . Association with AKT1 and DTNBP1 also implies the role of c07. Genome-wide screen for late onset Alzheimer’s disease in a these genes in the etiopathogenesis of psychotic diseases and even complex pedigree from a genetically isolated population tentatively elucidates the molecular pathways affected in the disease F. Liu1, A. Arias-Vásquez1, Y. S. Aulchenko1, K. Sleegers1, P. Sanchez-Juan1, A. processes of CNS . M. Bertoli-Avella2, B. J. Feng1, A. Isaacs1, P. Heutink3, C. van Broeckhoven4, B. A. Oostra2, C. M. van Duijn1; c09. Differential liabilities of coding and non-coding mutations 1Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The at a major locus in complex disease : RET in Hirschsprung Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The disease Netherlands, 3Section Medical Genomics, Department of Human Genetics and J. Amiel1, G. Antinolo2, S. Borrego2, G. Burzynski3, I. Ceccherini4, E. Emi- Department of Biological Psychology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive son5, C. Eng6, R. Fernandez2, M. Garcia-Barcelo7, P. Griseri4, R. Hofstra3, C. Research VU University and VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Kashuk5, F. Lantieri4, S. Lyonnet1, P. Tam7, A. Tullio-Pelet1, K. West5, A. Chakra- Netherlands, 4Department of Molecular Genetics, Flanders Interuniversity, Insti- varti5; tute of Biotechnology, University of Antwerp, B-2610 Antwerpen, Belgium. 1Necker, Paris, France, 2UC Genetica y Reproduccion, HH UU Virgen del We studied late onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD) in a young, Rocio, Seville, Spain, 3Dept Medical Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands, genetically isolated population from the Southwest of the Netherlands . 4Lab di Genetica Molecolare, Ist Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 5Inst Genetic Medicine, Extensive genealogy was collected, resulting in a complex pedigree Johns Hopkins Univ, Baltimore, MD, United States, 6Dept Molecular Genetics, containing 103 LOAD patients and their 4,645 relatives . This Ohio State Univ, Columbus, OH, United States, 7Dept Surgery, Genome Re- genealogy provides a unique opportunity to identify LOAD loci . search Centre, Univ Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. However, utilization of such a pedigree in multipoint linkage analysis is Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a multigenic congenital malformation computationally challenging . We aimed to develop a new algorithm to characterized by absence of enteric ganglia in the gut where the RET cut the entire pedigree into computable sub-units and conduct linkage gene plays a central role . High-penetrance RET coding sequence analysis of LOAD . The algorithm developed clustered all patients (CDS) mutations occur in ~50% of familial HSCR although genetic into 35 sub-pedigrees, which accounted for 87 .5% of the complete linkage studies suggest involvement in most families . The penetrance genealogic information . Subsequently, we performed a genome-wide of CDS mutation is sex-dependant . To determine whether RET non-ESHG Concurrent Sessions  coding sequences (NCDS) mutations contribute to risk, we studied 876 as well as severe growth retardation . These cases also had generalized HSCR patients and their parents from three continents . A common, angiodysplasia, low serum copper, ceruloplasmin and zinc levels . The disease-associated haplotype was constructed for RET region in all intelligence was normal . No abnormality was detected in cytogenetic populations . The largest contribution to risk was made by an enhancer analysis . Minimal variation in the phenotype was observed within mutation in intron 1 . HSCR risk varies by segment length affected (S/L, and between the families . To the best of our knowledge this striking short/long; TCA, Total Colonic Aganglionosis), gender, and the finding of association with achalasia has not been reported . Consanguineous CDS mutations . We observed that the NCDS mutation makes a greater nature of both families suggested autosomal recessive inheritance . contribution to susceptibility for S-HSCR and more so in boys than For the gene symbol, we suggest AAMS (Achalasia, Angiodysplasia, girls . We suggest a model in which the enhancer mutation contributes megacolon, skeletal changes) . No additional abnormalities including more to disease liability in the most frequent forms of the disease (i .e . malignancy, multiple endocrinopathies etc ., have been demonstrated male, S-HSCR, CDS mutation negative) and the rare CDS mutations in ten years folow-up of these cases . make the greatest contributions to the less frequent manifestations of HSCR (i .e . female, TCA) . The types and parental origin of mutation is c12. Holoprosencephaly: clinical and genetic study about 340 also skewed . It is tempting to speculate that the variable prevalence patients (1996-2006) of HSCR across different ethnic backgrounds results from the variable L. Pasquier1, C. Bendavid2,3, C. Dubourg2,3, S. Jaillard4, I. Gicquel2, C. Henry4, frequency of the disease-associated haplotype . Our data provide a V. David2,3, S. Odent1; consistent explanation of the genetic features of a disease that stands 1Unité de Génétique Clinique, CHU Rennes, France, 2UMR 6061 - CNRS, as a model for multigenic inheritance . Rennes, France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Rennes, France, 4Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Rennes, France. c10. Acrolaryngeal dysplasia: a distinct autosomal dominant Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common brain malformation acromelic syndrome. resulting from incomplete cleavage of the prosencephalon (1 out of D. L. Rimoin1, D. Krakow1, W. Wilcox1, L. Ghizzoni2, S. Braddock3, S. Unger4, 16.000 live births; 1 out of 250 conceptuses). HPE is associated with a A. Superti-Furga4, G. Mortier5, J. Hall6, Y. Alaney1, R. Lachman1; wide spectrum of craniofacial malformations ranging from lethal forms 1Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2University of (alobar HPE with cyclopia) to less severe forms such as lobar HPE Parma, Parma, Italy, 3University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States, and normal face . 4University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 5University of Ghent, Gent, Belgium, The aetiology is very heterogeneous involving environnemental 6University of British Columbiua, Vancouver, BC, Canada. factors, chromosomal abnormalities and at least 7 genes . Acrolaryngeal dysplasia, formally known as “Tattoo” or “Fantasy Island” Since 1996, our team has started to work on the wide clinical and syndrome, is a distinct autosomal dominant disorder . Through the genetic variability of holoprosencephaly . Patient (foetuses or children International Skeletal Dysplasia Registry over 20 cases of individuals with normal karyotype) samples and clinical data (from HPE to originally classified with other acromelic disorders were found to have a microforms) were collected from medical teams in France and Europe . characteristic constellation of findings. Affected individuals are usually Systematic mutation analysis and genomic rearrangements (QMPSF, normal at birth with grow delay becoming evident in the first year of MLPA) screening of the four main genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF) life, progressing to significant short-limbed short stature, most severe were performed. 71 sequence changes were identified among 340 in the hands and feet . They develop a distinct hoarse voice, down DNA samples at a rate of about 20% . slanting palpebral fissures, thickened eyelashes and/or dictachiasis, 27 familial cases confirmed extreme clinical variability. 9 patients striking muscular habitus, very small hands with limited flexion and samples with 2 microdeletions were identified supporting multiple-hit in some cases, significant asthma and restrictive pulmonary disease. hypothesis involving others genetics and/or environnemental factors . Radiographic findings include a relatively normal axial skeleton, As genetic counselling must be done carefully, we performed molecular relatively small capital femoral epiphyses with a medial downward prenatal diagnosis fours times with fetal US scan and cerebral MRI slant and significant brachydactyly. The metacarpals are primarily screening . involved with small pointed epiphyses, and a “carved out” appearance At last, we show involvement of cerebral malformations as of proximal metacarpals 2-5 . Two instances of vertical transmission Aprosencephaly/Atelencephaly is linked to SIX3 mutations and were observed, the remainder of the cases being sporadic, suggesting cerebellar hypoplasia to SHH gene . This work has improved molecular autosomal dominant inheritance . While the clinical phenotype resembles diagnosis’ rate in Holoprosencephaly and therefore the genetic geleophysic and acromicric dysplasia, the radiographic findings in the counselling . metacarpals and hips are different and in neither disorder is the distinct voice and typical muscular habitus seen . Geleophysic dysplasia has c13. FBN1 mutations in patients with incomplete Ghent criteria been chararcterized as a lysosomal storage disorder, whereas there in a series of 1057 probands: Further delineation of type i is no lysosomal vacuolization in acrolaryngeal or acromicric dysplasia . fibrillinopathies The distinct irregular laryngeal nodules of chondroid metaplasia and G. Collod-Beroud1, A. Child2, B. Callewaert3, C. Binquet4, E. Gautier4, E. Arbus- the bony metaplasia of the tracheal and bronchial cartilage observed tini5, K. Mayer6, A. Kiotsekoglou2, C. Bonithon-Kopp4, C. Beroud1, M. Claustres1, in acrolaryngeal dysplasia may provide a clue as to the pathogenesis P. Comeglio2, C. Muti7, H. Plauchu8, P. Robinson9, L. Ades10, J. De Backer3, P. of this disorder . Coucke3, U. Francke11, A. De Paepe3, C. Boileau12, G. Jondeau7, L. Faivre13; 1Laboratoire de Genetique Moléculaire, IURC, Montpellier, France, 2Departe- c11. Achalasia, megacolon, skeletal deformities associated ment of Cardiological Sciences, London, United Kingdom, 3Medical Genetics, with generalized angiodysplasia and severe growth retardation, Ghent, Belgium, 4Centre d’Investigation Clinique - Epidemiologie Clinique, low copper, ceruloplasmin and zinc levels in two distinct Dijon, France, 5Molecular diagnostic Unit, Pavia, Italy, 6Molecular Genetics, consanguineous families. A new autosomal recessive condition. Martinsried, Germany, 7Consultation Pluridisciplinaire Marfan, Hopital Ambroise S. Balci1,2, F. Atalay3; Paré, Boulogne, France, 8Service de Genetique, Lyon, France, 9Institut für 1Hacettepe University, Clinical Genetics (emeritus), Ankara, Turkey, 2Kibris Medizinische Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 10Department of Pediatrics, Sydney, Sokak 17/8, Kavaklidare, Ankara, Turkey, 3Turkish Advanced Specialized Hos- Australia, 11Department of Genetics and Pediatrics, Stanford, CA, United pital, Ankara, Turkey. States, 12Laboratoire de Genetique Moléculaire, Hopital Ambroise Pare, Bou- The aetiology of achalasia is largely unknown although a gene has logne, France, 13Departement de Genetique, Dijon, France. been identified for adrenal insufficiency, achalasia and alacrima Mutations in the FBN1 gene cause Marfan syndrome (MFS) and syndrome (Triple A syndrome, MIM # 231550) . Familial occurance type I fibrillinopathies. The proportion and the clinical characteristics (MIM # 200400) is extremely rare and achalasia in those cases is of patients carrying a FBN1 mutation with incomplete Ghent criteria usually seen as an isolated abnormality . We report an undescribed remains to be determined . From a large international collaborative associated achalasia in two sisters and two brothers in distinct families study including 1057 probands with a FBN1 mutation, 30% did not ascertained from different geographical regions. The major findings fulfill the Ghent nosology if the presence of a FBN1 mutation was are: achalasia, megacolon, skeletal changes such as, triangular facial not considered as a major criterion . Since some features of MFS face, high palate, kyphoscoliosis, finger deformities and nail dysplasia appear in adulthood, we analyzed a subgroup of 172 adult probands ESHG Concurrent Sessions  with incomplete Ghent criteria (16%) . The mean age at last follow-up ment of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The was 36 years . The majority of patients (78/172) had one major and Netherlands, 7Servico de Genetica Medica, Hospital Dona Estefania, Lisbon, at least one minor system involvement, 17/172 had 2 major systems Portugal, 8West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women’s involvement, 46/172 had an isolated major system involvement Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 9Merseyside & Cheshire Clinical Genet- [isolated aortic dilatation (n=22), isolated ectopia lentis (n=13), isolated ics Service, Liverpool Women’s Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 10North skeletal manifestations (n=9), isolated mitral valve prolapse (n=2)] and East Thames Regional Genetics Service, The Institute of Child Health, London, 31/172 had one to four minor systems involvement . FBN1 mutations United Kingdom, 11Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center were preferentially located in the 5’ region of the gene in patients with Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 12Craniofacial Centre, Children’s Hos- isolated ectopia lentis and isolated aortic dilatation and in the 3’ end pital, Boston, MA, United States, 13Oxford Craniofacial Unit, Radcliffe Infirmary, of the gene in patients with isolated skeletal manifestations . No PTC Oxford, United Kingdom. mutation was found in association with isolated ectopia lentis . The Craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS) is an X-linked disorder in molecular results allowed reclassification in 55% of this subpopulation which males, despite being less severely affected than females, are as classical MFS according to Ghent criteria, giving emphasis on the paradoxically under-represented in pedigrees . To understand the indication of a FBN1 mutation study in patients with two major or one molecular basis for this, we have examined the EFNB1 mutations in major and at least one minor system involvement in order to identify 59 CFNS families (39 new, 20 previously published). We identified individuals at risk for aortic dilatation . 27 novel intragenic mutations and 3 deletions, 2 of which completely delete EFNB1 . All mutations support a partial or complete loss- c14. Non congenital paediatric myotonic Dystrophy: clinical and of-function mechanism. A key goal of the study was to define the genetic study in a series of 44 patients parental origin of germline mutations . As mosaicism would confound D. Héron1, A. Jacquette1, S. Whalen1, A. Mallet1, H. Radvanyi2, N. Angeard3, B. this analysis we first screened samples using Wave-DHPLC, specific Eymard3; restriction digests and Pyrosequencing. Mosaicism was identified in 6 1Département de Génétique, PARIS, France, 2Service de Biochimie Génétique, cases (out of 53 informative for this study), including in an apparently Boulogne, France, 3Institut de myologie, PARIS, France. unaffected parent with 2 affected children, a sporadic case, and an There are 2 paediatric forms of myotonic dystrophy type 1 : the affected female with two unaffected children . The proportion of mutant well-known severe congenital form and the more recently described allele was quantified by Pyrosequencing and varied widely in different childhood-onset type . Nevertheless, the nomenclature of DM1 in subjects and tissues (2-48%) . In the remaining samples a paternal children remains confusing . origin of mutation was demonstrated in 13 out of 15 informative cases . We report a series of 44 patients (20 females and 24 males) aged from The bias towards mutations arising in the paternal germline is probably 6 to 18 years, presenting with a paediatric non congenital form of DM1, the major determinant of the scarcity of males in CFNS pedigrees, as in order to precise its clinical and genetic characteristics . The results only affected females are produced in the first generation. Post-zygotic showed that : mutations, the reduced reproductive fitness of affected females, and the occurrence of two thirds of X chromosomes in females also contribute . 1 . The main clinical symptoms were slowness, hy- Our results have important implications for genetic counselling in persomnia, tiredness, dysarthria, and learning dif- CFNS: the possible origins of mutation must be taken into account ficulties. At clinical exam, facial involvement and when providing recurrence risks . myotonia were frequent, but usually not recognized by the patients . c16. Amisyn, SCAMP, CLIC and NBEA are candidate genes for autism and suggest a role for neuron vesicle trafficking in the 2 . School disability was the most important feature in pathogenesis of autism. daily life, whereas mental retardation was present D. Castermans1, K. Freson2, J. Vermeesch3, C. Schrander-Stumpel4, J. Fryns3, in 55% of the patients W. Van de Ven5, C. Van Geet2, J. Steyaert3,4, J. Creemers1, K. Devriendt3; 1Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, Department for Human Genetics, 3 . 16/44 patients had mild symptoms before one year Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, Department of of age, leading to identify an “early childhood form” Pathology, Leuven, Belgium, 3Division of Clinical Genetics, Center for Human of DM1 Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 4Center for Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, The Neth- erlands, 5Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Human Genetics, 4 . The sex ratio of transmitting parents was nearly Leuven, Belgium. one (24/20) Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder of unknown cause and pathogenesis . At the ESHG 2004 meeting, we reported on the 5 . Molecular genetic studies showed CTG repeat size identification of three different genes in three unrelated persons ranging from 200 to 1800 (mean : 679 ), while CTG with idiopathic, non-familial autism carrying a de novo chromosomal repeat size from transmitting parent was from 65 to translocation: NBEA, CLIC4 and amisyn . Interestingly, the 1100 (mean : 380) corresponding proteins of all genes have a possible function in vesicle This report, the most important series of patients with paediatric trafficking in the brain. non congenital form of DM1, confirms (1) the existence of a clinical Recently, in the CLIC4 patient, also SCAMP5 was found to be affected . continuum in paediatric forms of DM1 and (2) the presence of non SCAMP5 is the brain-specific member of the ‘secretory carrier muscular symptoms mainly learning difficulties. Several groups membrane protein’ family involved in vesicle budding from trans- of these patients have been extensively studied for (1) cognitive Golgi . profile (n=36), (2) reading and spelling impairments (n=23), (3) sleep We studied the involvement of all these genes in the regulated evaluation (n=20) and will be presented . secretory pathway of dense-core secretory granules (counterparts of neuronal large dense-core vesicles) by overexpression versus RNAi- c15. the origin of EFNB1 mutations in craniofrontonasal mediated gene knockdown in the mouse beta-TC3 neuroendocrine syndrome: frequent somatic mosaicism and explanation of the cell line. Overexpression of amisyn and SCAMP5 result in a significant paucity of carrier males decrease of secretion . Interestingly, knockdown of NBEA, SCAMP5 S. Twigg1, K. Matsumoto1,2, A. Kidd3, A. Goriely1, I. Taylor1, R. Fisher4, J. and amisyn result in a significant increase of secretion. However, we Hoogeboom5, I. Mathijssen6, T. Lourenao7, J. Morton8, E. Sweeney9, L. Wil- showed no involvement for CLIC4 in regulated secretion . In conclusion, son10, H. Brunner11, J. Mulliken12, S. Wall13, A. Wilkie1; these in vitro data suggest a role for NBEA, amisyn and SCAMP5 as 1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Depart- negative regulators of neuron vesicle trafficking and/or fusion. ment of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, School of Medicine, University In addition, preliminary in vivo data on the blood platelets of these of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan, 3Central and Southern Regional Genetic patients revealed specific abnormalities in both morphology and Services, Wellington Hospital, Wellington South, New Zealand, 4Yorkshire secretion of the vesicles . Regional Genetic Service, St James’ University Hospital, Leeds, United King- Taken together, the identification of genes affected by translocations dom, 5Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 6Depart- in patients with autism in combination with the in vitro and in vivo ESHG Concurrent Sessions  functional data concerning the corresponding proteins implies that c19. A mutation in the nup6 gene causes infantile Bilateral vesicle trafficking in neurons may be involved in the pathogenesis of striatal Necrosis autism . L. Basel-Vanagaite1,2, L. Muncher2, R. Straussberg3,2, M. Pasmanik-Chor4, M. Yahav2, L. Rainshtein5, C. A. Walsh6, N. Magal2,5, E. Taub7, V. Drasinover5, G. c17. Disrupted function and axonal distribution of mutant Rechavi8, A. J. Simon8, M. Shohat7,2; tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase in dominant intermediate charcot- 1Schneider Children’s Medical Center of Israel and Rabin Medical Center, marie-tooth neuropathy Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, A. Jordanova1,2, J. Irobi2, F. P. Thomas3, P. Van Dijck4, K. Meerschaert5, M. Israel, 3Schneider Children’s Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tikva, Israel, 4Fac- Dewil6, I. Dierick2, A. Jacobs2, E. De Vriendt2, V. Guergueltcheva1, C. V. Rao3, I. ulty of Life Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 5Felsenstein Medical Tournev1, F. A. Gondim3, M. D’Hooghe7, V. Van Gerwen2, P. Callaerts8, L. Van Research Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 6Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, Den Bosch6, J. P. Timmermans9, W. Robberecht6, J. Gettemans5, J. M. Thev- United States, 7Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 8The Chaim Sheba elein10, P. De Jonghe2, I. Kremensky1, V. Timmerman2; Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel. 1Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular Genetics Department Autosomal recessive Infantile Bilateral Striatal Necrosis is characterized (VIB8), Antwerpen, Belgium, 3Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, MA, United clinically by developmental arrest at the age of one year, dysphagia, States, 4Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology (VIB10), Leu- choreoathetosis, pendular nystagmus and progressive degeneration of ven, Belgium, 5Department of Medical Protein Research (VIB9), Gent, Belgium, the basal ganglia . We have mapped the disease gene in the candidate 6Department of Experimental Neurology, Leuven, Belgium, 7Sint-Jan Hospital, region to ~230 kb on 19q13 .33 in six interrelated Bedouin families Brugge, Belgium, 8Laboratory of Developmental Genetics (VIB-PRJ8), Leuven, including in total 10 patients and 28 unaffected individuals . Sequencing Belgium, 9University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium, 10Department of Molecu- of the nup62 gene revealed a missense mutation causing a change from lar Microbiology (VIB10), Leuven, Belgium. glutamine to proline (Q391P) in exon 3 in all the patients, producing Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathies (CMT) are common disorders of a substitution from a polar, hydrophilic residue to a non-polar, neutral the peripheral nervous system caused by demyelination or axonal residue . All the other 12 candidate genes were sequenced, and no degeneration, or a combination of both features . We previously pathogenic sequence changes found . The mutation was not present in assigned a locus for an autosomal dominant intermediate CMT 400 control chromosomes from ethnically unrelated individuals; it was type to chromosome 1p34-p35 (DI-CMTC). Here we identified two found only in the heterozygous state in 12 out of 280 chromosomes in heterozygous missense mutations and one de novo deletion in the Bedouin controls living in the same geographic area as the original tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (YARS) in three unrelated DI-CMTC families . families, as expected due to the high frequency of carriers within this Biochemical experiments and genetic complementation in yeast population. Four new patients in two Bedouin IBSN families identified demonstrated partial loss of aminoacylation activity of the mutant recently were homozygous for the same nup62 mutation . Comparisons proteins, and mutant YARS, or its yeast orthologue TYS1, reduced of p62 protein sequences from diverse species indicate that glutamine yeast growth . YARS localizes in axonal termini of differentiating primary at position 391 is highly conserved . This is the second example of a motoneuron and neuroblastoma cultures. This specific distribution was nuclear pore complex protein causing mendelian disease in humans significantly reduced in cells expressing mutant YARS proteins. YARS (the first is triple A syndrome). Both diseases share central nervous is the second aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase found to be involved in CMT, system involvement. Our findings suggest that p62 has a cell type- linking protein-synthesizing complexes with neurodegeneration . specific role and is important in the degeneration of the basal ganglia in humans . c18. Distinguishing neurodegenerative disorders with tau pathology using mRNA expression microarrays c20. impaired ganglioside synthesis involved with pathogenic I. F. Bronner1,2, Z. Bochdanovits1,2, P. Rizzu1,2, J. C. van Swieten3, R. Ravid4, W. mechanism in a familial form of multiple sclerosis Kamphorst5, P. Heutink1,2; E. Vitale1,2, C. Yildirim – Toruner1, S. Husain1, G. Toruner1, M. Schwalb1, S. 1VU University Medical Center, Department of Human genetics, Section Medi- Cook1; cal Genomics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Center for Neurogenomics and 1UMDNJ New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, United States, 2CNR Insti- Cognitive Research, VU University Medical Center and VU University, Amster- tute of Cybernetics, Pozzuoli (NA), Italy. dam, The Netherlands, 3Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, multiple sclerosis (ms) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 4The Netherlands Brain Bank, Amsterdam, The disease of the central nervous system (CNS) characterized by Netherlands, 5Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amster- features including demyelination, inflammation and degeneration of dam, The Netherlands. central axons . Genetic and non-genetic factors both have roles in Despite intensive research, the aetiology of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the susceptibility to MS . Here we present evidence of a change in Pick’s disease (PiD), Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP) and ganglioside synthesis as a foundation of the disease in a pedigree Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is still largely unknown . Due to the in which MS segregates . We previously demonstrated a linkage overlap between these diseases clinical diagnosis of these patients is between the MS phenotype and markers on 12p12 conditional on the difficult. Even on post-mortem material classification of disease type is presence of HLA DR15, DQ6 alleles in a pedigree of Pennsylvania labour intensive and complex . Microarrays can provide insight in the Dutch extraction . A candidate locus encompassing 18 cM segment of complexity and relationships between diseases and normal aging, as 12p12 was analyzed for candidate gene analysis . Direct sequence of they provide data of the simultaneous activity of multiple genes and the disialoganglioside 3 synthase (GD3S) gene localized in that region cellular pathways . show a novel G29A genetic variant present in the 5’ splice donor site of To investigate whether microarrays are an ideal platform for disease intron 4/5 of the GD3S gene (CMP-NeuAc:NeuAc alpha 2-3Gal beta 1- classification, we analysed snap frozen post-mortem tissue from 4Glc beta 1-1‘Cer alpha 2,8-sialyltransferase) . RT-PCR revealed that the medial temporal lobe of pathology confirmed patients with four in MS patients there is a premature degradation of the GD3S mRNA different tauopathies AD, PSP, PiD, FTD and control subjects for molecules . Additionally real-time quantitative RT-PCR assays show gene expression . To exclude as much non-disease-related variation that the GD3S transcript is about 150 times lower when compared all patients were age, gender, APOE-ε and MAPT (tau) haplotype to the normal sample. Moreover immunofluorescence analysis on matched . peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs) and immunoprecipitation (IP) Using several rounds of analysis we identified a set of 166 genes that western blots of the protein extract from the same cells of MS patients can discriminate all patient groups from controls . Furthermore PSP and confirm an altered staining pattern when compared with controls. The AD and FTD/PiD also clustered into separate clusters. These findings discovery of this specific molecular change associated with MS may are a first step towards the development of an accurate microarray- shed light on the pathogenic mechanism in the disease . based classification test.ESHG Concurrent Sessions 6 c21. transcriptional deregulation by the mutant Huntington C23. Aggressive fibromatosis, pathways that cross-talk with Wnt Disease (HD) protein: implications for pathogenesis signaling S. Y. Cong1,2, B. A. Pepers1,3, R. A. C. Roos3, G. J. B. van Ommen1,4, J. C. S. Amini Nik, K. Van Dam, R. PourEbrahim, H. Xavier Zambrano Manrique, S. Dorsman1,4,5; Tejpar, J. J. Cassiman; 1Center of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, The second affiliated Desmoid tumors, also known as aggressive fibromatosis, are rare hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China, 3Department of Neurol- fibroblastic tumors that exhibit a wide range of local aggressiveness, ogy, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Center for from largely indolent to locally destructive . Although, we have already Medical System Biology, Leiden/Amsterdam/Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 5VU shown constitutive activation of Wnt pathway in Desmoid tumors due University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. to APC or B-Catenin mutation, our recent data revealed involvement Huntington’s disease (HD) is caused by the expansion of a polyglutamine of some other signaling pathways like TGF/BMP signaling pathways repeat and can be used as a model to study neurodegenerative in pathogenesis of Desmoid tumors . Western blot analysis revealed disorders caused by aggregation-prone proteins . It had been proposed over expression of phospho-smad2 in desmoids in compare to control that the entrapment of transcription factors (TFs) in protein aggregates tissue (Fascia) of same patient . Induction of TGF-signaling pathway plays an important role in HD pathogenesis . In this study we studied in normal human fibroblast, increased total and active form of Beta- the highly-related co-activators and Histone Acetyltransferases CBP Catenin and consequently increased proliferation in these cells . and p300 in an established HD-exon1 (httex1p) PC12 cell model . The Over-induction or blocking of TGF-B signaling pathway in Desmoid results indicate that mutant htt specifically affects the activity of CBP, cells changed their behavior particularly BrdU incorporation .Using and not p300, via different mechanisms, including protein binding and transfection assay, TGF-B could significantly down-regulate IGFBP6 protein degradation . Our data challenge the model that interference promoter (One of the direct target genes of Wnt-B-Catenin which is of mutant htt with TFs is caused primarily by their entrapment in highly down-regulated in Desmoid tumors) in different cell line, while aggregates . To get more insight in the underlying mechanisms, we it could up-regulate TOPflash activity. The cross-talk between these performed biochemical comparison studies of httex1p . The results pathways leads us to a proposed Vogel-gram for Desmoid tumors . showed that soluble wild type httex1p fragments are predominantly present in higher molecular weight complexes, while their mutant c24. Genome-wide analysis to unravel the molecular counterparts are mainly present in monomeric form. These findings mechanisms behind vitamin D resistance suggest that especially an increased amount of soluble monomeric J. L. Costa1, P. Eijk1, M. Tijssen1, J. Narvaez2, J. Welsh2, B. Ylstra1; forms of mutant httex1p may facilitate aberrant interactions both with 1VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2University of itself via the polyglutamine stretch and with other proteins, such as Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, United States. CBP and thereby contribute to molecular pathogenesis . The role of vitamin D (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D) in cancer was 3 suggested by a strong epidemiological association between prostate, c22. Defective oxidative phosphorylation in thyroid oncocytoma breast, and colon cancer and vitamin D deficiency, and is thought to be is associated with pathogenic mitochondrial DNA mutations a consequence of its anti-proliferative action . affecting complexes i and iii. We have initiated studies where we employ genomic approaches to E. Bonora1, G. Gasparre1, A. Porcelli2, A. Biondi3, A. Ghelli2, V. Carelli4, A. unveil the genetics behind the anti-tumorigenic action of vitamin D . Baracca3, G. Tallini5, A. Martinuzzi6, G. Lenaz7, M. Rugolo2, G. Romeo1; In our studies, we made use of the breast tumor cell line MCF-7 of 1Unit of Medical Genetics-University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Dept of Biol- which four independent biological vitamin D resistant replicates were ogy-University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Dept. of Biochemistry, University of produced . Vitamin D resistance was studied with a variety of genomic Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Dept of Neurology-University of Bologna, Bologna, techniques; including expression arrays, NMD arrays and oligo CGH Italy, 5Dept of Anatomy- University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 6Istituto Scienti- arrays . We, and others, have shown that studying drug resistance using fico E. medea, Conegliano Veneto, Italy, 7Dipartimento di Biochimica, Università different array techniques may point directly towards pivotal genes di Bologna, Bologna, Italy. underlying cancer progression . For the experiments RNA and DNA Cells with an aberrant accumulation of mitochondria characterize from all 4 resistant cell lines was hybridized directly with the respective oncocytic tumors . These tumors commonly arise in the thyroid and their RNA/DNA of the parental cell line onto human oligonucleotide (60- pathogenesis is unknown . In order to assess mitochondrial function in mer) arrays of 30 .000 probes . neoplastic oncocytic cells, we studied the thyroid oncocytic cell line The oligo array CGH experiments pointed to an area in chromosome XTC .UC1 and compared it with other thyroid non-oncocytic cells . 11q as candidate region of DNA copy number changes . Parallel Only XTC .UC1 were unable to survive in conditions forcing cells to expression analysis on the 30K oligo arrays revealed that no single rely only on mitochondria for energy production . The rate of respiration significant gene was involved in the acquired resistance. Instead a set and ATP synthesis driven by complex I substrates was severely of genes was consistently altered, which led us to employ pathway reduced in XTC .UC1 and the enzymatic activity of complexes I and III analysis in the search for common signatures . The deregulation of dramatically decreased, in conjunction with an enhanced production the pathway involving EGFR (epithelium growth factor receptor) was of reactive oxygen species . Transmitochondrial cell hybrids (cybrids) identified in this analysis, indicating an important role for the EGFR carrying XTC .UC1 mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) were generated to pathway in the anti-tumorigenic effect of vitamin D . discriminate whether the energetic failure depended on mitochondrial or nuclear DNA mutations . XTC .UC1 cybrid clones showed a reduced c25. the major epigenetic effect of the histone deacetylase viability and ATP content similar to that of the parental XTC .UC1, inhibitor butyrate is a paradoxical decrease in promoter histone pointing to the existence of mtDNA alterations . Sequencing of XTC . acetylation and decrease in gene activity. UC1 mtDNA identified a mutation generating a premature stop codon A. Rada-Iglesias1, A. Ameur2, S. Enroth2, C. Koch3, N. Carter3, D. Vetrie3, I. in ND1 (complex I) and a missense substitution in the catalytic site of Dunham3, J. Komorowski2, C. Wadelius1; cytochrome b (complex III) . 1Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformatics, Our work provides the first demonstration that impaired mitochondrial Uppsala, Sweden, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United King- function of XTC .UC1 is due to a combined complex I/III defect dom. associated with mtDNA mutations as proven by the transfer of the Butyrate is a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) and chemical biochemical deficiency of the mutant mtDNA into the cybrids. These derivatives are used in clinical trials . It is structurally similar to valproic mutations may represent valuable biomarkers for thyroid oncocytic acid and phenylbutyrate that are approved for treatment of epilepsy and tumors and contribute to the development of specific treatments for cancer . HDACi treatment increases the overall acetylation of histones, the cure of this form of cancer . which is supposed to reactivate epigenetically silenced genes . The liver cell-line HepG2 was treated for 12h with sodium-butyrate, which dramatically increased the total levels of acetylated H3 and H4 . Distribution of AcH3 and AcH4 was characterised by ChIP-chip in 1% of the human genome as defined in the ENCODE project. The major ESHG Concurrent Sessions  and surprising finding was that 100-150 regions with high AcH3 and absence of BIN1 methylation in cancer, which was discordant with the AcH4 suffered a pronounced deacetylation after treatment, many of observation of its reactivation after 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine treatment . them located around transcription start sites. ChIP and locus specific Expression patterns were evaluated for every of the genes under study PCR was performed on a time series and confirmed 11/11 analysed (table1, 16 BC samples versus their normal counterparts) . Discussion regions . For each of these promoters the expression of the gene was of the structural/functional features of the CGIs and the patterns of analysed and was found to be down-regulated . ChIP-chip analysis of expression of corresponding genes in BC will be presented . The H3 and H3K4me showed that nucleosome loss could not explain the research is being partially supported by Applied Biosystems, USA. results . ChIP of RNA PolII suggested that transcription initiation and/ Table1. Methylation and expression profiling of the genes identified in the study. or elongation may be affected. Immunofluorescence analysis showed that the increase in total histone acetylation was localized to the Reduced Normal Elevated nuclear periphery and it may be located in heterochromatic regions . Gene Locus Protein Methylation expression expression expression It is probable that also other HDACi’s may have this effect on histone acetylation in euchromatic regions . Our results indicate that they SEMA6B 19p13 .3 Semaphorin 6B 38% 44% 50% 6% should be analysed in a similar way and that pre-assumptions about BIN1 2q14 .3 Bridging integrator 1 18% 67% 33% 0 their molecular mechanisms of action might need to be revised . VCPIP1 8q13 .1 Deubiquitinating protein VCIP135 17% 70% 30% 0 LAMC3 9q34 .13 Laminin gamma-3 chain 8% 87% 13% 0 c26. Birt-Hogg-Dube : A syndrome the geneticist should know C. D. DeLozier1,2, T. Treisman1, Y. Chang3, D. Tashjian4, T. McCalmont5, C. J. KCNH2 7q36 .1 Potassium voltage-gated channel 7% 63% 31% 6% subfamily H member 2 Curry1,6; 1Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, CA, United States, 2Kaiser RPSA 3p22 .2 40S ribosomal protein 2% 18% 82% 0 Permanente Genetics, Fresno, CA, United States, 3Kaiser Permanente Urol- Calcium channel, voltage-dependent, CACNG4 17q24 .2 3% 37,5% 25% 37,5% ogy, Fresno, CA, United States, 4Dermatology Associates, Fresno, CA, United gamma subunit 4 States, 5Dermatopathology, University of California San Francisco, San PSMF1 20p13 Proteasome inhibitor subunit 1 (PI31) 3% 69% 31% 0 Francisco, CA, United States, 6University of California San Francisco-Fresno, Fresno, CA, United States. c28. Loci of shared segmental aneuploidy in the genomes of In our full-service genetics consultation we see approximately 200 healthy and mentally retarded subjects detected by Array-cGH families/year for assessment of a hereditary predisposition to cancer . Most consultations concern breast /ovarian or colorectal cancers, and M. Poot, M. J. Eleveld, R. Hochstenbach, H. K. Ploos van Amstel; most gene testing comes back negative . Although textbooks suggests Department Medical Genetics, 3508 AB Utrecht, The Netherlands. that “rare cancer-predisposition syndromes” account for less than one By genome-wide segmental aneuploidy profiling with a 3,782 BAC percent of familial aggregation of cancer, our experience suggests that array we detected in a panel of 131 unrelated affected children and 21 syndromic entities may well be under-diagnosed . One such condition of their unaffected parents on average 35 autosomal loci of segmental is the Birt-Hogg-Dube (BHD) syndrome, due to mutations in the aneuploidy (SA) per subject. In total, we identified 696 distinct loci of presumed tumor-suppressor gene folliculin (FCN) on chromosome SA that were shared among patients and parents . These loci occur 17p . BHD is best known to dermatologists because of skin lesions as deletion, duplication, or both, in frequencies up to 45% within our with characteristic histology: fibrofolliculomas, trichodiscomas and study population . Subjects of Turkish and Arab/Berber origin showed acrochordons. Renal tumors, specifically oncocytomas and papillary significant overlap with Caucasians (87% and 92%, respectively). Plots renal cell carcinomas, are highly characteristic of BHD, which also of the cumulative number of shared loci of SA indicate that their total predisposes to spontaneous pneumothorax/ pulmonic cysts and to number may be finite. Loci of SA were distributed in the euchromatin benign and malignant tumors of the uterus, ovaries, breast and colon . with equal densities among Giemsa-light and Giemsa-dark bands . We describe here the clinical, genetic and histological features of Out of the 68 most frequently occurring loci of SA, 21 contained sites three families with BHD syndrome presenting to the cancer genetics of segmental duplication on the same chromosome, while 31 and 63 consultation in the same year . All adults over 30 had typical facial and BAC clones were flanked by segmental duplications within a distance thoracic skin lesions and each family had at least one person with a of 1 and 2 Mb, respectively . Comparison with a set of 39 randomly benign or malignant kidney tumor . Two families had pneumothorax . chosen BAC clones showed highly significant association of loci of SA We believe that a thorough physical exam and the conscientious with segmental duplications (p values of 0 .0001, 0 .0012 and <0 .0001, histological verification of benign and malignant tumors in individuals respectively) . Our data are consistent with the hypothesis that most attending the cancer genetics clinic, will result in improved detection of loci of SA have been generated through non-allelic homologous this under-diagnosed cancer predisposition syndrome . recombination mediated by intrachromosomal sites of homology . Since loci of SA occur frequently in the general population, they should C27. Identification of methylation and expression abnormalities be taken into account before clinical conclusions are to be drawn associated with breast cancer. upon detection of segmental aneuploidies in patients with congenital abnormalities or mental retardation . V. V. Strelnikov1,2, E. B. Kuznetsova1, M. V. Nemtsova1,2, D. V. Zaletayev1,2; 1Molecular Medicine Institute, I.M.Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, Mos- c29. Distribution of recurrent copy number variations in cow, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian different ethnic populations Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. We have elaborated a novel modification of arbitrary-primed methylation L. E. L. M. Vissers1, S. J. White2, A. Geurts van Kessel1, E. Kalay1, A. E. Le- sensitive PCR to identify CpG islands (CGIs) abnormally methylated hesjoki3, P. C. Giordano2, E. van de Vosse4, M. H. Breuning2, H. G. Brunner1, J. in breast cancer (BC). By use of this technique we have identified T. den Dunnen2, J. A. Veltman1; CGIs belonging to SEMA6B, BIN1, VCPIP1, LAMC3, KCNH2, RPSA, 1Department of Human Genetics, NCMLS, Radboud University Nijmegen Medi- CACNG4 and PSMF1 genes . Methylation frequencies in 108 BC cal Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Center for Human and Clinical Genet- samples were evaluated by methylation sensitive PCR and/or direct ics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Folkhalsan In- sequencing of bisulphite-treated DNA (table1) . By means of bisulphite stitute of Genetics, Neuroscience Center and Department of Medical Genetics, sequencing we have constructed fine methylation maps for parts of University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Infectious Diseases, the identified genes’ promoter CGIs demonstrating individual cytosine Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. methylation patterns characteristic for each . Methylation mapping Recent studies have revealed a new type of genetic variation in the revealed nonrandom distribution of methylated cytosines across the human genome encompassing relatively large genomic segments CGIs with certain regions within the same island being frequently and (~100 kb - 2 .2 Mb)1-4 . These variations are referred to as copy number some rarely/never methylated in BC . Methylation was not restricted to variations (CNVs) . The full nature and extent of CNVs in terms of their the core regions of CGIs . Thus, in BIN1 the intronic part of the promoter genomic locations and frequencies in different ethnic populations CGI showed abnormal methylation, while its core region was never is still largely unknown . Here we describe the use of MLPA5 for methylated, which had led other authors to an erroneous conclusion of determining the frequencies of 12 regions of recurrent CNV recently detected by array CGH3,4. More than 300 individuals from five different ESHG Concurrent Sessions  ethnic populations, including three distinct European, one Asian and 5.70 (0.01), p=0.025), which was accompanied by a non-significant one African population, were tested for the occurrence of CNV using trend for higher prevalence of myocardial infarction and diabetes . In at least one sequence-unique MLPA primer pair per genomic region . addition, the 221 carriers had higher all-cause (1 .08 (1 .00-1 .17)), non- Seven of these regions showed extensive CNV in all populations, cardiovascular (1 .11 (1 .01-1 .22)), and other cause of mortality (1 .18 including the β-defensin gene cluster (8p23.1), the TBC1D3 region (1 .04-1 .33)) . In block-1 of the Foxo3a, carriers of the 1112 haplotype (17q12), and (part of) the NSF gene (17q21 .31) . For the NSF locus, had higher risk for stroke (1 .92 (1 .19-3 .08)), but lower for myocardial ~70% of individuals showed copy numbers different from the median, infarction (0 .61 (0 .37-0 .99)) compared to the 1111 haplotype carriers . with estimated copy numbers varying between 2 and 7 . Furthermore, The same participants had higher all-cause (1 .09 (1 .00-1 .19)) and we detected different copy number distributions of the NSF gene stroke (1 .28 (1 .03-1 .60)) mortality . No associations with the Foxo3a between populations, suggesting that this locus is under selective block-2 or with the SNPs before the haplotype blocks were found . The pressure . Future studies will be aimed at the effect of recurrent CNVs results of this study suggest that polymorphisms in the Foxo1a and on gene expression levels and their potential involvement in human Foxo3a gene have an influence on human lifespan. health and disease . 1Sebat et al. Science (2004) 305, 525-528 C32. Identification and Functional Analysis of CITED2 Mutations 2Fredman et al. Nat .Genet . (2004) 36, 861-866 in Patients with congenital Heart Defects 3Iafrate et al. Nat .Genet . (2004) 36, 949-951 S. Hammer1, C. H. Grimm1, I. Dunkel1, S. Mebus2, H. Sperling2, A. Ebner3, R. 4De Vries et al. Am .J .Hum .Genet . (2005) 77, 606-616 Galli1, H. Lehrach1, C. Fusch3, F. Berger2, S. Sperling1; 5White et al. Hum .Mutat . (2004) 24, 86-92 1Max Planck Institute for Moleculare Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2German Heart Center Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University, Greifswald, c30. systematic prediction of the boundaries of large copy Germany. number variants in the human genome We present for the first time functionally relevant mutations of CITED2 J. O. Korbel1,2, A. E. Urban1, S. M. Weissman1, M. Snyder3, M. B. Gerstein1; in patients with congenital heart defects (CHD) (Sperling et al . Human 1Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States, 2European Mutation 26(6), 575-582, 2005) . Recent reports have demonstrated Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Yale University, New that mice lacking the transcription factor Cited2 die in utero showing Haven, CT, United States. various cardiac malformations . CITED2 encodes a CBREBBP/EP300 Large-scale copy number polymorphisms (CNPs) represent an interacting transcriptional modulator of HIF1A and TFAP2 . abundant form of genomic variation in humans (1-3) and are likely To study the potential impact of sequence variations in CITED2 for to be of increasing importance in molecular studies related to CHD in human, we screened a cohort of 392 well-characterized human diversity and disease (4) . While existing technologies allow patients and 192 control individuals using DHPLC, sequencing the detection of SNPs and small (<<1kb) deletions and insertions, and Amplifluor™ genotyping techniques. We identified 15 CITED2 the precise boundaries of larger CNPs have remained inaccessible . nucleotide alterations, thereof seven alterations that were only found We have developed a combined computational and experimental in CHD patients and not detected in controls including three mutations approach that involves high-resolution oligonucleotide tiling array data leading to alterations of the amino acid sequence (p .Ser170_Gly178del, processing, and a data mining strategy utilizing custom Gaussian p .Gly178_Ser179ins9, p .Ser198_Gly199del) . All three of the amino Hidden Markov Models, enabling the systematic discovery of CNP acid changing mutations cluster in the serine-glycine-rich junction of boundaries across the human chromosomes 21, 22, X, and Encode the protein to which so far no functionality had been assigned . Here we regions . Predicted breakpoints are validated by DNA sequencing show that these mutations significantly reduce the capacity of CITED2 following PCR or vectorette PCR amplification. Previously, breakpoint to transrepress HIF1A, additionally the p .Ser170_Gly178del mutation validation for genomic alterations detected on chromosomes 22 and 11 significantly diminishes TFAP2C coactivation. This reveals a modifying showed that boundaries are predicted with an accuracy <500 bp (ref . role for the serine-glycine-rich region in CITED2 function . In summary, 5) . We apply the approach on high-resolution comparative genome these observed mutations occurring in patients with septal defects hybridization data from various patients and healthy individuals, utilizing indicate the causative impact of CITED2 in the development of CHD chromosome-specific oligonucleotide tiling arrays (~400,000 probes) in human . with average probe-spacing <100 bp . Our initial results suggests that the approach will help discriminate disease variants indistinguishable c33. mutations in Desmoglein-2 gene are associated to by technologies currently applied in clinics . arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy 1 . Sebat J, Lakshmi B et al. (2004) Science 305, 525-8 . K. Pillichou1, G. Beffagna1, A. Nava2, C. Basso3, B. Bauce2, A. Lorenzon1, A. 2 . Iafrate AJ, Feuk L et al. (2004) Nat Genet 36, 949-51 . Vettori1, J. Towbin4, G. Thiene3, G. A. Danieli1, A. Rampazzo1; 3 . Tuzun E, Sharp AJ et al. (2005) Nat Genet 37, 727-32 . 1Department of Biology, Padua, Italy, 2Department of Cardio-Thoracic-vascular 4 . Feuk L, Carson AR, Scherer SW (2006) Nat Rev Genet 7, 85-97 . Sciences, Padua, Italy, 3Institute of Pathology, Padua, Italy, 4Department of 5 . Urban AE, Korbel JO et al. (2006) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, in Pediatrics, Houston, TX, United States. press . Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a myocardial disease characterized by progressive myocyte loss and C31. Identification of haplotypes in the human Foxo1a and fibrous and fatty tissue replacement of the right ventricular free wall, Foxo3a genes influencing disease at old age and lifespan which is the substrate for reentrant arrhythmias and sudden death . M. Kuningas1, S. P. Mooijaart1, P. E. Slagboom2, R. G. J. Westendorp1, D. van The primarily mode of inheritance is autosomal dominant with reduced Heemst1; and age-related penetrance. Five disease genes have been identified 1Department of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, so far, three of them (desmoplakin, plakophilin-2 and plakoglobin) are Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Section of Molecular Epidemiology, Department of involved in the desmosomal complex . Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. We hypothesized that mutations in desmoglein-2 (DSG2), the only Recently Daf-16 has been shown to regulate lifespan in nematodes desmoglein isoform expressed in cardiac myocytes, may account for and flies. In mammals four Daf-16 homologues are present: Foxo1a, ARVC . Foxo3a, Foxo4 and Foxo6. Here we present the first data about the Sixty ARVC probands were screened for DSG2 mutations by influence of human Foxo1a and Foxo3a on disease at old age and denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and lifespan . This study was carried out in the population based Leiden direct sequencing. Ten DSG2 mutations have been identified in 9 85-plus Study consisting of 1245 participants aged 85 years and older, patients (15%) . Among the DSG2 mutations, six were missense with a follow-up of 5489 person-years . Based on HapMap, 3 htSNPs (Y86C, G100R, N266S, K294E, E331K, V391I), two insertion-deletions from Foxo1a and 9 htSNPs defining two haplotype blocks from Foxo3a (G678fsX681, E418fsX419), one a nonsense (Q558X) and one a splice were chosen . In addition 1 SNP from Foxo1a and 2 SNPs from Foxo3a site mutation (1181-2A>G) . None of the detected nucleotide changes were selected to describe the area before the haplotype block . The was found in 560 control chromosomes . An endomyocardial biopsy haplotype analyses of Foxo1a revealed that carriers of 221 haplotype was obtained in five patients, showing extensive loss of myocytes with have higher Hba1C levels compared to 111 carriers (5 .90 (0 .02) vs . fibro-fatty tissue replacement. In three of them, electron microscopy ESHG Concurrent Sessions  investigation was performed, showing intercalated disc paleness, c36. Pattern of p6 mutations and their phenotypes in human decreased desmosome number and intercellular gap widening . ectodermal dysplasia syndromes This is the first demonstration that mutations in DSG2 gene are T. Rinne, B. C. Hamel, R. Meijer, H. Scheffer, H. van Bokhoven, H. G. Brunner; associated to ARVC. Based upon current data, we confirm that many Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. forms of ARVC are due to alterations in the desmosome complex . Heterozygous mutations in the transcription factor gene p63 are causative at least for six syndromes with various combinations of c34. Genotype- Phenotype correlation in Patients with short ectodermal dysplasia, orofacial clefting and limb malformations . stature: Clinical indicators of SHOX Haploinsufficiency Symptoms in these syndromes are overlapping, but different enough G. Rappold1, W. F. Blum2, B. J. Crowe3, R. Roeth1, E. P. Shavrikova4, C. Quig- to be considered as a single syndrome . EEC and AEC syndromes ley3, J. L. Ross5, B. Niesler1; present a strong genotype-phenotype association, whereas association 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidel- in the other syndromes is more ambiguous . We present the results berg, Germany, 2University Children’s Hospital, Giessen, Germany, 3Eli Lilly and of an extensive study, which is based on 227 patients carrying a Company, Indianapolis, IN, United States, 4Pharma Support Inc., St. Peters- p63 mutation. This study confirms previously observed genotype- burg, Russian Federation, 5Department of Pediatrics, Thomas Jefferson Univer- phenotype associations . Yet, we also demonstrate that a remarkable sity, Philadelphia, PA, United States. phenotypic variation can be recognized in individual syndromes, even Short stature affects three in a hundred children . Despite an assumed among patients carrying the same p63 mutation . extraordinary genetic heterogeneity, mutations in a single gene, Almost 90% of the EEC syndrome mutations are caused by five SHOX, which encodes a homeodomain transcription factor involved mutations . The phenotypic delineation of these “hot spot” mutations in bone growth, are relatively frequently found in patients with short reveals that each of these five individual mutations imposes different stature. Haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene causes short stature with risks towards specific aspects of the complete phenotypic spectrum. varying phenotypes ranging from isolated short stature to Leri-Weill For example, patients with a R227 mutation rarely have facial clefts, dyschondrosteosis and Langer dysplasia . In this study, we assessed whereas these are seen in >80% of patients with a R304 mutation . the association between the genotype and phenotype in a large cohort Likewise, kidney and urethral problems were observed in 40% of of short children from 14 different countries with an average age of 7 .6 patients with an R227 mutation, but never among patients with a years . Screening of 1641 unrelated children with sporadic or familial R280 mutation. These and other mutation-specific characteristics may short stature revealed SHOX mutations in 68 (4 .2%) individuals . While reflect the importance of these amino acids in a certain developmental mean height was not different between patients with and without event . Furthermore, ADULT syndrome presents a “hot spot” mutation SHOX deficiency (-2.57 versus -2.58 SDS), detailed anthropometric R298, and clarifies the phenotypic difference between Limb-Mammary measurements in all children revealed several bone deformities syndrome . Finally, this study illustrates the minor differences between including short forearm and lower leg, cubitus valgus, Madelung AEC and RHS, which let us to consider them to be a single entity . deformity, high-arched palate and muscular hypertrophy that differed significantly (p<0.001). These phenotypic data were analysed and C37. Haploinsufficiency of the Euchromatin Histone Methyl compared to 33 children with Turner syndrome where haploinsufficiency Transferase1 (Eu-HMTase1) gene causes the 9q subtelomeric of SHOX is thought to be responsible for the height deficit. Different deletion syndrome. types of SHOX mutations (48/70.6% classified as complete deletions, T. Kleefstra1, A. R. Oudakker1, W. M. Nillesen1, M. H. A. Ruiterkamp-Versteeg1, 4/5 .9% as partial deletions and 16/23 .5% as point mutations) were D. A. Koolen1, A. Magee2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach3, H. van Esch4, J. Fryns4, also compared to the respective phenotype suggesting a tendency B. C. J. Hamel1, E. A. Sistermans1, H. G. Brunner1, B. B. A. de Vries1, H. van towards a more severe phenotype in individuals with homeodomain Bokhoven1; missense mutations . Altogether, this study offers a detailed genotype- 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, phenotype comparison in a large cohort of children with short stature 2Clinical Genetics, Belfast City Hospital Trust, Belfast, Ireland, 3Institut fur and provides clear quantitative guidelines as to which children call for Humangenetik, Universitaet Essen, Germany, 4Center for Human Genetics, testing of the SHOX gene . University Hospital Leuven, Belgium. A rapidly growing number of patients with submicroscopic telomeric c35. PtEN Related Disorders - a national clinical study in the UK deletions of chromosome 9q has defined the definition of the clinically K. L. Lachlan1, D. J. Bunyan2, I. K. Temple1,3; recognisable 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome (9q- syndrome) . 1Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2Wessex Common features in these patients are severe mental retardation, Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 3Department of Hu- hypotonia, brachycephaly, flat face with hypertelorism, synophrys, man Genetics, Southampton University, United Kingdom. anteverted nares, thickened lower lip and carp mouth with macroglossia PTEN related disorder is the preferred term encompassing a group of and conotruncal heart defects . The minimal critical region responsible syndromes including Bannayan-Zonana, Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome for this 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome has been estimated to be (BRR), benign familial macrocephaly and Cowden syndrome . We less than 1 Mb . present a clinical study of 30 individuals from 18 families with a Recently, we have characterised the breakpoints of a de novo known PTEN mutation . The patients were ascertained through clinical balanced translocation t(X;9)(p11.23;q34.3) in a female with features geneticists or via the BRR patient group with the aim of documenting strikingly similar to those seen in the 9q- syndrome . The chromosome the different clinical presentations dependent on age and deriving 9 breakpoint disrupted the Eu-HMTase1 gene in the critical region information about the national history of the condition . at 9qter, which encodes Euchromatin Histone Methyl Transferase 1 . The age range of the probands was between 2 years and 69 years Mouse tissue ISH of Eu-HMTase1, indicates that this gene plays an of age . The commonest presentation in childhood was developmental essential role in early embryonic development and that it is selectively delay . In adulthood the presentation was more varied and included expressed in adult brain . These observations suggest that disruption cerebellar disease and bowel cancer. Pertinent clinical findings of of Eu-HMTase1 is causative for the 9q- syndrome . To proof this, we the whole cohort included the observations that all patients were have developed an MLPA-based screening protocol for microdeletions macrocephalic with a head circumference over the 98th centile; four in the Eu-HMTase1 gene . MLPA analysis of a set of about 20 patients out of thirty had a diagnosis within the autism spectrum, walking was with a clinical presentation reminiscent of the 9q subtelomeric deletion delayed with an average age of 20 months and twelve individuals had syndrome revealed 4 additional microdeletions . Moreover, we required speech therapy . On examination, only one adult had normal identified a de novo nonsense mutation in the Eu-HMTase1 gene in a skin . Of fourteen adults who have been investigated eleven have clinically typical 9q- patient . In conclusion, these results establish that benign thyroid disease . There were no cases of malignant thyroid haploinsufficiency of Eu-HMTase1 is causative for the 9q subtelomeric disease, but one case of breast and colon cancer was observed . deletion syndrome . In conclusion, we did not demonstrate a genotype-phenotype correlation; variable expression within and between families was seen. Penetrance of the condition is age related . Practical clinical diagnostic and management tools will be discussed .ESHG Concurrent Sessions 0 c38. Duplications of the mEcP2 region are commonly found in c40. transcriptome plasticity through RNA editing a specific subset of MR patients; towards a detailed genotype- S. Maas1, A. Athanasiadis2,1, R. Kaushal1, N. J. Vendetti1; phenotype correlation 1Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, United States, 2Massachusetts Institute of M. Bauters1, H. Van Esch2, M. Friez3, O. Boespflug-Tanguy4, M. Raynaud5, A. Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States. M. Vianna-Morgante6, J. Ignatius7, M. Zenker8, K. Vandenreijt1, P. Blanc4, C. RNA editing by adenosine deamination, catalyzed by the adenosine Moraine5, R. Stevenson3, P. Marynen1, J. Fryns2, C. Schwartz3, G. Froyen1; deaminases acting on RNA (ADARs), is a posttranscriptional 1Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology, Leuven, Belgium, 2Univer- mechanism for the regulation of gene expression and particularly sity Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 3JC Self Research Institute of widespread in mammals (1) . A-to-I RNA editing regulates important Human Genetics, Greenwood, SC, United States, 4Centre Hospitalier Univer- functional properties of neurotransmitter receptor genes in the sitaire, Clermont-FD, France, 5Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Tours, Tours, central nervous system by changing single codons in pre-mRNA . France, 6Dept. Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Institute of Biosciences, Sao The deficiency or misregulation of editing has been implicated in the Paulo, Brazil, 7Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland, 8University of Erlangen- etiology of neurological diseases, such as epilepsy, amyotrophic lateral Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. sclerosis (ALS), depression and brain tumor progression . By full coverage X-array-CGH we identified a 0.4 Mb duplication at We have recently identified Alu repeat elements in the human genome the MECP2 region in a family with severe mental retardation and as a major target for post-transcriptional processing by A-to-I RNA progressive spasticity . Screening by real time quantitation (qPCR) of editing (2). These findings suggest additional roles for RNA editing and 17 additional MR patients with similar phenotypes revealed 3 additional links it to other RNA processing phenomena, such as alternative pre- duplications . Female carriers show skewed X-inactivation and MECP2 mRNA splicing as well as siRNA mediated gene silencing and miRNA expression levels in PBLs of affected males demonstrated the double function (3) . dosage. These findings revealed a yet unidentified mechanism for In a new bioinformatics screen we have identified additional candidate mental and developmental impairment (Van Esch et al ., AJHG 2005) . genes for editing and experimentally confirmed cases where editing In order to assess the prevalence in the XLMR population we screened alters codons and leads to amino acid changes in the affected 124 randomly selected MR patients as well as 60 patients that were proteins . negative for MECP2, L1CAM or ATRX mutations by qPCR . Only The goal of our current work is to become able to predict which genes one additional case from the ATRX negative group was identified. In are subject to RNA editing, what additional functions it serves in vivo collaboration with other clinical groups, another 11 carefully selected and how changes in RNA editing contribute to human diseases . patients were found which harbor duplications of the MECP2 gene . By 1 . Maas et al ., 2003, JBC 278, 1391-1394 qPCR the location and extent of all 16 duplications were fine-mapped 2 . Athanasiadis et al ., 2004, PLoS Biology, 2 (12), e391, 1-15 up to 5-10 kb resolution . The duplication sizes ranged from 0 .3 to 1 3 . Yang et al ., Nat Struct Mol Biol . 2006 13, 13-21 Mb with the smallest overlapping region of 0 .2 Mb only containing the IRAK1 and MECP2 genes . In some patients, the known MR genes c41. Life without sulfatases: exploiting a mouse model of SLC6A8, L1CAM or GDI1 were included . Interestingly, all proximal multiple sulfatase deficiency as well as distal breakpoints seem different which does not point to C. Settembre1,2, I. Annunziata1, G. Cobellis1,3, M. Sardiello1, A. Ballabio1,4; a common recombination mechanism . Based on this duplication 1TIGEM- Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2SEMM mapping and the well characterized clinical features of the affected - European School of Molecular Medicine, Naples, Italy, 3Seconda Universita’ males, we performed a detailed genotype/phenotype correlation study degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy, 4Universita’ degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, of which the results will be discussed . Naples, Italy. Sulfatases are involved in several biological functions as diverse as c39. Glyc-O-Genetics of Walker-Warburg syndrome and related degradation of complex molecules, production of steroid hormones disorders and cell signaling . Humans have 17 different sulfatases . Eight J. van Reeuwijk1, S. Maugenre2, C. van den Elzen1, A. Verrips3, E. Bertini4, F. diseases due to sulfatase deficiencies are known, while little is known Muntoni5, L. Merlini6, H. Scheffer1, H. G. Brunner1, P. Guicheney2, H. van Bok- for the nine remaining sulfatases. In Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency hoven1; (MSD), the activities of all sulfatases are substantially reduced due 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, to a defect in their post-translational modification. We have identified 2Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 3University Medical Center, the Sulfatase Modifying Factor 1 (SUMF1) gene which is involved Utrecht, The Netherlands, 4Bambino Gesu’ Children’s Research Hospital, in the post-translational modification of sulfatases and is mutated Rome, Italy, 5Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, United Kingdom, 6Uni- in patients with MSD . We have now generated a Sumf1 KO mouse versità di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. model . Preliminary analysis of homozygous Sumf1 KO mice revealed O-linked glycosylation defects are the underlying cause for a group neonatal lethality, severe growth deficiency and massive accumulation of disorders, which phenotypically are characterized by congenital of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) in all examined tissues . The activities muscular dystrophy (CMD) with mild to severe brain- and eye anomalies . of five sulfatases tested were found completely absent. These data Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS) patients display the most severe indicate that sulfatase post-translational modification in mammals developmental defects in this group of disorders, and generally die within absolutely requires SUMF1, thus excluding alternative mechanisms the first year of live. A combined approach of homozygosity mapping and suggesting that the residual sulfatase activities observed in the in consanguineous families and candidate gene selection resulted patients are the result of hypomorphic SUMF1 mutations . Interestingly, in identification of mutations in POMT1, POMT2, FCMD, and FRKP . heterozygous animals had consistently lower levels of all sulfatase Mutations in these four genes are causative in nearly one third of all activities compared to their wild type littermates reinforcing our WWS patients in our cohort . Homozygosity data from 12 sporadic WWS previous hypothesis of SUMF1 being not only an essential but also a cases and four families suggest involvement of multiple other loci . In limiting factor for sulfatase activity . order to identify the remaining WWS genes, we are screening genome- In this exceptional mouse model, the function of an entire protein wide homozygosity data for candidate loci and use bioinformatics family has been completely abolished, thus offering an unprecedented approaches focused on identification of candidate genes in these loci opportunity to study disease mechanisms and gene function in that functionally interact with known WWS genes . In addition, we aim to mammals . gain more insight in function and characteristics of known WWS genes, i .e . by studying genotype-phenotype correlations for genes involved in c42. Altered activity of AP-1 transcription factor components WWS and related disorders. Recently this resulted in the identification of in cystic kidneys of humans and mouse models for Autosomal POMT1 mutations in patients with a less severe phenotype than WWS, Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease. characterized by CMD with calf hypertrophy, microcephaly, and mental I. S. Lantinga-van Leeuwen1, N. H. Le1, A. van der Wal2, W. N. Leonhard1, H. retardation . We postulate that in these patients one or both transcripts van Dam3, E. de Heer2, M. H. Breuning1, D. J. M. Peters1; for POMT1 confer residual protein O-mannosyltransferase activity . This 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, suggests the existence of a disease spectrum of CMD including brain 2Department of Pathology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Department of and eye abnormalities resulting from POMT1 mutations . Molecular Cell Biology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands.ESHG Concurrent Sessions 1 Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) is a common and in an in vitro study we have previously demonstrated that human inherited disorder that predominantly manifests with the formation of keratinocytes expressing R143W-Cx26 mutant are protected from cell fluid-filled cysts in both kidneys. The disease is caused by a mutation in death compared to wild-type Cx26 . In our study, we investigated the the PKD1 or PKD2 gene . To get insight in the crucial initial pathogenic role of wild-type Cx26 and R143W-Cx26 in epidermal wound healing events leading to cystogenesis we have created several mouse lines by focusing on key features of a regenerating epidermis . We show in which a large part of Pkd1 is either deleted, or flanked by loxP increased migration and proliferation in cells expressing R143W-Cx26 sites . We also generated mice with a hypomorphic allele with reduced compared to wild-type Cx26 counterpart . In addition, R143W-Cx26 Pkd1 gene expression, which are viable, showing bilaterally enlarged expressing keratinocytes form a significantly thicker epidermis in an polycystic kidneys . Polycystin-1, the PKD1 gene product, has been organotypic co-culture skin model . We also demonstrate that cells implicated in several signaling complexes that are known to regulate expressing this mutant Cx26 are significantly less susceptible to cellular essential cellular functions . We demonstrated previously that aberrant invasion by the enteric pathogen Shigella flexneri . These studies expression of polycystin-1 results in modification of activator protein-1 demonstrate the advantageous effect of R143W-Cx26 in epithelia by (AP-1) transcription factor activity in cultured renal epithelial cells . Also enhancement of cellular aspects of epithelial wound healing and an in cystic kidneys of ADPKD patients and of homozygous hypomorphic inhibitory effect on bacterial invasion . These data suggest that loss Pkd1 mice, AP-1 activity is altered . Interestingly, small cysts and/or of Cx26 expression either through GJB2 mutation or topical inhibition dilated collecting ducts, representing initial stages of cyst formation, may have beneficial effects on the rate of wound repair and protection displayed highest expression levels of activated forms of ATF2, c-Jun, from infection . and of c-Fos . Recently, we generated mice with conditional Pkd1 deletion in renal C45. Gene expression profiling reveals a new molecular pathway epithelial cells, using a tamoxifen-inducible, kidney-specific Cre involved in Oculopharyngeal muscular Dystrophy transgene . Biallelic inactivation of Pkd1 in adult mice resulted in a minor E. Sterrenburg1, S. J. E. Routledge2, B. M. van der Sluijs3, B. G. van Engelen3, cystic phenotype in the kidneys . However, inactivation of Pkd1 in 4- M. Antoniou2, S. M. van der Maarel1; days-old newborn mice resulted in rapid cyst growth. Again, significant 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, up-regulation of activated forms of ATF2 and c-Jun was observed . Our Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Medical and Molecular Genetics, King’s College data suggest that altered AP-1 activity might play an important role in London, Guy’s Campus, London, United Kingdom, 3Neuromuscular Center early cystogenesis . Nijmegen, Institute of Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. c43. the mutation in the Renin Receptor (AtP6A2) associated Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is a late-onset, usually with XMRE (X-linked MR-epilepsy) significantly reduces ERK 1/2 autosomal dominant myopathy . OPMD is caused by a small expansion activation by NGF in neurites of an alanine (Ala) tract at the N-terminus of the nuclear poly(A)-binding J. Walker, K. J. Franek, C. E. Schwartz; protein (PABPN1) and is clinically characterised by progressive ptosis, JC Self Research Institute, Greenwood, SC, United States. dysphagia and limb muscle weakness . The pathological hallmark is A neutral mutation (p .D107D) in the renin receptor (ATP6A2) in a the accumulation of unique tubulofilamentous inclusions within the family with X-linked mental retardation and epilepsy (XMRE) resulted nuclei of skeletal muscle fibers. These inclusions contain PABPN1 and in exclusion of exon 4 (RERΔ4), as it altered an exon splice enhancer also sequester ubiquitin, proteasome subunits and heat shock proteins site (Ramser et al . HMG, 2005) . as well as poly(A) RNA . In order to further characterize its function and potential role in brain To model OPMD in a cellular system, we generated stable cell lines development, we have transfected both wild-type and mutant RER of primary mouse myoblasts expressing either wild-type (WT) or 7 cDNA into rat PC-12 pheochromocytoma cells . The RERwt was alanine-expanded (+7Ala) PABPN1 under the control of the muscle- particularly localizated to an area near the nucleus and to the tips of specific human desmin control region. neural projections. However, RERΔ4 did not appear to accumulate at Following fusion into myotubes, these cells form intranuclear inclusions, neurite tips . No other morphological differences between PC-12 cells which stain for PABPN1, ubiquitin, poly(A)polymerase (PAP) and poly(A) expressing RERwt and RERΔ4 were evident. Unstimulated PC-12 RNA, similar to the pathological hallmarks seen in OPMD patients . cells expressing RERwt exhibited 2-3 fold increased levels of ERK1/2 Large-scale gene expression analysis reveals a group of genes which phosphorylation compared to controls (empty vector transfected PC- is differentially upregulated in a trend comparable to PABPN1 . A 12 cells), whereas their RERΔ4 counterparts demonstrated 1/6 the separate group of genes showes a significant downregulation upon level of ERK1/2 phosphorylation relative to controls . Moreover, nerve PABPN1 overexpression, and the effect is strongly correlated with the growth factor stimulated RERΔ4 transfected cells exhibited 1/3 the level percentage of inclusions present in the cells . The genes in this group of ERK1/2 activation compared to controls and wild-type transfected are largely extracellular matrix (ECM) components or involved in the cells. Thus, RERΔ4 appears to act in a “dominant-negative” manner synthesis of the ECM. This is the first indication for involvement of the to inhibit NGF-mediated ERK1/2 phosphorylation . Using differentially- ECM in OPMD, which should lead to a better understanding of the epitope-tagged RERwt and RERΔ4, we determined that RERΔ4 can disease mechanism and possible therapeutic intervention . dimerize with itself (RERΔ4- RERΔ4), as well as with wild type RER (RERΔ4- RERwt). Together, our data suggest that the RERΔ4 mutation c46. Non invasive screening and rapid QF-PcR assay could associated with XMRE may result in a dominant-negative form of renin reduce the need of conventional cytogenetic analyses in receptor and may impair the ability of neurites to respond to NGF via prenatal diagnosis the ERK1/2 pathway. These findings confirm the important role of the V. Cirigliano1,2, G. Voglino3, M. Adinolfi4; RER in cognitive functions . 1Dept. Genetica Molecular, General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Departament de Biologia Cel•lular Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain, 3Mole- c44. mutant connexin 26 Enhances Epidermal Wound Healing cular Genetics and Cytogenetics Lab, Promea, Torino, Italy, 4The Galton Labo- And inhibits Bacterial invasion ratory, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Y. K. S. Man, C. Trolove, A. Thomas, A. Papakonstantinopoulou, D. Patel, H. Recently it has been shown that prenatal diagnosis by QF-PCR can Navsaria, E. A. O’Toole, M. A. Curtis, D. P. Kelsell; detect the great majority of chromosome abnormalities, despite being Institute of Cell and Molecular Sciences, Queen Mary’s University of London, deliberately targeted to chromosomes 21, 18, 13, X and Y . Main London, United Kingdom. advantages of the assay are low cost, speed and automation allowing A large proportion of recessive non-syndromic hearing loss is due large scale application . to mutations in the GJB2 gene encoding connexin 26 (Cx26), a We developed a QF-PCR assay that was applied on 28 .000 clinical component of the gap junction . Within different ethnic groups, there are samples with results issued in 24 hours . Common referral indications specific common recessive mutations each with a carrier frequency of were: biochemical risk (32%), maternal age (30%), parental anxiety between 1-3 % suggesting a possibility of heterozygous advantage . (22%) abnormal ultrasound (7 %) increased nuchal translucency (6%) . Indeed, carriers of the R143W-GJB2 allele, the most prevalent in the All samples were also tested by cytogenetic analysis . African population, present with a thicker epidermis than non-carriers QF-PCR was normal in 26755 cases without false positive results . All ESHG Concurrent Sessions  1030 aneuploidies involving chromosomes 21, 18, 13, X and Y were including 83 requests for PND . identified with 100% specificity. Several cases of partial trisomies and Age of consultands ranged 17-80 years . Most had a partner (50 .3%), mosaicism were also detected . 45 .4% were single, 2 .8% divorced, and 1 .5% widows . Women (59%) QF-PCR showed 100% sensitivity in identifying clinically relevant predominated. Nearly 61% already had some children; only 57.5% abnormalities in samples referred for advanced maternal age and were still in their reproductive years . About 85% reached delivery of biochemical risk . In fetuses with abnormal ultrasound sensitivity was results; 51% tested ‘non-carriers’, 49% ‘carriers’. 95% . QF-PCR proved highly reliable allowing termination of affected The majority (48%) of our consultands came for PST mainly because pregnancies without waiting for cytogenetic analysis . of their “wish to know”; 15% mainly worried about children they had; Our results raise the possibility of reducing the load of prenatal 13% mainly for family planning and their “wish to have children”; 6% cytogenetics if pregnancies are monitored by non invasive tests . for “general life decisions”; 4% claiming “easier access to a treatment”; Women with positive results are offered amniocentesis or CVS and QF- 4% “pressed by others”; and 7% (with a pregnancy ongoing) came PCR should always be performed . In case of abnormal QF-PCR results with a simultaneous request for PND and PST . This reinforces the view cytogenetic analyses may not be necessary as, in our experience, that family planning, and the wish not to pass the mutant gene on to parents have opted for early termination in most cases of autosomal their children still to be born, are not the most important motivation for trisomies . In cases of negative QF-PCR results cytogenetic analyses requesting and uptaking PST . might only be performed for fetuses with abnormal ultrasound c49. single-cell chromosomal imbalances detection by array c47. chromosomal mosaicism, DNA methylation and cGH embryolethality: a possible link between cytogenetic and C. Le Caignec1,2, C. Spits2, K. Sermon2, M. De Rycke2, B. Thienpont1, Y. epigenetic factors in the etiology of embryo aneuploidy Moreau3, J. P. Fryns1, A. Van Steirteghem2, I. Liebaers2, J. R. Vermeesch1; I. N. Lebedev, E. N. Tolmacheva, E. A. Sazhenova, A. A. Kashevarova; 1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Bel- Insitute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. gium, 2Research Group Reproduction and Genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Progress in preimplantation genetic diagnosis as well as introduction of Brussels, Belgium, 3ESAT-SISTA, K.U. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. molecular cytogenetic techniques into analysis of human reproductive Single-cell genetic analysis has important applications for basic wastages have revealed a high frequency of chromosomal mosaicism . research as well as for clinical purposes . Thus far, genome wide The presence of cell lines with different karyotypes is the consequence analysis of the DNA of a single cell has remained cumbersome . Array of mitotic errors during early stages of embryo development . However Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) is a new method that can the molecular mechanisms of mitotic non-disjunction in embryo cells detect chromosomal copy number changes across the genome . Thus remain obscure. One of the most significant factors of genomic instability far, array CGH of isolated single cells has been challenging due to is inactivation of the cell cycle checkpoints . Several studies have the low amount of DNA present in a single cell . By optimizing a non- proved that aberrant promoter DNA methylation is a strong mechanism specific Phi29 DNA polymerase amplification of all genomic sequences, for gene silencing . A global epigenetic genome reprogramming takes we generated sufficient quantities DNA of adequate quality for array place during early stage of mammal’s development . It is possible CGH. Amplified DNA from a single cell of respectively a trisomy 13, that there is a close relation between disturbances of the genome 18, 21, and monosomy X cell line was hybridized on a 1-Mb array reprogramming and mitotic instability in the etiology of embryo versus normal control DNA . All aneuploidies were unambiguously aneuploidy . To test this hypothesis a pilot analysis of DNA methylation identified and, repeated experiments, showed the reproducible and in promoters of the p16/pRB-pathway genes in 11 spontaneous accurate detection of the chromosomal aneuploidies being studied . In abortions with chromosomal mosaicism was carried out . CDKN2A and addition to aneuploidy detection, we demonstrate that also segmental RB1 hypermethylation was found in the cytotrophoblast of 82% and aneusomies can be accurately identified. A fast protocol was generated 56% spontaneous abortions, respectively . The corresponding values allowing data interpretation in two days . This makes the method in the extraembryonic mesoderm were 91% and 88% . None of the applicable for preimplantation genetic diagnosis . Currently, we are mosaic embryos without hypermethylation of these genes were found . performing aneuploidy screening on single human blastomeres and At the same time no cases of aberrant methylation were found in the results of these experiments will be presented . placental tissues of pregnancy term-related 23 induced abortions . Our preliminary results point out a possible link between aberrant epigenetic C50. Whole genome amplification with haplotype analysis - a processes and etiology of mitotic non-disjunction in human embryos . novel approach to preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for a This work is supported by Grant of President of Russian Federation, wide range of diseases. MK-1969 .2005 .4 . P. J. Renwick1,2, J. Trussler2, H. Fassihi3, P. Braude2,3, C. Mackie Ogilvie1,2, S. Abbs1,2; c48. ten years of a programme for presymptomatic testing (Pst) 1Genetics Centre, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Centre for Preim- and prenatal diagnosis (PND) in late-onset neurological diseases plantation Genetic Diagnosis, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3King’s in Portugal: machado-Joseph disease (mJD), Huntington disease College, London, United Kingdom. (HD) and familial amyloid neuropathy type i - AttRV30m (FAP-i) PGD for single gene disorders is generally restricted to diseases with J. Sequeiros1,2, J. Pinto-Basto1,3, T. Coelho1,4, J. C. Rocha1,5, S. Lêdo1,5, Â. a common mutation, such as the DF508 cystic fibrosis mutation, and Leite1, L. Rolim1,6, M. Branco1,4, S. Albuquerque1, M. Paneque1, S. W. Se- the number of diseases offered is limited by lengthy optimisation of queiros1,7, M. Marta1,4, P. Valente1,8, C. Barbot1,9, A. Lopes1,8, J. Leal Loureiro1,10, assays at the single cell level . We present here a novel approach that M. Fleming1,2; overcomes these limitations by using a generic step of whole genome 1IBMC, Univ. Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Portugal, 3IGM, Porto, Por- amplification (WGA) of single embryonic cells, followed by the disease- tugal, 4HGSA, Porto, Portugal, 5ISCS-N, Paredes, Portugal, 6Univ. Fernando specific component of the test to obtain extended haplotypes spanning Pessoa, Porto, Portugal, 7ISPA, Lisbon, Portugal, 8Hosp. Magalhães Lemos, the disease locus . WGA of single cells is subject to allele drop-out, Porto, Portugal, 9Hosp. Maria Pia, Porto, Portugal, 10Hosp. S.Teotónio, Viseu, but this does not compromise diagnosis when using extensive marker Portugal. panels . A programme for PST of MJD of late-onset neurological diseases The proof of this principle was demonstrated by successfully obtaining is in place in Portugal since late 1995 . A multidisciplinary team Dystrophin haplotypes on 9 single buccal cells from a female donor . was gathered in each national centre for genetic counselling and Thus two Dystrophin multiplex assays containing 12 intragenic STR psychosocial evaluation, and follow-up . Periodic workshops take polymorphisms and 3 sex specific loci can be used to identify healthy place to develop and discuss intervention and research protocols, males, non-carrier females, female carriers and males affected with and compare experiences . IBMC is also the national reference lab for Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy . genetic testing of these disorders . WGA and PCR analysis was carried out on 49 single blastomeres At CGPP-IBMC, in Porto, we received a total of 998 requests for PST collected from 8 human embryos (including 3 sibling pairs) using a or PND of late-onset neurological disorders: FAP-I (728), HD (142), total of 57 polymorphic markers for chromosomes 1, 7, 13, 18, 21, X MJD (67), FRDA (48) and other (23 for CADASIL, Wilson or SCA2), and Y . Results were obtained for each blastomere, demonstrating that ESHG Concurrent Sessions  this approach can be applied without technical difficulty. c53. Valproic acid stimulates ABcD2 gene expression: a novel Linkage assays have been set up for cystic fibrosis, junctional potential therapy for X-adrenoleukodystrophy epidermolysis bullosa, and recurrent Prader-Willi syndrome . The A. Pujol1, S. Fourcade1, L. Brichta2, E. Hahnen2, P. Aubourg3, B. Wirth2, J. combined techniques of WGA and haplotyping thus open the way to Mandel4; the rapid, straightforward development and application of PGD tests 1IRO/IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, for any mapped single gene disorder . Germany, 3INSERM U561, Université Paris V, Paris, France, 4IGBMC, Illkirch, Strasbourg, France. c51. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for HLA compatible and Our ultimate goal is to develop new therapies for X-linked disease free embryos: single center experience. adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD), the most frequent inherited monogenic E. Altıok1,2, F. Taylan1,2, S. Yüksel1, C. Demirel3, E. Dönmez3, I. Ünsal4, G. demyelinating disease (minimal incidence 1:17,000) . X-ALD leads Demirkeser1; to death in boys due to cerebral demyelination (cerebral childhoold 1Acibadem Genetic Diagnosis Center, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Boğaziçi University, ALD, CCALD) or to motor disability in adults due to spinal cord and Dept. Molecular Biology &Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Acibadem IVF Center, peripheral nerve degeneration (adrenomyeloneuropathy or AMN) . The Istanbul, Turkey, 4Acibadem Labmed, Istanbul, Turkey. gene mutated in the disease (ABCD1) is a peroxisomal ATP-binding Stem cell transplantation from ‘saviour’ siblings have been a valuable transporter of very-long-chain-fatty acids, whose accumulation is the alternative for therapy of a variety of monogenic disorders, hematologic hallmark of the disease . We have generated and characterized mouse malignancies and myelodysplasias . Between 2002 and 2005, 67 models for X-ALD by inactivation of ABCD1 and of a close homolog, referrals to our center have been evaluated for eligibility to PGD of the ABCD2 peroxisomal transporter . Recently, we have shown that HLA match and monogenic disorder . After stringent selection criteria, stable overexpression of ABCD2 is able to prevent the late-onset 56 couples have been found eligible for PGD . The others have been neurodegenerative phenotype presented by ABCD1 knock-out mice . rejected for reasons including unreproductive age, medical condition This constitutes an in vivo evidence of the overlapping functions of the affected child, unproper expectations of the family, economic of both transporters in the mouse . Because ABCD2 is a target of reasons, but most frequently decline of transplantation indication by histone deacethylator (HDAC) inhibitors such as 4-phenylbutyrate, the hematologists . PGD is performed on one or two single blastomeres we investigated the effect of valproic acid (VPA), an HDAC inhibitor biopsied from 6-8-cell embryos on day 3 after fertilization of the egg . successfully used for the long-term treatment of epilepsy . Indeed, VPA HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-DR regions and disease ( beta thalassemia, stimulates ABCD2 expression in vitro and ex vivo in mouse and human . Fanconi C, Fanconi A, SCID or Wiskott Aldrich syndrome) associated When given to X-ALD patients, a 2 to 4 fold upregulation of ABCD2 in gene were initially amplified by multiplex PCR after the blastomer lysis. peripheral mononuclear cells in 50% of the patients is reached . Thus, The embryos selected for HLA alleles by alternative methods including our findings open encouraging perspectives for the therapy of this sequence based typing, real time PCR or STR haplotyping . Mutations devastating disease . of monogenic disorders have been tested by sequencing or by real time PCR . Total of 8 pregnancies have been obtained which has C54. Pharmacologic Chaperone AT2101 Improves the Trafficking resulted already 4 deliveries . One cord blood has been transplanted to and Activity of Acid-ß-Glucosidase in Gaucher Fibroblasts 12 year old sibling with beta thalassemia . We have experienced that S. Kornfeld1, B. Wustman2; PGD for HLA match and monogenic disease is feasible and provides 12Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, , valuable source for transplantation . MO 63110, USA., Saint Louis, MO, United States, 2Amicus Therapeutics, Cran- bury, NJ, United States. c52. Evidence of in vivo increase of smN RNA and protein in Gaucher disease is caused by mutations in acid β-glucosidase smA carriers and patients treated with valproic acid (GBA), the lysosomal enzyme responsible for the catabolism of L. Brichta1, I. Hölker1, K. Haug2, T. Klockgether3, B. Wirth1; glucosylceramide . The most common homozygous mutation in the 1Institute of Human Genetics, Institute of Genetics and Center for Molecular GBA enzyme (N370S) has been shown to result in reduced activity Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University and delayed trafficking of GBA to the lysosome in patient fibroblasts. of Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Neurology, University of Bonn, Germany. Defective GBA activity results in the progressive accumulation of Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), an autosomal recessively glucosylceramide within macrophages and osteoclasts, and GBA inherited motoneuron disorder, leads to death in childhood in about retention in the ER with increased protein degradation and activation half of all patients . While the disease is caused by homozygous of cytokines and release of inflammatory mediators ultimately leading absence of the survival motor neuron gene 1 (SMN1), each patient to a variety of clinical manifestations such as anemia, bone fragility retains 1-4 SMN2 copies . They are almost identical to SMN1, but and possible CNS impairment . Currently, enzyme replacement therapy exon 7 is skipped in 90% of SMN2 transcripts . The encoded protein (ERT) and substrate reduction therapy (SRT) represent the only viable is not fully functional. Using fibroblasts from SMA patients, we have treatment options for patients with Gaucher disease . More recently, previously demonstrated that therapeutic doses of valproic acid (VPA), the use of pharmacological chaperones as a means of rescuing GBA an antiepileptic drug, increase full-length (FL) SMN2 mRNA/protein activity in Gaucher fibroblasts has been explored. In this study, we levels in-vitro by enhancing SMN2 transcription and promoting exon 7 demonstrate that treatment of N370S fibroblasts with the glucose inclusion. These findings opened an exciting perspective for a causal analog AT2101 (30-100 µM) increases the lysosomal steady-state SMA therapy . levels of the GBA protein to near wild-type levels with a corresponding Here, we provide a first proof of principle of an in-vivo activation of two-fold enhancement in GBA activity . Pulse/chase experiments a causative gene by VPA, a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, indicate that AT2101 acts to both increase the intracellular trafficking in a human inherited disease . Ten SMA carriers with 1 SMN1 and of newly synthesized GBA and prolongs the stability of the mutant 1-3 SMN2 copies were enrolled in a VPA pilot trial . Drug treatment enzyme within the lysosome . Although a glucose analog, AT2101 revealed increased FL-SMN mRNA/protein levels in blood from is a very poor inhibitor of alpha-glucosidase II and does not alter N- 7/10 probands . In a subsequent investigation of peripheral whole linked oligosaccharide processing at 500µM . Taken together, these blood from 20 SMA type I-III patients treated with VPA in individual data suggest that AT2101 may be a promising alternative to enzyme experimental curative approaches, FL-SMN2 mRNA levels were found replacement therapy (ERT) for the treatment of Gaucher disease . to be increased in 7 patients, whereas 13 presented unchanged or decreased transcript levels. Difficulties in developing effective clinical c55. intrabody-based therapy for protein aggregation disorders: biomarkers are pointed out and a strategy is suggested how to monitor OPmD as paradigm drug response in treated patients . This will be an essential tool required P. Verheesen1, A. de Kluijver1, S. van Koningsbruggen2, H. de Haard3, G. J. for discriminating between responders and non-responders to VPA van Ommen2, T. Verrips1, S. M. van der Maarel2; treatment . 1Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Ablynx NV, Ghent, Belgium. Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is regarded a paradigm ESHG Concurrent Sessions  for the group of protein aggregation disorders . It is caused by extensions episodes of care relating to 6000 individual patients with a diagnosis of the N-terminal polyalanine stretch of the nuclear polyA-binding of haemochromatosis . protein 1 (PABPN1) causing the presence of PABPN1-containing Crude prevalence was 53 per million of population (pmp) and intranuclear aggregates in skeletal muscle . Intranuclear aggregation crude incidence 21 pmp in 2002/3 . Indirectly age sex standardized of mutant PABPN1 is also observed in transgenic mouse and cell prevalence by health authority of residence indicated unexplained models for OPMD and these models consistently support a direct role geographical variation . Lifetime probability of having an episode of for the protein aggregation in OPMD pathogenesis . We have isolated care related to haemochromatosis was 9% in males and 4% in females and characterized several single-domain antibody reagents (VHH) in a hypothetical cohort of 1000 C282Y homozygotes . 14% of patients that recognize at least two different epitopes in PABPN1 . The antibody had liver disease recorded at the first episode of care. The majority of reagents specifically detect endogenous PABPN1 in cell lysates on care was provided by haematologists . western blot and label PABPN1 in cultured cells and muscle sections . Despite a high prevalence of the at-risk genotype, haemochromatosis is When expressed intracellularly as intrabodies in a cellular model for uncommon. Lifetime penetrance was nearly 10% in males. A significant OPMD, aggregation of PABPN1 was prevented in a dose-dependent percentage of individuals present with preventable complications at manner . These intrabodies have also curative properties as they could their first episode of care. This together with geographical variation in also reduce the presence of already existing aggregates . Given the prevalence suggests further scope for earlier diagnosis . domain specificity of VHH-mediated aggregation interference, this approach allows the definition of the nucleation kernel in aggregation- c58. Preference for sweet foods is partially genetically prone proteins, thus facilitating etiological insight into this and other determined; a Finnish family study protein aggregation disorders . It may also provide useful therapeutic K. Keskitalo1,2, A. Knaapila1,2, M. Kallela3, A. Palotie4, M. Wessman4,5, S. Sam- agents . malisto2, L. Peltonen2, H. Tuorila1, M. Perola2; 1Department of Food Technology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2De- c56. Advances in exon skipping trial development towards partment of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute (KTL), Hel- proof-of-concept and systemic application in Duchenne sinki, Finland, 3Department of Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, muscular Dystrophy Helsinki, Finland, 4The Finnish Genome Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, J. T. C. van Deutekom1, H. Heemskerk1, C. de Winter1, P. van Kuik2, S. de Finland, 5Folkhälsan Research Institute, Helsinki, Finland. Kimpe2, G. Platenburg2, G. J. B. van Ommen1; The human has an innate preference for sweet foods . However, the 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, degree of sweet taste preference varies largely between individuals . Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Prosensa B.V., Leiden, The Netherlands. The aim was to study if genetic elements contribute to these differences . Antisense oligonucleotides (AONs) are emerging as small molecule The study population consists of 146 members (32 % male, 68 % drugs with a high, sequence-specific, corrective potential on RNA female, 19 to 78 years old) of 26 Finnish families, genome-scanned with level . Especially for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), AONs 360 microsatellite markers . The subjects rated the sweetness intensity have demonstrated to be an efficient and relatively simple and safe and pleasantness of 0, 3, 7 .5, and 18 .75 % sucrose solutions using alternative to gene therapy approaches based on gene replacement . labeled magnitude scales LMS (Green et al . 1993) and LAM (Schutz Over the last five years we have successfully developed this antisense & Cardello, 2001), and evaluated the pleasantness and use frequency approach towards clinical application. In the first half of 2006, a of 5 sweet foods (chocolate, candies, ice cream, sweet pastry, sweet “proof-of-concept” clinical study, based on intramuscular injections desserts) using 7-point scales . Phenotypes for pleasantness and use of an exon 51 skipping AON, will be undertaken in a selected group frequency of sweet foods were constructed as mean of ratings given of DMD patients, of which the set-up will be discussed . To facilitate to these 5 items . Program MERLIN was used for variance component full-body treatment of DMD patients, we are now focusing on the linkage analysis of these quantitative traits . Highest heritabilities were development of a safe and efficient systemic AON-delivery method. observed for pleasantness of 7 .5 and 18 .75 % sucrose solution (h2 = Using the mdx mouse model, we have compared efficacy, persistence 23 and 48 %, respectively) and for sweet foods’ pleasantness (h2 = and biodistribution of an AON (containing 2‘-O-methyl RNA with a full- 19 %) and use frequency (h2 = 35 %) . The multipoint linkage analysis length phosphorothioate backbone) targeting the mutated exon 23, provided a LOD score of 3 .49 at marker GGAA3G05 located in after intravenous administration of increasing doses and intervals . Chr16p11 .2 to use frequency of sweet foods . These results suggest We obtained relatively high exon 23 skipping levels (up to 45%) in all that the preference for sweet taste is partially genetically determined muscle types, including diaphragm and heart, resulting in significant and that locus 16p11 .2 harbors a genetic element modifying the use dystrophin expression as detected by Western blot analysis . There of sweet foods . was an increased muscle-specific uptake and efficacy of AON in the mdx mice when compared to control mice . A highly sensitive ligation c59. A common genetic variant 10 kb upstream of INSIG is ELISA for AONs, allowed us to assess the stability of the AON in the associated with adult and childhood obesity different organs and tissues, showing a half life of 10 days in skeletal A. Herbert1, N. P. Gerry1, M. B. McQueen2, I. M. Heid3, A. Pfeufer4, T. Illig3, H. muscle. The overall therapeutic effect was indicated by significantly E. Wichmann3, T. Meitinger4, D. Hunter5, F. B. Hu6, G. Colditz6, A. Hinney7, J. decreased creatin kinase levels in plasma of treated mice, and by Hebebrand7, K. Koberwitz4, X. Zhu8, R. Cooper9, K. Ardlie10, H. Lyon11, J. N. improved performance in RotaRod studies . These results offer a Hirschhorn12, N. M. Laird13, M. E. Lenburg1, C. Lange13, M. F. Christman1; favourable perspective for the first clinical Phase I/IIa studies on AONs 1Boston University Medical School, Department of Genetics and Genomics, in DMD patients, suggesting that these are within reach in the next Boston, MA, United States, 2Harvard School of Public Health, Department of few years . Epidemiology, MA, United States, 3GSF - National Research Center for Envi- ronment and Health, Institute of Epidemiology, Neuherberg, Germany, 4GSF c57. clinical burden and penetrance of haemochromatosis: - National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of Human estimates derived from routine data Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany, 5Harvard School of Public Health, Department C. Patch, H. Yuen, P. Roderick, W. Rosenberg; of Epidemiology, Boston, MA, United States, 6Brigham and Women’s Hospital University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. and Harvard Medical School, Nurses Health Study, Channing Laboratory, Bos- The prevalence of the at-risk genotype for haemochromatosis is ton, MA, United States, 7University of Duisburg-Essen, Department of Child common at approximately 1 in 200, the clinical penetrance is unknown . and Adolescent Psychiatry, Germany, 8Loyola University Medical Center, De- This study aims to determine the clinical burden of haemochromatosis partment of Preventive Medicine and Epidemiology, IL, United States, 9Loyola and provide an estimate of the probability of diagnosis and treatment University Medical Center, Maywood, Department of Preventive Medicine and for C282Y homozygotes in a Northern European population . Epidemiology, IL, United States, 10SeraCare Life Sciences Inc, Genomics Col- The prevalence and incidence of haemochromatosis requiring laborative, Cambrige, MA, United States, 11Children’s Hospital, Boston, Pro- hospitalisation together with associated co-morbidity, patterns of gram in Genomics and Divisions of Genetics, MA, United States, 12Children’s care and lifetime cumulative probability of admission was estimated Hospital, Boston, Department of Genetics, MA, United States, 13Harvard School from routine hospital admissions data for England . The data covered of Public Health, Department of Biostatistics, Boston, MA, United States. six years from April 1997 to March 2003 and consisted of 56000 Obesity is a heritable trait and a risk factor for many of the common ESHG Concurrent Sessions  diseases such as type 2 diabetes, heart disease, and hypertension . association testing has been proposed as an alternative to linkage Here we use a dense, whole-genome scan of the DNA samples from studies . Using maps of frequent SNPs, the entire genome, or more the Framingham Heart Study cohort to identify a common genetic restricted regions of it, can be queried for association with a disease . variant near the INSIG2 gene (insulin-induced gene) associated with These large-scale association studies have become a reality with the obesity. We have replicated the finding in four separate samples recent availability of the HapMap database and are a promising tool for comprised of individuals of Western European ancestry, African understanding the genetic component of complex diseases . Americans and children . One of the replication samples was the However, the question of the actual power of this new approach for large population based KORAS4 study from Germany (n=3996) . The identifying genetic risk factors for complex diseases is still open . obesity-predisposing genotype is present in 10% of individuals . Our Power studies published in support of the approach were based on the study suggests that common genetic polymorphisms are important hypothesis of a single variant associated with the disease . Because determinants of obesity . true complex disease etiology may include cases of several variants in one gene or gene-gene interactions, we perform power computation c60. Genetic variants of RANtEs are associated with protection under several of these more complex models using the ENCODE for type 1 Diabetes data that exhaustively describes the SNPs in ten 500kb-regions A. Zhernakova1, B. Z. Alizadeh1,2, P. Eerligh2, G. Valdigem1, P. Hanifi-Moghad- of the human genome . We show that under very realistic models, dam2,3, N. C. Schloot3, B. Diosdado1, C. Wijmenga1, B. O. Roep2, B. P. C. Koel- including the scenario of common variants, the approach of systematic eman1,2; anonymous SNP association tests may also fail . 1Complex Genetics Section, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Department of Immu- nohematology and Blood Transfusion, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Diabe- C63. Quantitative mapping of loci influencing susceptibility to tes Research Institute, Heinrich-Heine University, Dusseldorf, Germany. lentiviral infection. Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease with complex genetic S. Deutsch1, C. Loeuillet2, M. Munoz2, M. Gagnebin1, J. Wyniger2, H. Attar1, J. predisposition . RANTES (CCL5) is a Th1 chemokine, which promote S. Beckmann3, S. E. Antonarakis1, A. Telenti2; T-cell activation and proliferation . Genetic association of RANTES 1Department of Genetic Medicine, University of Geneva, Switzerland, 2Institute with asthma, sarcoidosis and multiple sclerosis have previously been of Microbiology, University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Service of Medical Ge- described . Increased protein levels of RANTES at the primary sites of netics, CHUV- Lausanne, Switzerland. inflammation have been reported for different autoimmune diseases. Susceptibility to lentiviral infection (including HIV) is a quantitative trait In this study we tested RANTES as a candidate gene for association that is likely to have a strong genetic component and be influenced by with T1D, using three tagged SNPs to capture all haplotype information . genetic variability of the host . The minor allele of all three SNPs was found to be less transmitted to To identify the genetic components underlying this trait we established T1D offspring (transmission rates 37 .3%(p=0 .002), 38 .7%(p=0 .007) an ex vivo approach to measure lentiviral susceptibility in lymphoblastoid and 41 .0%(p=0 .013)), and also less frequent in case versus control cells (LBLs), based on a GFP reporter system . The assay outputs design (p= 0 .009, 0 .03 and 0 .04 respectively) . A similar protective effect two phenotypes: fraction of infected cells, and expression of lentiviral was observed for the haplotype carrying all three minor alleles (TDT: genes . p=0.003; OR=0.55; CI: 0.37-0.83, case/control: p=0.03; OR=0.74; We measured lentiviral susceptibility in 198 LBLs from 15 three- CI: 0 .55-0 .98) . Finally, individuals carrying the protective haplotype generation CEPH families to calculate heritability and perform express significantly lower serum level of RANTES, when compared quantitative linkage using previously generated genotypes . to non-carriers . Heritability calculations showed that both phenotypes have a strong Conclusion: Genetic variation of RANTES is significantly associated genetic component with h2r of 0 .53 and 0 .43 respectively . Quantitative with T1D, both in a case control and in family-based analysis . Carriers linkage analysis using variance components, lead to the identification of the protective haplotype express lower serum level of RANTES of a suggestive locus on chromosome 8q for the ‘fraction of infected protein, suggesting lower T-cell activation and proliferation . cells’ trait (LOD=2 .89, p=2E-04) . Because the phenotype is not normally distributed we performed 500 simulations to determine the c61. screening and replication using the same data set: A empirical significance of the finding; the LOD-score obtained was testing strategy for case/control studies genome-wide significant (95% significance threshold = 2.83). To M. B. McQueen1, J. Su1, A. Murphy1, K. Schneiter1, N. M. Laird1, S. T. Weiss2, further dissect the susceptibility locus, we measured the trait in LBLs C. Lange1; of the 60 caucasian HapMap individuals . We selected all tag SNPs in 1Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States, 2Harvard Medical a 3Mb region centered on the marker with the highest LOD-score and School, Boston, MA, United States. performed association analysis, which identified a single significant We propose a novel testing strategy for case/control studies that uses SNP (p=7.7E-05) after correction for multiple testing. This finding the same data set for the screening step and the replication step . For narrows down the candidate region to 5-10 genes . We thus identify family-based designs, we proposed such 2-stage strategy in which a new locus for lentiviral susceptibility that could help improve our both steps are statistical independent: the screening step, in which understanding on the mechanisms of HIV infection . the strength of the genetic association between each marker and the trait is assessed, and the replication step, in which a selected subset c64. Distinctive white matter abnormalities on mRi in patients of markers is tested for genetic association with the trait . However, with 6p deletion syndrome the approach has been limited to family data . Here, we propose a S. A. J. Lesnik Oberstein1, M. Kriek1, K. Szuhai2, A. van Haeringen1, J. van der testing strategy for case/control studies that uses the same data set Smagt3, K. B. M. Hansson1, M. H. Breuning1, M. S. van der Knaap4; for screening and replication, and makes the necessity of family-data 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, for such testing strategies redundant . We outline the approach and Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden Uni- assess its power compared to standard multiple-testing procedures . Its versity Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Ge- practical relevance for genome-wide association studies is illustrated netics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 4Depart- by applications to genome-wide association studies . ment of child neurology, VUMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. A girl with mental retardation, short stature and a distinct pattern of c62. Will systematic association studies of anonymous sNPs multiple congenital abnormalities, including white matter abnormalities succeed where linkage studies failed? on MRI, presented at our department in 1999 . Despite intensive J. K. Pickrell, F. Clerget-Darpoux, C. Bourgain; investigations, no diagnosis could be made . Recently, the parents U535 INSERM, Villejuif, France. presented with their third child . He showed a similar pattern of congenital Systematic linkage screenings for complex disease genes have often and MRI abnormalities as his sister . MAPH analysis, followed by had poor results, despite the impressive number of diseases studied . FISH and Array-CGH, revealed a cryptic unbalanced chromosomal As linkage studies have low power to detect common variants, it is translocation leading to a monosomy of 6pter and a trisomy 20qter hypothesized that common polymorphisms may be involved in complex in both siblings. Based on analogous MRI findings, a third, unrelated disease . In order to detect the contribution of these alleles, large-scale patient, was diagnosed and molecularly confirmed to have 6p deletion ESHG Concurrent Sessions 6 syndrome by her neuroradiologist . of the aneuploid state of specific chromosomal segments on the The recent literature delineates a pattern of congenital abnormalities phenotype down to the gene level . and dysmorphic features that should alert the clinician to the possibility of 6p deletion syndrome and instigation of appropriate investigations c67. targeted cloning of fragile sites - based on a previous (FISH or MAPH/MLPA of the 6p telomeric region) . In addition to the tagging of fragile regions in a breast cancer cell line already described features, we would like to add the finding that A. Fechter, E. Kuehnel, I. Buettel, L. Savelyeva, M. Schwab; children with 6p deletion syndrome seem to have a marked, and German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. possibly pathognomonic, pattern of white matter abnormalities on Common fragile sites are chromosomal loci which can be observed brain MRI . as breaks or gaps on metaphase chromosomes after culturing the cells under conditions inhibiting DNA replication or repair. They reflect c65. Array-cGH: A novel tool in genetic diagnosis of individuals site-specific genetic instability being involved in e.g. chromosome with congenital heart defects rearrangements, sister chromatid exchanges and gene amplification. B. Thienpont1, L. Mertens2, B. Eyskens2, D. Boshoff2, N. Maas1, T. de Ravel1, During the last years progress has been made in understanding the J. Fryns1, M. Gewillig2, J. R. Vermeesch1, K. Devriendt1; molecular basis of common fragile sites and the mechanisms which 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Pediatric Cardiology Unit, account for their expression, however, the nature of common fragile Leuven, Belgium. sites is still not completely known . Array-CGH is a novel diagnostic tool for the detection of submicroscopic Point of departure for a targeted cloning of several fragile sites was chromosomal imbalances . Moreover, it offers an opportunity to identify tagging of fragile site DNA by repair mediated integration of a marker novel genetic loci for specific genetic disorders. We report the results gene into breaks . For this approach, the breast cancer cell line MDA- of array-CGH analysis in 60 patients with a congenital heart defect MB-436 was chosen as model, since it spontaneously expresses fragile (CHD) of unknown cause, who had, in addition, either developmental sites with a high frequency and displays other non-random instable delay/mental retardation and/or additional major malformation(s) and/ regions . A transfected marker gene integrated preferentially into fragile or dysmorphism . sites and non-random instable regions (44 respectively 41% of total Array-CGH was performed using a home-made 1Mb array, with the integrations) and thus tagging the fragile regions . Using different 1Mb BAC/PAC set from the Sanger institute . All detected anomalies cloning approaches flanking sequences of the marker gene were were confirmed and parents were investigated. identified and the exact position of the respective corresponding fragile New abnormalities were detected in 11/60 patients (18%) . Mosaicism sites was determined . The co-localization of the derived sequences for monosomy 7 was detected in a patient with suspected diagnosis with the fragile site was confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization of Fanconi syndrome but normal DEB and mitomycin tests . Among on metaphase chromosomes of lymphoblastoid cell lines treated with the 10 others, there were 4 interstitial deletions (maximal sizes Aphidicolin to induce fragile site expression . The exact dimensions of between 2 and 14 Mb), 1 interstitial duplication (6 Mb), a paternally the fragile sites were determined by FISH mapping analysis . inherited duplication in chromosome 22q11 .2, 1 terminal deletion 5q (6 Mb), 1 unbalanced translocation (9q/20q) and two more complex c68. Genome wide tiling path array cGH analysis in a diagnostic intrachromosomal rearrangements involving deletions, duplications setting. A three-year experience and inversions . N. de Leeuw, R. Pfundt, D. Koolen, E. Sistermans, W. Nillesen, M. Egmont-Pe- With the exception of TBX1 (dup 22q11 .2), NOTCH1 (del 9q34 .3) and tersen, J. Veltman, A. Geurts van Kessel, B. de Vries, D. Smeets; NKX2.5 (del 5q35.12), no genes for CHD are known in the identified Dept. of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Ni- regions . Using ENDEAVOUR, a recently developed bioinformatics jmegen, The Netherlands. tool to prioritize candidate genes in specified chromosomal regions, In April 2003, genome wide array-based Comparative Genomic we identified several novel candidate genes for CHD. Array-CGH can Hybridisation (array CGH) analysis was diagnostically implemented in detect cryptic submicroscopic imbalances in a large proportion of our cytogenetic services in order to reach a resolution that extends far patients with a CHD and a “chromosomal” phenotype . Moreover, the beyond routine cytogenetic analysis1 . This was achieved by the mutual identified chromosomal imbalances are a source of novel candidate efforts of people from five different fields of expertise: clinical genetics, genes for CHD . cytogenetics, DNA diagnostics, bioinformatics, and biostatistics . One year after implementation, we switched from a first generation c66. molecular cytogenetic (re-)examinations of structural 1 Mb resolution BAC array to a second generation 100 kb resolution chromosome aberrations within the EcARUcA (European tiling path array encompassing over 32,000 BAC clones . After tackling cytogeneticists Association Register of Unbalanced several practical high hurdles, one of the main being the correct clinical chromosome Aberrations) project reveals surprising results interpretation of the analytical data and the subsequent classification M. Riegel, A. Schinzel; of imbalances as variant, unique or inherited, the first final diagnostic University of Zürich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. array CGH outcomes (of a current total of ~500 array requests) were Within the ECARUCA project, molecular cytogenetic re-examinations completed and reported to the requesting physicians early in 2005 . were performed for European laboratories with the aim to better define Various practical aspects that have resulted in our current diagnostic breakpoints in various structural chromosome aberrations . As the main strategy are discussed . These include cytogenetic and subtelomere aim of the Register is to better know and understand the phenotype and Multiplex Ligase-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) analysis prior course of rare chromosome aberrations, it was considered important to array CGH analysis, and subsequent validation of significant array to precisely define the aneuploid segments with respect to karyotype- CGH aberrations by region-specific MLPA and/or FISH. Other relevant phenotype correlation . For deletions and duplications, microsatellite diagnostic issues such as parental testing, family and follow-up studies, marker analysis and FISH with BACs was the method of choice . For and ISCN-based nomenclature are also addressed . additional marker chromosomes, chromosome dissection and reverse Our current strategy enables us to routinely use this powerful, yet paiting was also applied . In selected cases also MLPA and array CGH expensive tool to detect submicroscopic imbalances and thereby to was applied . More than 100 patients were so far examined . The initial unravel the causative defects in a growing number of patients with determination of breakpoints had to be revised in almost all cases . In mental retardation with or without multiple congenital anomalies . some patients even the chromosome involved had not been correctly 1De Vries et al ., Am . J . Hum . Genet . 77:606-616 (2005) . determined . Deletions in some cases concerned segments which were not even overlapping with the initially determined segment . Especially large was the discrepancy in instances of duplication-deletions . From the above-mentioned results we conclude that many patients in whom especially de novo duplications, interstitial deletions and additional marker chromosomes were determined, should be re-examinated with molecular cytogenetic methods . This will result in many revisions of initial karyotypes and will improve our knowledge about the impact ESHG Concurrent Sessions  c69. subtelomeric imbalances in phenotypically normal developmental defects of the central nervous system (most commonly individuals occipital encephalocele), hepatic ductal dysplasia and cysts, and I. G. Balikova1, T. de Ravel1, C. Le Caignec1, B. Thienpont1, B. Menten2, F. polydactyly . MKS is genetically heterogeneous with three loci mapped: Speleman2, K. Devriendt1, J. P. Fryns1, J. R. Vermeesch1; MKS1, 17q21-24; MKS2, 11q13 and MKS3. We have fine-mapped 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Medical Genetics the MKS3 locus to a 12 .67 Mb candidate interval at chromosome Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. 8q21 .13-q22 .1 . We sequenced 22 positional candidate genes before Submicroscopic telomeric imbalances are a major cause of we identified pathogenic mutations in TMEM67 for five MKS3-linked developmental and mental disorders and are detected in 3 to 7% consanguineous families with classic clinical features of MKS . of patients with normal karyotypes . Screening for subtelomeric MKS3/TMEM67 is a novel, evolutionarily-conserved gene that is aberrations has become a routine aspect of the diagnostic work-up expressed in foetal spinal cord, brain, liver and kidney, as expected of patients with MCA/MR . Because of this strong correlation between for the phenotype, as well as more general low levels of expression . subtelomeric imbalances and developmental disorders, subtelomeric It encodes a novel, 995 amino acid, transmembrane protein that we screening is being implemented in prenatal diagnostic techniques . have called meckelin . Meckelin has topological similarity to the G- In contrast to these findings, scattered reports in the literature describe protein-coupled and the Frizzled (FZ) families of receptors, and may phenotypically normal individuals carrying subtelomeric imbalances . have a role in primary ciliary and basal body function . Further mutation Here, we report on the detection of subtelomeric chromosomal analysis has identified a number of frame-shift, splice-site and imbalances in phenotypically normal individuals at another six missense changes, all of which are in exons encoding the extracellular subtelomeres of respectively chromosomes 4p, 6q 10q, 11q, 17p, domain of meckelin . 17q, and 18q . In addition, array CGH was applied and uncovered We present initial genotype-phenotype correlations for MKS, and imbalances sized between 0 .4 Mb and 7 Mb . Surprisingly, this shows preliminary functional work that begins to elucidate the role of meckelin that not only small chromosomal deletions and duplications, but in normal human development . also large imbalances can be tolerated without obvious phenotypic anomalies . None of these subtelomeric imbalances are listed as c72. Germline mutations of proto-oncogenes in the RAs-RAF- common copy number variations of the human genome . Since most of ERK pathway cause costello syndrome and cardio-facio- them have been ascertained through the detection of the imbalance in cutaneous (cFc) syndrome a child with a developmental disorder, they are likely to be susceptibility Y. Aoki1, T. Niihori1, Y. Narumi1, H. Kawame2, K. Kurosawa3, H. Ohashi4, M. Fi- factors that, dependent on the genetic or environmental background, locamo5, G. Neri6, H. Cavé7, A. Verloes7, N. Okamoto8, R. C. M. Hennekam9,10, can lead to phenotypic anomalies . These observations raise major G. Gillessen-Kaesbach11, D. Wieczorek11, M. I. Kavamura12, L. Wilson13, S. ethical concerns for the introduction of subtelomeric and genome wide Kure1, Y. Matsubara1; screening tools in prenatal genetic diagnosis 1Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan, 2Nagano Children’s Hospital, Nagano, Japan, 3Pathology, Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center, Yo- c70. cranio-lenticulo-sutural dysplasia is caused by a sEc23A kohama, Japan, 4Saitama Children’s Medical Center, Saitama, Japan, 5IRCCS. mutation disrupting ER-to-Golgi trafficking G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 6Istituto di Genetica Medica, Rome, Italy, 7Hôpital S. A. Boyadjiev1, J. Fromme2, C. Nauta1, W. Eyaid3, R. Schekman2,4, L. Orci5; Robert Debré (APHP), Paris, France, 8Osaka Medical Center and Research 1McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka, Japan, 9Institute of Child Health, States, 2Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California, London, United Kingdom, 10Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands Berkeley, CA, United States, 3Department of Pediatrics, King Fahad Hospital, Antilles, 11Universitaet Essen, Essen, Germany, 12Federal University of Sao Khasim Alaan, 11426 Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Brazil, 13Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, Berkeley, CA, United States, 5Department of Morphology, University of Geneva United Kingdom. Medical Center, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Costello syndrome is a rare, multiple congenital anomaly syndrome We described Cranio-lenticulo-sutural dysplasia (CLSD) as a novel characterized by coarse face, mental retardation, cardiomyopathy autosomal recessive syndrome with late-closing fontanels, sutural and predisposition to tumors . The molecular basis of the disease has cataracts, facial dysmorphisms, and skeletal defects mapped to been unknown . Mutations in tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 (PTPN11) chromosome 14q13-q21 . Using a positional cloning approach we have been identified in approximately 40% of patients with Noonan identified F382L missense mutation in SEC23A segregating with this syndrome1, which phenotypically overlaps with Costello syndrome . syndrome . SEC23A is an essential component of the COPII-coated We hypothesized that the causative gene(s) for Costello syndrome vesicles that transport secretory proteins from the endoplasmic and Noonan syndrome without PTPN11 mutations is a functionally reticulum (ER) to the Golgi complex . Electron microscopy and upstream or downstream molecule(s) of SHP-2 in the RAS-RAF-ERK immunofluorescence (IF) documented gross dilatation of the ER in pathway . We sequenced the entire coding regions of the four RAS patient fibroblasts. The cells also exhibited cytoplasmic mislocalization genes (KRAS, HRAS, NRAS and ERAS) in genomic DNA from 13 of SEC31 and delayed secretion of COL1A1. Transfection of fibroblast individuals with Costello syndrome and 28 individuals with PTPN11- cells with a mutant SEC23A expression vector produced cellular negative Noonan syndrome. We identified four heterozygous de novo phenotypes similar to those observed in the mutant cells . These mutations of HRAS (G12V, G12A, G12S and G13D) in 12 of 13 affected observations were corroborated by in vitro cell-free vesicle budding individuals, all of which have been previously reported as somatic and assays which demonstrated that the F832L mutation results in loss of “oncogenic” mutations in various tumors . Fibroblasts established from SEC23A function and inefficient COPII complex formation. We propose patients were hypersensitive to growth factor stimulation as compared that a secretory defect of a distinct set of cargo proteins required for with control fibroblasts. Only a mutant allele was expressed in the normal morphogenesis accounts for CLSD . ganglioneuroblastoma tissue surgically isolated from an individual with Costello syndrome despite the biallelic expression in her fibroblasts. c71. the transmembrane protein meckelin (MKS) is mutated in Furthermore, we recently identified genes mutated in CFC syndrome. meckel-Gruber syndrome Our observations strongly suggest that dysregulation of the RAS- RAF-ERK pathway is a common molecular basis for the three related U. M. Smith1, S. Pasha1, S. M. Sharif2, P. A. Batman3, C. P. Bennett2, C. disorders, Noonan, Costello, and CFC syndrome . Woods4, C. McKeown5, P. Cox6, T. Attie-Bitach7, C. A. Johnson1; 1Section of Medical and Molecular Genetics, University of Birmingham, United 1 . Tartaglia, M . & Gelb, B .D . Eur J Med Genet 48, 81-96 (2005) . Kingdom, 2Clinical Genetics, St. James’ Hospital, United Kingdom, 3Department 2 . Aoki, Y . et al . Nat Genet 37, 1038-40 (2005) . of Histopathology, Bradford Royal Infirmary, United Kingdom, 4Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women’s Hospital, United Kingdom, 6Department of Histo- pathology, Birmingham Women’s Hospital, United Kingdom, 7Département de Génétique et INSERM U-393, Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, France. Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is a severe autosomal recessively- inherited disorder characterized by bilateral renal cystic dysplasia, ESHG Concurrent Sessions  c73. mutations in different components of FGF-signalling in phenotype in both, TBX1 under- and over expression . We therefore LADD syndrome provide the first functional evidence for the pathogenic relevance of B. Wollnik1,2,3, H. G. Brunner4, H. Kayserili3, O. Uyguner3, G. Nürnberg5,6, E. D. TBX1 missense mutations . Lew7, A. Dobbie8, V. P. Eswarakumar7, A. Uzumcu3, M. Ulubil-Emeroglu9, J. G. Leroy10, Y. Li1,2, C. Becker5,6, K. Lehnerdt11, C. W. Cremers12, M. Yuksel-Apak3, c75. Branching and nucleokinesis defects in migrating P. Nürnberg1,5,13, C. Kubisch1,2,13, J. Schlessinger7, H. van Bokhoven4, E. Rohm- interneurons derived from doublecortin knockout mice ann1,2; C. Kappeler1, Y. Saillour1, J. Baudouin2, F. Phan Dinh Tuy1, C. Alvarez2, C. Hou- 1Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Cologne, Germany, 2Insti- bron3, P. Gaspar2, G. Hamard3, J. Chelly1, C. Metin2, F. Francis1; tute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Medical 1INSERM U567, Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 2INSERM U616, Paris, France, Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, 3Homologous recombination laboratory, Institut Cochin, Paris, France. Turkey, 4Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medi- Doublecortin (DCX) is mutated in cases of lissencephaly, a malformation cal Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5Cologne Center for Genomics, Uni- of cortical development associated with severe mental retardation and versity of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 6RZPD Deutsches Ressourcenzentrum epilepsy . In this disorder the cerebral cortex is highly disorganised, für Genomforschung GmbH, Berlin, Germany, 7Department of Pharmacology, most probably resulting from perturbed neuronal migration . We are Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States, 8Genetic pursuing a variety of approaches in an attempt to better understand Service, St. James’s University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 9Ear, Nose the pathophysiology of lissencephaly . In addition to performing and Throat Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, mutation screening analyses, we identified and characterised several Turkey, 10Department of Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, protein partners of DCX, providing entry points into understanding Belgium, 11HNO-Abteilung, Klinikum Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany, 12Otorhi- the biochemical pathways in which it is implicated . These studies nolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The show that DCX is a MAP, also implicated in vesicle trafficking and cell Netherlands, 13Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. adhesion, likely to be important functions for neuronal migration . We Autosomal dominant lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital (LADD) syndrome also generated Dcx knockout mice which interestingly, have only subtle is a multiple congenital anomaly mainly characterized by lacrimal abnormalities in the mouse cortex . Nevertheless, our video microscopy duct aplasia, malformed ears and deafness, small teeth, and digital analyses of migrating knockout interneurons show defects in migratory anomalies . We genotyped three large LADD families using the dynamics. Specifically, the formation and division of growth cones at Affymetrix GeneChip 10K Array and mapped the LADD1 locus on the extremities of neuronal processes are more frequent in knockout chromosome 10q26 to a 6 .2 Mb critical region between markers cells . As a consequence, cells are more extensively branched, although D10S1693 and D10S1723. We identified heterozygous missense individual branches are less stable. Dcx-deficient cells thus migrate mutations in the tyrosine-kinase domain of the fibroblast-growth-factor- in a disorganised manner, extending and retracting short branches receptor 2 (FGFR2) in all three LADD families and a de novo FGFR2 and making less long distant movements of the nucleus . These novel mutation in a sporadic case . After exclusion of FGFR2 in two additional data thus highlight an important role for Dcx in migrating interneurons . LADD families we found a causative mutation in the tyrosine-kinase Furthermore, comparative neuropathological analyses also identify domain of FGFR3 in one family, and a missense mutation in the gene severe defects in the distribution of interneurons in type I lissencephaly encoding fibroblast-growth-factor 10 (FGF10), a known FGFR ligand, brains . Perturbations of the number, distribution or function of in the other family . interneurons, which are important regulators of neuronal activity, are We conclude that LADD syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous likely to contribute to the epilepsy observed in this disorder . disorder caused by heterozygous missense mutations in either FGFR2, FGFR3, or FGF10 . Interestingly, all FGFR mutations so far C76. Identification of DNA methylation markers for detection and identified in LADD are located within the tyrosine-kinase domains classification of colon cancer by epigenetic profiling of FGFR2 and FGFR3 in loops that play a regulatory function in the E. H. van Roon1, M. van Puijenbroek2, H. Morreau2, J. M. Boer1; control of tyrosine-kinase activity . Therefore, reduced functional activity 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, of FGFR2/3 seems to be an attractive plausible mechanism underlying The Netherlands, 2Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, the molecular basis of LADD syndrome . The Netherlands. Epigenetic modification of gene expression by aberrant methylation c74. Further evidence and functional proof of the pathogenic of promoter CpG islands plays an important role in the initiation and relevance of TBX1 missense mutations development of colorectal cancer (CRC) . DNA methylation-based A. Rauch1, C. Zweier1, C. Campbell2, H. Sticht3; markers are attractive because the aberrant methylation is thought 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen- to arise early in the development of CRC . In addition, the stability Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Department of Biochemistry, University at of methylation changes in the DNA allows the development of cost- Buffalo, NY, United States, 3Department of Bioinformatics of the Institute of effective and sensitive assays. Therefore, we aim at the identification Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, of high-performance DNA methylation markers for the detection Germany. and classification of CRC and its precursor forms. We are carrying Deletion 22q11 .2 syndrome is the most frequent known microdeletion out genome-wide methylation studies in a consecutive series of syndrome . It is associated with a highly variable phenotype including clinically well-described colon tumors and paired normal samples DiGeorge- and Shprintzen syndromes .From studies in several mouse using differential methylation hybridization of CpG island microarrays . models, haploinsufficiency of the T-box transcription factor TBX1, Patient DNA samples derived from macrodissected fresh-frozen which is located within the common deletion interval, was suggested to tissues are digested with MseI and amplified by linker-mediated PCR. cause the phenotype . Nevertheless, to date only 3 patients from Japan Subsequently, the amplicons are digested by two methylation-sensitive were described to have point mutations of TBX1 in association with five restriction enzymes, Cy-labeled and co-hybridized with a common of the major features of 22q11.2 deletion. We report the first Caucasian reference sample to microarrays containing 9,000 PCR-amplified CpG patient with a TBX1 missense mutation within the T-box, associated islands. We identified loci that are aberrantly methylated in a high with the typical facial gestalt, short stature and developmental delay . proportion of tumor samples, including promising candidate biomarkers To prove the functional relevance of this mutation we tested our novel with methylation in over 90% of the tested tumors . Currently, these loci and the three published mutations in a transcriptional reporter assay . are being verified by bisulfite sequencing and studied in more detail. While the published truncating mutation showed remarkable reduction Possible clinical applications of these markers include early detection of TBX1 transcriptional activity, the published and our novel missense of cancer with applications such as in feces screening, and cancer mutation showed significantly increased activity. While RNA levels prognosis . showed no increase of transcript, homology modelling of the mutant protein showed new electrostatic interactions, which could enhance the stability of dimers. We were able to confirm this hypothesis by an EMSA assay using the T-box binding site . This unexpected results are in line with data from a mouse model, which showed a similar ESHG Concurrent Sessions  C77. Identification of regulatory Conserved Non-Coding c79. Detection of copy number changes in patients with mental sequences (cNcs) using the chicken genome and chicken retardation using high density sNP microarrays embryos J. Wagenstaller1, S. Spranger2, B. Heye3, B. Kazmierczak2, M. Cohen4, P. C. Attanasio1, F. Chiodini2, C. Wyss1, J. M. Matter2, S. E. Antonarakis1; Freisinger5, T. Meitinger1,3, M. Speicher1,3, T. M. Strom1,3; 1Dpt Genetic Medicine & Development, University of Geneva Medical School, 1GSF - National Research Center, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Ger- Switzerland, 2Dpt of Biochemistry, Sciences II, University of Geneva, Switzer- many, 2Praxis für Humangenetik, Bremen, Germany, 3Technical University, Insti- land. tute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 4Kinderzentrum, Munich, Germany, Comparative genome analysis across mammals has revealed a large 5Children’s Hospital, Technical University, Munich, Germany. number of highly conserved non-coding sequences (CNCs) . We had Array-based genomic screening is a powerful strategy to identify studied CNCs from 21q and found that their evolutionary features chromosomal and allelic rearrangements . Among these techniques, strongly suggested functional importance . However the function of whole genome analysis using high-density SNP genotyping the majority of these sequences is unknown . We hypothesised that a oligonucleotide arrays allow identification of yet unknown possible role of a subset of CNCs is transcriptional regulation . microdeletions, microduplications and uniparental disomies . We In vitro luciferase and DNaseI hypersensitive assays were used to collected a cohort of 70 children and, when available, their parents evaluate this putative regulatory function; the results of both screens with unexplained mental and developmental retardation, facial and/ revealed that only 15% of CNCs have transcriptional regulators or sceletal dysmorphologies, and other symptoms as well. The first properties . This supports the current hypothesis that there may screening of the patients, including high resolution banding analysis be insufficient evolutionary distance between humans and others and metabolic investigations was unconspicuous . The patients mammals to detect conserved regulatory sequences . genomic DNAs were analysed using the Affymetrix GeneChip 100K In that view, the chicken offers a more divergent genome for Array, consisting of 116,204 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) comparative analysis (310Mya for chicken-human common ancestor) probes with an average spacing of 23 .6 kilobases . Data analysis and a tractable experimental system to evaluate the phylogenetic was perfomed with dChip, Bioconductor and Perl script . Preliminary distance necessary for regulatory elements identification. analysis revealed approximately 10% de novo rearrangements . These Alignment of 21q CNCs with the chicken genome revealed that ~10% deletions and duplications varied in size from 200 kb to 10 Mb and of these are conserved down to birds . We electroporated chicken span regions which contain up to 118 known genes . Rearrangements retinas (E3 & E6) and chicken whole embryos (E2) with GFP-reporter will be confirmed by LOH, quantitative PCR and fluorescence in situ vectors to determine the regulatory potential of a set of those CNCs . hybridization (FISH) . We were also able to detect deletions at the Preliminary data on 11 sequences suggest that the majority of the breakpoint region of 2 children with known translocations/inversions, tested CNCs (72%) strongly activate the GFP expression in explanted which were not detected by cytogenetic investigations . Therefore, retina and in different embryonic tissues . We observed that few CNCs microarrays provide an efficient way to serve as a tool for precise behave as enhancers in early retina (E3) but not at later developmental mapping regions with allelic imbalances and chromosomal breakpoints stages (E6) . and may help to characterize new microrearrangement syndromes, Our results suggest that the chicken genome could be used to identify delineate regions of UPD and identify genes involved in chromosomal transcriptional regulators among the mammalian CNCs . rearrangement phenotypes . Further studies will also be performed to determine the resolution of different SNP genotyping and tiling path C78. Genome-wide copy number profiling on high density BAC, array techniques . sNP and oligonucleotide microarrays: A platform comparison J. A. Veltman, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa, M. Egmont-Petersen, I. M. Janssen, D. c80. Annotation of the protein-coding genes in the ENcODE Smeets, A. Geurts van Kessel; regions Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. A. Reymond1, F. Denoeud2, J. Harrow3, C. Ucla4, A. Frankish3, R. Castelo2, C. Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) Wyss4, J. Drenkow5, J. Lagarde2, T. Hubbard3, T. R. Gingeras5, S. E. Antonara- approaches have recently proven successful for detection of kis4, R. Guigo2, P. Kapranov5; submicroscopic copy number alterations . Array CGH is now possible 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Swit- with a genomewide tiling resolution of ~100 kilobases using 32,000 BAC zerland, 2IMIM, Barcelona, Spain, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, clones . Improvements in resolution can be achieved by using higher United Kingdom, 4University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Affymetrix Inc., numbers of shorter fragments, provided that measurement precision Santa Clara, CA, United States. is maintained . In this study we compared the performance of two The aim of the ENCODE project (http://genome .gov/10005107) is commercially available oligonucleotide platforms to our tiling resolution ultimately to identify all the functional elements of the human genome . BAC array platform . DNAs from ten patients with submicroscopic copy During its pilot phase, ENCODE focuses on 44 regions of the human number abnormalities, identified by tiling resolution array CGH, were genome corresponding to 1% of its sequence (Science, 2004, 306, 636- hybridized in a blinded fashion onto 100k Affymetrix SNP arrays and 40) . As part of this project, the GENCODE consortium by combining 385k Nimblegen oligonucleotide arrays . We implemented a recently manual annotation with experimental validation, thus allowing constant published algorithm for SNP-based copy number detection, corrected refinements, produced a high quality annotation of the genome to be for systematic variation using normal controls and automated data- used as the “reference set” by the ENCODE consortium members . analysis. Most known submicroscopic alterations were identified by To uncover further the complex architecture of the human transcriptome both platforms, as well as many additional copy number variants smaller and potentially identify new gene elements (exons), we combined than one megabase . Statistical power analyses indicated that the BAC 5’RACEs with high-density 22 nucleotides-resolution tiling arrays . array platform exhibited the highest signal-to-noise ratio, allowing PolyA-RNA from twelve adult human tissues and three established reliable detection of single copy number alterations encompassing human cell lines were analyzed to investigate the complexity of the only 4 BACs . More targets needed to be combined for reliable copy human transcriptome expressed in the ENCODE regions . Indeed, the number detection on the Affymetrix and Nimblegen arrays . The higher use of the RACE technology allows the detection of low copy number target density of the latter two, however, compensated for the lower transcripts/isoforms and a high-resolution analysis of each gene in an detection power and the smaller size of the targets allowed detection individual manner but with high-throughput using pooling strategies . of alterations <100 kb. These findings indicate that genome profiling These experiments allowed the identification of as-yet unannotated results can be comparable across platforms, and increases in target exons and tissue/cell line specific, distal unannotated 5’ exons in density will ultimately allow for copy number analysis of all 250,000 the majority of the 399 tested genes. A significant subset of these exons in the human genome . alternative distal 5’ exon span large segment of genomic sequences away from the main portion of the coding transcript and often overlap with the next 5’ positioned gene(s) . These data are supported by independent experiments mapping the transcription start sites using CAGE and PET-Ditags .Clinical genetics 100 c81. island of euchromatic-like sequence and expressed genes dominant disorder, in that the manifestations included included within the short arm of HsA21: sequence and copy number macrocephaly; characteristic facial features; growth retardation; cardiac variability. defect; sparse, curly hair; neurologic impairment/developmental delay; P. Prandini1, R. Lyle1,2, K. Osoegawa3, B. ten Hallers3, S. Humphray4, B. Zhu3, gastrointestinal dysfunction; ocular abnormalities/dysfunction; history of E. Eyras5, R. Castelo5, C. Bird4, M. Cruts6, C. Ucla1, C. Gehrig1, S. Dahoun1, X. polyhydramnios; and hyperkeratotic skin lesions. CASE REPORT The She7, C. van Broeckhoven6, E. E. Eichler7, R. Guigo5, J. Rogers4, P. J. de Jong3, propositus 10 years old male . At physical examination his height was A. Reymond8, S. E. Antonarakis1; 123 cm (-3 pc), weight 27kg (10-20 pc), OFC 56 cm (+97 pc) . Clinically 1Dept of Genetic Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva 4, Switzerland, he showed short stature, macrocephaly, thick curly and sparse hair, 2Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway, 3Children’s Hospital Oak- peculiar facies characterized by blepharophimosis, sparse eyebrows, land Research Institute, Oakland, CA, United States, 4Wellcome Trust Sanger downslanted palpebral fissures, broad nasal bridge and short philtrum, Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 5Institut Municipal d’Investigacio Medica/ short neck . The palmar and plantar regions shown hyperkeratosis Universitat Pompeu Fabra/Centre de Regulacio Genomica, Barcelona, Spain, and multiple palmar-plantar creases . The radiological examination 6Institute of Biotechnology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 7University revealed cuboid-shaped vertebral bodies and lack of lumbar lordosis, of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 8Center for pelvis hypoplasia, short and broad tubular bones, brachymetacarpalia Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. and brachymetatarsalia, brachydactyly of all fingers and hypertrophy of Although the sequence of the euchromatic portion of the human genome the 1st ray on hands and feet . elongated tumorous radiolucent defects is essentially complete, the heterochromatic regions remain unknown . in metaphyses of tibia bilateral . DISCUSSION: We describe a 10-year- These regions include the short arms of the acrocentric chromosomes . old boy whose features were thought to satisfy the diagnosis of CFC Among these, the short arm of HSA21 (21p) has special significance syndrome and new radiologcal findings. CFC syndrome (MIM 115150) because of its involvement in translocations resulting in trisomy21 . We is distinguished from Noonan syndrome by the presence of abnormal constructed a BAC library from the human-mouse somatic hybrid cell line hair and hyperkeratotic lesions and by its usual sporadic occurrence . WAV17, monoallelic for HSA21 . We generated 1 .3Mb of 21p sequence Because CFC syndrome had been considered to be a more severe from 8 BACs . Surprisingly, 21p contains islands of sequence showing variant of Noonan syndrome, but not found abnormalities in the gene euchromatic-like features with an interspersed repeat content similar PTPN11 in CFC patients . The clinical diagnostic criteria be used in to that found on 21q. In silico and EST-based predictions identified 29 future studies aimed at identifying a molecular basis for this condition, gene models, a third of which were shown to correspond to bona-fide and also differentiated CFC from Noonan and Costello syndromes . genes by RT-PCR in 24 human tissues . We mapped the 5’ ends of these transcripts by RACE and defined their structures. Analysis of P0003. the phenotype of three family members in two these transcripts in different individuals shows extensive nucleotide generations with an unbalanced 10;18 chromosome variability and alternative spliced isoforms among different tissues translocation: partial trisomy 10q and an 18q deletion syndrome suggesting multiple inter- and intrachromosomal copies . Moreover M. W. Elting1, J. T. Schmidt2, Y. M. Heins1, A. W. M. Nieuwint1, J. M. van Ha- they map to the short arms of multiple acrocentrics as determined with gen1; monochromosomal cell hybrids. Quantification of their copy number 1VU University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics and Human by qPCR suggests that they are present in 4-50 copies in the human Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Amstelland Hospital, Department of genome . Since the gene content of the heterochromatic regions of the Otorhinolaryngology, Amstelveen, The Netherlands. genome appears to be underestimated, more efforts should be made We present a girl, 18 months of age, with narrow palpebral fissures, towards the characterization of these unexplored regions . For this goal hypertelorism, epicanthic folds, a flat midface, an upturned nose, and we have end-sequenced the entire BACs WAV-17 library and selected a bow-shaped mouth . She is short (-2 SD) and has a toe position 47 clones that do not correspond to 21q for further sequencing . anomaly . Her development is slightly delayed . The pedigree revealed recurrent miscarriages . Cytogenetic analyses showed an unbalanced chromosomal translocation: 46,XX,der(18), t(10;18)(q26.1;q22.2). The clinical genetics breakpoints were confirmed by FISH analysis and MLPA. The father is a carrier of the balanced translocation t(10;18). P0001. Werner syndrome in three members Of A Family The carrier’s brother, also a carrier, has a prematurely born son, known Presenting As Hoarseness And scleroderma to have developmental delay and non-specific white matter changes B. M. Owlia; on the MRI-scan of the brain . A second brother is institutionalized Sadoughi university of medical sciences, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. because of mental retardation . Both mentally retarded family members Some of genetic disorders may be diagnosed enormously as some have the unbalanced translocation t(10;18). more routine diseases in clinical practice . This is true also for werner,s The unbalanced family members share most of the facial dysmorphisms . syndrome which may mimic scleroderma . Werner,s syndrome is a All three had a short stature, toe anomalies and a vertical talus . The autosomal recessive disorder secondary to mutation in helicase gene children have nystagmus and strabismus, no congenital heart defect . (WRN) on short arm of chromosome 8 . It typically begins with graying Their uncle can only speak a few words, had strabismus and a small of hairs in second decade of life and skin changes , hoarseness , cardiac septal defect, a retinal tear at age 7, has a high forehead and early cataract , leg ulcer and diabetes ensue before age 34 . Patients large lower jaw, hearing loss, scoliosis, and joint contractures of the with werner,s syndrome are prone to a variety of malignancies and fingers. Most of the phenotypic features fit best with the features of accelerated atherosclerosis . an 18q- syndrome, such as developmental delay, short stature, facial Here in we present a 32 years old lady with werner,s syndrome which dysmorphism, foot deformities and eye movement disorders . White was under extensive evaluation due to hoarseness . Skin stiffening matter disease of the brain and epilepsy have been described in the was the leading cause of referral to us . Constellation of symptoms 18q- syndrome . So far, epilepsy has not occurred in our patients . along with family history of similar condition in her two sisters lead us to the of werner,s syndrome as the cause of condition . P0004. 2q24.3 deletion syndrome: report of a case and review of the literature. P0002. New skeletal abnormalities in a case of M. Mencarelli1, C. Pescucci1, R. Caselli1, R. Mostardini2, F. Mari1, R. Artuso1, M. cardiofaciocutaneus syndrome Bruttini1, M. Priolo3, T. Pramparo4, O. Zuffardi4, G. Morgese2, A. Renieri1; M. G. López-Cardona1, A. Bolaños2, S. Coronado3, A. García-Avila1, N. O. 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Pediatrics, Siena, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, Dávalos1,4; Azienda Ospedaliera Bianchi- Melacrino-Morelli, Reggio Calabria, Italy, 4Gen- 1Instituto de Genética Humana, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadala- eral Biology and Medical Genetics, Pavia, Italy. jara, Mexico, 2Serv. Ortopedia, Hospital Regional VGF, ISSSTE, Guadalajara, We report a 3 years and 9 months old girl with postnatal growth Mexico, 3Serv. cirugia pediatria Hospital Regional VGF ,ISSSTE, Guadala- retardation, microcephaly, down-slanting palpebral fissures, long jara, Mexico, 4Serv. Génetica. Hospital Regional “Dr. Valentin Gómez Farias” eyelashes and micrognathia . Broad and long halluces with a wide ISSSTE, Guadalajara, Mexico. gap between first and second toes were present. The other toes INTRODUCTION: Cardiofaciocutaneus-CFC syndrome is an autosomal were remarkably short with hypoplastic phalanges . She also showed Clinical genetics 101 developmental delay, seizures, lack of eye contact, stereotypic and Chromosome analysis of the patient revealed 46,XY,del(4)(q33) . FISH repetitive hand movements and sleep disturbances with breath using a 4p/4q subtelomere DNA probe assay, the finding confirms the holding . Brain MRI showed an incomplete myelinization . Prenatal deletion of qter subtelomere on chromosome 4 . Parental chromosomes and postnatal (3 months) karyotype was normal . Array-CGH analysis are normal. To our knowledge this is the first report of mucocutaneous revealed a “de novo” 2q interstitial deletion of about 10 .4 Mb, involving candidiasis in a patient with 4q terminal deletion . segment between cytogenetic bands 2q24 .3 and 2q31 .1 . The deletion was confirmed by quantitative PCR. A review of 52 children with P0007. A new case of 7p duplication syndrome interstitial 2q deletion reported in the literature identified 6 cases E. Papadopoulou1, S. Sifakis2, C. Sarri3, J. Gyftodimou4, T. Liehr5, K. Mrasek5, with a comparable deletion . The emerging phenotype includes M. Kalmanti1, M. B. Petersen3; postnatal growth retardation, developmental delay, mental retardation, 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, 2De- microcephaly, and peculiar facial dysmorphisms . Long and broad partment of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, halluces with wide space between the first and the second toes are Greece, 3Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece, present in all described patients . 4Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, The association of a 2q24-q31 deletion with digital anomalies is 5Inst. Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. supported by the absence of significant digital anomalies in the vast Introduction: Partial duplication of the short arm of chromosome 7 majority of patients with a 2q deletion which does not overlap this is a rare chromosomal disorder, which results in developmental, region . These evidences suggest that bilateral digital malformations of craniofacial, skeletal, and cardiovascular anomalies . There have been hands and feet, including a wide gap between the first and the second to our knowledge at least 58 confirmed cases of duplicated 7p which toes, brachydactyly with/without syndactily, camptodactyly, and/or split suggests a well-defined pattern of abnormalities. foot, associated with other anomalies should represent a clinical hint Clinical Report: We report a case of a nine-month old female infant with for a deeper investigation of the 2q24-q31 region . a direct duplication of the 7p22 .1-p13 chromosome region . The infant presented psychomotor retardation, stereotypic behavior, generalized P0005. A rare case with 47, XXY karyotype and female phenotype hypotonia, and characteristic dysmorphic features . The weight, the H. Acar1, M. Capar2, H. Muslumanoglu3, T. Cora1, S. Yildirim1; length, and the head circumference were at 3rd, 25th, and 3rd centile 1Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 2Selcuk University, correspondingly . The propositus presented a characteristic craniofacial Department of Genocology, Meram Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 3Osmanos- appearance with a peculiar thin Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome-like facies, man University, Medical Faculty, Eskisehir, Turkey. high forehead, hypertelorism, slight palpebral fissures, pale highly Sexual development is a result of numerous events that occur in cells arched eyebrows, thin lips, high narrow palate, micrognathia, straight of various target tissues to induce morphogenesis of the reproductive and thin nose with a broad bridge, slightly angulated pointed tip and system organs . Although the importance of the Y chromosome in male narrow inverted nostrils . The ears were low set and there were abnormal determination has been well established, at the genomic level, sexual palmar creases . Skeletal anomalies included kyphoscoliosis, irregular differentiation depends on different genes such as the sex-determining form of the vertebrae, narrow thorax, and bilateral camptodactyly of the and other genes . The SRY is responsible for the reproductive index finger. Traditional G-banding detected a partial 7p duplication, system morphogenesis and, primarily, directed differentiation of the which was further demonstrated to be entirely of chromosome 7 origin bipotential gonads . The SRY gene is the most important in the genetic by using a whole chromosome paint for chromosome 7 and derived control of the male development and followed by the others . Sexual from 7p22 .1-p13 by multicolor banding (MCB) studies . differentiation anomalies may exist a wide spectrum at birth . These Discussion: Our observations in combination with other cases include male and female pseudohermaphroditism, gonadal dysgenesis confirm that 7p trisomy due to dir dup(7p) can be regarded as a and true hermaphroditism . The development of molecular techniques defined chromosome syndrome. FISH, when used, is essential in the has greatly contributed to clarify the process of sexual differentiation . confirmation of the cytogenetic abnormality and further delineation of In this study, we present clinical findings, conventional and molecular the chromosomal disorder . cytogenetics and molecular genetic findings of a phenotypicaly female case with 47, XXY karyotype . P0008. DNA-diagnostics of hereditary retinal dystrophies, caused by mutations in ABcA4 gene. P0006. child with 4q terminal Deletion and mucocutaneous S. Gudzenko1, O. Khlebnikova2, N. Beklemitcheva2, A. Polyakov1; candidiasis 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow M. A. Al-Owain1, S. Kennedy1, M. Iqbal1, I. Al-Mohsen1, H. Al-Hindi1, S. Al-Muh- Research Institute of Eye Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation. sen2; Hereditary retinal dystrophies is a heterogeneous group of congenital 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, retinal diseases, caused by degenerative changes in the photoreceptor 2King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. cells of retinal pigment epithelium, with a severely reduced visual We report an eight-year old Saudi boy with subtle dysmorphic facial acuity outcome . At least four clinically polymorphic retinal dystrophies features, growth retardation, global developmental delay, cerebellar (Stargardt disease (STGD), fundus flavimaculatus (FFM), retinitis atrophy, and recalcitrant mucocutaneous candidiasis . Weight and pigmentosa-19 (RP19) and con-rod dystrophy (CRD)) have been height are less than 3rd centile, and OFC at 25th centile . The physical associated with mutations in the retina-specific transporter gene (ABCA4 examination revealed subtle dysmorphic features with a high forehead, or ABCR) related to the ATP-binding cassette superfamily . The DNA- epicanthal folds and crowded teeth . The CNS examination was notable analysis was performed for 24 unrelated patients clinically diagnosed for generalized hypertonia and hyperreflexia. The patient has suffered with STGD, FFM, RP19 and CRD for the three most common ABCR from recurrent mucocutaneous candidiasis since the age of 18 months mutant alleles: Gly863Ala, Ala1038Val and Gly1961Glu . Ala1038Val involving the mouth and nails with partial response to oral fluconazole. mutation was identified in ten patients: 2 patients with STGD were Recently, he has esophageal candidiasis based on esophageal biopsy, found to be homozygote and heterozygote; 2 patients with FFM were and barium enema showed significant gastroesophageal reflux. He has heterozygote and one patient were homozygote; 3 patients with RP19 an improved response to oral voriconazole . Developmental assessment and 2 patients with CRD were found to be heterozygote . Gly863Ala showed severe mental retardation and profound delay in gross and and Gly1961Glu mutations were not identified in any studied patient. fine motor skills. Immunoglobulin levels, nitroblue tetrazolium test, The allelic frequency of the ABCR mutant allele, Ala1038Val, identified HIV and leukocytic markers were normal . The blastogenesis revealed in 12 of 48 studied chromosomes, composed 25% in the group of depressed lymphocytes‘ response to candida at 38% when compared patients has been investigated . The results of the research indicate a to control . Diffuse cerebellar atrophy was found on MRI examination . high effectiveness of elaborated DNA-diagnostics . Visual evoked potentials, electroretinogram and brain stem auditory evoked potentials were normal . The electroencephalogram showed diffuse background slowing and disorganization indicating diffuse cerebral dysfunction of a nonspecific nature, but no clinical seizure reported . Aside from the coxa valga, the skeletal survey was normal . Clinical genetics 10 P0009. A new syndrome with abnormal gyral pattern, vermis lobe hypoplasia as a new additional anomaly in this syndrome . hypoplasia, severe facial dysmorphism and cleft palate A. Mosca1, N. Laurent2, C. Durand3, P. Callier1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, F. Mugne- P0012. A girl with aplasia cutis congenita, limb abnormalities ret1, F. Huet4, J. Gouyon4, D. Sandre4, L. Faivre1; and eye anomalies: severe Adams Oliver syndrome 1Departement de Genetique, Dijon, France, 2Anatomopathologie, Dijon, France, M. Vreeburg1, N. J. C. Bauer2, J. Weber3, J. P. Schrander4, M. A. M. van 3Radiologie Pediatrique, Dijon, France, 4Pediatrie, Dijon, France. Steensel5, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders1,6; We describe the clinical, histopathological and molecular studies of 1University hospital Maastricht, department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, a female proband that died at two months of age in the context of a The Netherlands, 2University hospital Maastricht, department of ophthalmology, new syndromic abnormal gyral pattern with vermis hypoplasia . There Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3University hospital Maastricht, department of was no significant family history. Clinical and radiological features Child Neurology, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4University hospital Maastricht, included poor contact, cleft palate, severe facial dysmorphic features department of Paediatrics, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 5University hospital with marked down-slanting palpebral fissures, retrognathism, fronto- Maastricht, department of Dermatology, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 6Re- temporal pachygyria, bilateral occipital polymicrogyria and vermis search Institute Growth & Development (GROW), Maastricht University,, Maas- hypoplasia . A cytogenetic imbalance was ruled out using standard and tricht, The Netherlands. high resolution chromosome analyses, Miller-Dieker and telomeric Adams Oliver syndrome ( AOS; MIM 10030 ) is characterized by FISH studies and array-CGH. This description does not fit with any aplasia cutis congenita, most commonly of the scalp and skull, and of the known syndromes with abnormal gyral pattern . The presence terminal transverse limb defects . Other congenital anomalies such as of vermis hypoplasia in this child permits to allows us this observation congenital heart disease are frequently reported . Autosomal dominant in the subgroup of lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia . The inheritance with a great variability in expression and autosomal severe clinical course of the disease, the severe dysmorphism and recessive inheritance have been suggested . No causal gene defect the absence of cerebellar hemisphere hypoplasia in this child rule out is known for AOS . Norman-Roberts syndrome . Molecular analyses of the LIS1, DCX, We report on a Turkish daughter of non-consanguineous parents . ARX and RELN genes were negative . Consequently, the reported Pregnancy was complicated by oligohydramnion . At birth, she was features in this child are unique and represent a new syndrome . microcephalic ( OFC< -2SD) and had aplasia cutis congenita of the scalp and the upper abdomen . Her hands and feet had transverse P0010. ABO blood group antigen on human uroepithelial cells reduction defects . An ultrasound examination of the cerebrum responsible for pseudomonas aeruginosa infection revealed bilateral cerebral calcifications, ultrasound examination of the N. Ghasemi, J. Ayatollahi, M. Mosaddegh; abdomen showed her abdominal muscles underneath the aplasia to Yazd shahid sadougi medical sciences university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of be hypoplastic. She developed a nystagmus in the first months of her Iran. life . Further ophthalmological examination revealed vitreo-retinopathy Although the ABO blood group of the human host has been reported to of both eyes, causing severe vision loss . At the age of 8 months her influence infection in different part of human body, there have been few motor development was slightly delayed . Extensive chromosome clinical observations on this effect especially in urinary tract . A cross analysis showed no abnormalities . sectional study was performed to investigate the relationship between AOS has been suggested to be the result of a vascular disruption blood group type and urinary tract infection induced by pseudomonas sequence. This could result in a spectrum of clinical findings, ranging aeruginosa. Urinary tract infection was confirmed in 250 patients with from classical AOS to severe phenotypes, like in the proband presented pyuria and positive urine culture . In all 250 cases blood group were here . This spectrum may well be caused by a single gene mutation . histochemically confirmed. Accordingly, clinical study has proved that urinary tract infection by P . aeruginosa can be positively correlated P0013. Association of the DAt1 -67 t-Allele with Attention- with blood group A. P aeruginosa apparently adheres specific to Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) GalNAc as terminal carbohydrate of blood group A and indicate that N. Moghimi1, E. Shirazi2, A. Aghajani3, M. Tehranidoost4, M. Kaikhayi5, S. patients with blood group A may have a genetic predisposition to UTI Ehsani6, H. Najmabadi7, M. Ohadi8; by P aeruginosa . 1N.moghimi, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2E.Shirazi, tehran, Islamic Re- public of Iran, 3A.Aghajani, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4M.Tehranidoost, P0011. Acrocallosal syndrome with temporal lobe hypoplasia tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5M.R.Kaykhayi, tehran, Islamic Republic of A. Aykut, O. Cogulu, A. Y. Ekmekci, F. Ozkinay; Iran, 6S.Ehsani, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7H.Najmabadi, tehran, Islamic Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Genetics and Teratology, Ege Univer- Republic of Iran, 8M.Ohadi, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. sity, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. Association between attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) Acrocallosal Syndrome is a rare genetic disorder which is characterized and the 10-repeat allele of a polymorphism (a 40 bp variable number by moderate to severe mental retardation, agenesis or hypoplasia of of tandem repeats) in the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) has been the corpus callosum and polydactyly of fingers and toes. Although widely documented . In this study, we examined whether either allele autosomal recessive inheritance has been suggested, acrocallosal of the DAT1 core promoter -67 polymorphism is associated with ADHD syndrome usually seems to occur sporodically . The spectrum of this in a case/control study . The allele and genotype frequencies of the syndrome is very variable . Prominent forehead, broad nasal bridge, polymorphism were studied in 136 patients and 163 controls, which short nose and mandible, hypertelorism, epicanthic folds, large anterior were matched on the basis of sex, age and ethnicity . The genotype fontanelle and tapered fingers, omphalacel and inguinal hernia are frequencies in the patients group were as follows: AA 30.9%; AT some other common findings in this syndrome. Twenty percent of the 55.1%; TT 14% vs. the genotype frequencies in the control group: AA patients have accompanying brain abnormalities such as cerebral 49%; AT 41.8%; TT 9.2% [?2=10.3, df = 2, OR = 2.15 (95% CI 1.34- atrophy, hypothalamic dysfunction, small cerebrum, micropolygyria, 3 .47, p = 0 .006] . The T-allele of the -67A/T polymorphism revealed a hypoplasia of pons, hypoplasia of cerebellar hemispheres, hypoplasia ~1 .4-fold excess in the patients group comparing with the controls (p of medulla oblongata, agenesis or hypoplasia of cerebellar vermis = 0.003). For the first time, these findings provide tentative evidence and corpus callosum abnormalities . Here we present a 10-month- of the contribution of the DAT1 gene core promoter polymorphism to old female infant with clinical and radiological findings indicative of the etiopathophysiology of ADHD at least in the Iranian population acrocallosal syndrome . She was born to non-consangiuneous parents that we have studied . Replication studies of independent samples and after a normal vaginal delivery . The family history and pregnant duration family-based association studies are necessary to further evaluate the were unremarkable . She was noted to have craniofacial abnormalities significance of our findings. suggestive of acrocallosal syndrome, optic atrophy and polydactyly . Magnetic Resonance Imaging revealed cerebral atrophy, corpus callosum agenesis, dilated lateral ventricule and unilateral temporal lob hypoplasia which the latter not having previously been reported in the spectrum of this syndrome before. From our finding we conclude the importance of screening brain abnormalities and present temporal Clinical genetics 10 P0014. Evaluation of genetic services for Autosomal Dominant who are at the highest risk for liver and/or lung disease . We investigated forms of Retinitis Pigmentosa and associated retinal disorders. wether the AAT deficiency is a very rare or is a widely under-diagnosed J. O‘Sullivan1,2, N. Hart-Holden1,2, T. Colclough1,2, A. O’Grady1,2, S. Ramsden1,2, disease in Iranian population . G. C. M. Black2, R. Elles1,2; 85 unrelated children clinically characterized by idiopathic liver 1NGRL Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Academic Unit of Medical dysfunction suspected to AATD , genotyped for the Z,Smutations Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, Manchester, United Kingdom. using PCR-RFLP method .Any other possible mutations in exons III The aims of this project are to evaluate genetic services for Retinitis and V were studied in affected individuals using PCR-SSCP method, Pigmentosa and related retinal disorders . The project develops a model followed by sequencing . for genetic services for other genetically heterogeneous disorders . In order to estimate the frequency of Z and S alleles in Iranian Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is a group of inherited progressive retinal normal population, 200 control individuals were screened for Z and diseases affecting about 1 in 3500 people worldwide . RP can be S mutations . sporadic, autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive or X-linked . The results suggest rare frequency of AAT gene mutations in Iran . Currently we know of over 30 genes associated with this condition . Autosomal Dominant RP accounts for approximately 15-25% of all RP P0017. Determining different Alpha-thalassemia deletions in cases . We are currently developing testing for Rhodopsin (RHO) and iran using Gap-PcR technique. Peripherin (RDS) which account for approximately 35% of cases of V. Lotfi1, S. B. Azimifar1, P. Foulady1, M. Masrouri1, A. Abdolhosseini1, S. Ze- dominant RP . In addition we are investigating the involvement of a inali1,2; panel of common mutations and exonic hotspots across numerous 1Medical Genetics Laboratory of Dr. Zeinali., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, RP genes in this group of patients . We are also evaluating testing 2Department of Biotechnology, Pasteur Institute., Tehran, Islamic Republic of peripherin in patients with a macular dystrophy . Iran. The mutation detection rate in ADRP families so far is 28% of which Objective: we studied the prevalence of four most common α- 40% are Rhodopsin mutations, 30% are peripherin mutation and 30% thalassemia deletions in couples attending to this center in a 3 .5 years are from the common mutation panel . The mutation rate in the macular period . Background: Thalassemias including α and β thalassemias dystrophy patients tested for RDS/peripherin mutations is currently are most common inherited single-gene disorders around the world . 35%.Here we present the strategy and discuss the efficiency of the Fetuses with Hb Barts‘ hydrops fetalis caused by the homozygous α0 system to detect mutations . thalassemia (--/--) die either in utero or shortly after birth . materials and methods: We have studied prospective couples presented P0015. Alopecia-mental Retardation and microcephaly in three with unusual hematological indices . Genomic DNA was extracted iranian siblings from peripheral blood . Gap-PCR was used to screen most frequent R. Kariminejad, B. Bozorgmehr, H. Najmabadi, M. H. Kariminejad; deletional mutations causing α-thalassemia (i.e. -α3 .7, -α4 .2, -(α)20 .5, - Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, -MED) .Results: Two hundred thirty eight cases with hematological Islamic Republic of Iran. indices suggesting α-thalassemia were screened for the α-globin gene We are reporting 3 affected sibs, 2 girls, aged 13, and 7, one boy, deletions . A total of 156 individuals (65 .5%) presented with at least aged 12 with total congenital alopecia, mental retardation, and one of these deletions . From these, seventy six cases (48 .7%) were microcephaly in an Iranian family. The parents are first cousins with no heterozygote for α3 .7 deletion (-α3 .7/αα) and 50 (32%) were homozygous other pregnancies or offspring. The first child has refractory seizures, (-α3 .7/-α3 .7). Twelve cases (7.6%) were -(α) 20 .5 and ten cases (6 .4%) while the second has hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, and the third showed --MED/αα genotype. Also, eight cases (5.1%), were carriers of had neonatal teeth . -α4 .2 mutation (-α4 .2/αα). Discussion: As it was shown above, deletions Their teeth, nails, sweating and hearing are normal . They are not were detected in 156 out of 238 cases . Even if all 238 cases bear dysmorphic . The skin biopsy of the second child showed agenesis of mutations in α globin gene, our results still showed similar results to pilosebaceous apparatus . others and deletions consists majority of the α globin gene mutations. Alopecia, epilepsy, and mental retardation OMIM 203600 are the Like other studies, -α3 .7 was the most prevalent single gene deletion in findings in the Moynahan alopecia syndrome based on an initial Iranian population. However, - α4 .2 has very less prevalence than other report by Moynahan (1962), who reported two brothers with familial deletions . congenital alopecia, epilepsy, mental retardation and unusual electroencephalograms . Later, Mosavy (1975) observed 4 affected P0018. mutational analysis of the DJ-1 gene in sporadic patients sibs and Pfeiffer and Volklein (1982) reported an affected brother and with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis sister with microcephaly and no seizures . Seizures was present in the C. Rohe‘1, A. Di Fonzo1, R. Del Bo2, L. Van Unen1, A. Hoogeveen1, E. de reports by Wessel et al . (1982) in 3 sibs and in the 2 affected boys of Graaff1, G. Breedveld1, M. Scarlato2, B. Oostra1, G. Comi2, V. Bonifati1; family with affected fathers and 3 children reported by Van Haeringen 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Dino Ferrari Centre and Centre of (1990) . Excellence on Neurodegenerative Diseases, Milan, Italy. Our cases have all of the above findings and would suggest that the BACKGROUND: Homozygous mutations in the DJ-1 gene have been syndrome is heterogeneous with various clinical manifestations or reported in an Italian family with three brothers affected by early- variable expressivity . Our second patient has hypergonadatrophic onset parkinsonism, dementia, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . hypogonadism which has been reported in the cases of Pridmore et OBJECTIVE: To assess the role of DJ-1 among more common forms al . OMIM 601217 where the affected individuals have alopecia, mental of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) . METHODS: DNA from 70 retardation, seizures, and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism . unrelated sporadic ALS patients of Italian origin was screened for mutations in DJ-1 by direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction- P0016. Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency in Iranian population: amplified fragments. All 7 exons of DJ-1 and splice sites were screened . mutation Detection Each new variant identified was also analyzed among Italian controls. M. Ggorjipour1, R. Mirfakhraie2, S. Zare Karizi3, S. Bahremand4, M. Housh- In one case carrying a novel heterozygous mutation, cDNA analysis mand2, F. Mirzajani2; was performed on RT-PCR material obtained from a muscle biopsy . 1khatam university, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of Genet- RESULTS: two novel DJ-1 heterozygous variants were detected . The ic Engineering & Biotechnology, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic Azad missense p.A179T substitution was identified in ALS patients (2.8%) University, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Tehran Medical University, tehran, and controls (0 .8%), and is therefore unlikely to be pathogenic . The Islamic Republic of Iran. missense p .R156Q mutation was detected in one patient (1 .4%), but in Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a hereditary autosmal none of 580 control chromosomes . Although cDNA analysis revealed recessive disorder, due to mutations in the alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT) no evidence for a second mutation in this patient, a pathogenic role for gene of 12 .2 kb located on the chromosomal segment 14q31-32 .3 . the p .R156Q mutation cannot be excluded . CONCLUSION: Mutations Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency effects mainly the lung and liver leading of DJ-1 gene are not a common cause of sporadic ALS in this Italian to neonatal cholestasis,chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis . Antitrypsin sample; further studies are needed to clarify the contribution of DJ-1 deficiency is widely known in Europe as a disease of white population, mutations in common forms of ALS, especially in the familial cases .Clinical genetics 10 P0019. segmental aneuploidies in patients with epilepsy of Clinical findings were identified in a newborn with multiple parental unknown etiology detected by array-cGH consanguinity . Dysmorphic features included anal atresia, M. E. M. Swinkels, J. van Hoek-Terluin, K. ten Berg, F. A. Beemer, E. H. Bril- anophthalmia, short stature, rhizomelia of upper and lower limbs, stra, M. J. Eleveld, S. E. van der Wijst, D. Lindhout, P. F. R. Hochstenbach, O. hypoplastic nails, small-dysmorphic ears, short neck and various van Nieuwenhuizen, M. Poot; heart defects including dextromesocardia, atrial isomerism and University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. insufficiency of right atrioventricular valve. The radiological findings Background: Epilepsy and epileptic EEG abnormalities are common showed shortness of proximal limbs . The infantexpired soon after symptoms or signs of specific chromosomal abnormalities. This birth. In addition, the postmortem examination revealed bifid sternum, indicates that these chromosomal regions harbor genes involved in thymic hypoplasia, annular pancreas with congenital cardiac defects . epilepsy or epileptogenesis . Submicroscopic segmental aneuploidy The case had overlapping features with coditions such as CHARGE, detection by array-CGH has been applied extensively in patients with VACTERL, Fraser-cryptophthalmos, Lenz microphthalmia and fetal unexplained mental retardation ascertained through clinical checklists . thalidomide syndrome but the concurrence of rhizomelia with anal We used a similar checklist to score patients with epileptic disorders atresia and anophthalmia has not been described previously . Three and applied array-CGH in the first 16 patients. sibs of the father were also born to consanguineous parents with Methods: In a cohort of 675 pediatric patients that underwent an EEG- anophthalmia and died soon after birth . This supports the possibility of examination at the University Medical Centre Utrecht, 35 patients were a new autosomal recessive inherited condition . selected for analysis by array-CGH . Inclusion criteria were refractory epilepsy of unknown etiology, mental retardation and at least one of P0022. Presentation, natural history and management of the items described in the 5-item checklist developed by de Vries and aneurysm syndromes caused by mutations in TGFBR1 or coworkers. Array-CGH was applied to the first 16 patients with scores TGFBR encoding for transforming growth factor-β receptors ranging from 1-5 items . B. L. Loeys1, U. Schwarze2, T. Holm3, B. L. Callewaert1, G. H. Thomas3, H. Results: Four out of 16 (25%) patients analyzed by array-CGH showed Pannu4, J. F. De Backer1, G. L. Oswald3, S. Symoens1, S. Manouvrier5, F. Fara- segmental aneuploidies, including duplications involving chromosomes velli6, R. E. Pyeritz7, D. M. Milewicz4, P. J. Coucke1, A. C. Braverman8, P. H. 9 and 16, and combinations of deletions and duplications involving Byers2, A. M. De Paepe1, H. C. Dietz3; chromosomes 3 and 4 . Two of those aberrations were suspected after 1Center for Medical Genetics - Ghent University, Gent, Belgium, 2University of standard karyotyping, while the other two aberrations were found in Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Mc Kusick Nathans Institute for Ge- patients with a normal karyotype. All four patients had a score ≥ 4 on netic Medicine Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States, 4Uni- the clinical checklist, whereas no abnormalities were found in patients versity of Texas, Houston, TX, United States, 5University Hospital, Lille, France, scoring ≤3. 6Ospedale Galliera, Genoa, Italy, 7University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Conclusions PA, United States, 8Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, 1 . We demonstrate the added value of array-CGH by detection of United States. submicroscopic segmental aneuploidies in patients with epilepsy of Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a newly defined autosomal dominant unknown etiology . aortic aneurysm syndrome, characterized by the triad of arterial 2 . We show that a clinical checklist is useful in preselecting candidate tortuosity/aneurysms, hypertelorism and bifid uvula/cleft palate, and patients with epilepsy for analysis by array-CGH . caused by heterozygous mutations in the genes coding for transforming growth factor-beta receptor 1 or 2 (TGFBR1 or TGFBR2) . P0020. Angelman syndrome with a new mutation and We describe the clinical, molecular characterization and natural hyperamoniemia history of 50 families . Thirty-eight probands presented with typical R. S. Tincheva1, D. Halley2; manifestations of LDS . In view of the phenotypic overlap between 1University Pediatric Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Erasmus University, Department LDS and vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), we screened an of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. additional cohort of 40 patients with a typical presentation of vascular We present a seven year old boy born from second pathological EDS in the absence of the type III collagen abnormalities and the pregnansy, first child of unrelated parents. He is born at fourty weeks, craniofacial features of LDS . gestation by spontaneous delivery after an uneventful pregnancy . Birth A mutation in TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 was identified in all studied typical weight 3 350g and length 50 cm. Since the first month of his birth LDS probands (LDS-I) and in 12 probands with vascular EDS-like the child is with jerky movements . During early pregnancy the parents presentation (designated LDS-II) . The natural history in both groups noticed periods with laugh frequently for almost any reason . At age is characterized by aggressive arterial aneurysms (mean age at death of 20 months started seizures . Due to that fact began treatment with 26 .1 years) and high incidence of pregnancy-related complications Depakin . At three years was detected high ammonia level . Because of including death and uterine rupture (6/11 pregnant women) . Individuals that the therapy was changed but the hyperammoniemia still existed with LDS-I showed earlier cardiovascular surgery (13 .0 vs . 26 .9 years) and is the reason for low protein diet . and death (22 .1 vs . 31 .8 years) compared to LDS-II . There have The child has specific face dismorphism- happy disposition, been 54 vascular surgeries in this cohort of patients with only one microcephaly, macrostomia, protruding tongue, open mouth, and widely example of intra-operative mortality, a clear distinguishing feature from spaced teeth, prognathism. Specifically, ataxia-like incoordination, vascular EDS . Mutations in either TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 predispose to hyperkinesia, hyperactivity, restlessness, jerky movements, ataxic gait aggressive and widespread vascular disease and a substantial rate of or complete inability to walk and absent speech, sleeping disorders and pregnancy-related complications . Clinical presentation is predictive of feeding problems are the main symptoms . The principal neurological outcome . Genotyping of individuals may guide therapy including the disorders are epilepsy and EEG abnormalities - a slow wave of spike use and timing of prophylactic vascular surgery . activity and hypsarrhythmia . The child is mentally retarded . DNA analysis - Methylation-specific PSR of the SNRPN gene- normal P0023. No Genetic Variation Of ARG1 are involved in Persistance parents fragments . Mutation analysis of UBE3A gene- L747P mutation Of Fetal Hemoglobin in sickle cell Disease Patients in exon 14 was found in both the child and his mother. This is the first S. Moutereau1, C. KEUMEUGNI1, M. CHIMINGQI1, F. GALACTEROS2, S. time this mutation is described with this clinical picture . PISSARD1, C. Claude PREHU1, S. LORIC1; The methylation tests can fail to detect some familial Angelman 1Service de Biochimie et Génétique, Hopital Henri Mondor AP-HP, CRETEIL, syndrome cases with a recurrence risk of 50% . France, 2Unité de Génétique Médicale, Hopital Henri Mondor AP-HP, CRETEIL, France. P0021. Rhizomelia with anal atresia and anophthalmia; is it a Sickle Cell Disease (SCD) is influenced by foetal haemoglobin new syndrome? (HbF) concentration . In SCD patients HbF production is under tight O. Giray1, E. Bora1, A. Ulgenalp1, O. Ates2, E. Ozer3, D. Ercal1; genetic control and varies over a 20-fold range . A genetic entity so- 1Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics-Divi- called Heterocellular Persistance Of Fetal Haemoglobin was defined sion of Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatric Surgery, Izmir, Turkey, in patients where high level of erythrocytes containing HbF leads to 3Department of Pathology, Izmir, Turkey. fewer pain episodes and longer survival . Located in 6q22 .3-23 .1 the Clinical genetics 10 HPFH locus comprises genes among which figures ARG1. Arginase repeated failure of blastocyt development . This couple had gone in for catalyzes arginine hydrolysis to ornithine and urea . As L-Arginine is the 4 IVF cycles which had failed . The male partner was cytogenetically nitrogen donor for NO synthesis, SCD induced hemolysis will release normal and had no Yq microdeletion . In cases with sex chromosomal erythrocyte ARG1 and limit arginine plasma and cellular concentration and autosomal aberrations there is probability of poor embryo then NO availability . Combined with HbS release that will stronger development and consequently poor implantation , which may be a scavenge NO than normal hemoglobins, both mechanisms contribute result of high segregation abnormalities and may negatively affect the to pulmonary hypertension, the major SCD complication . outcome of assisted reproductive techniques . Thus the presence of To study ARG1, we collected DNA samples of 40 SCD patients (10 with genetic anomalies results in poor IVF outcome and vertical iatrogenic HbF 1% and <20%, 10 with HbF >20%) without genetic modification transmission of these anomalies through ART . known to increase Hbf concentration and 10 healthy controls . We then tested loss of heterozygoty using fluorescent markers (D6S976, P0026. AtRX syndrome in a girl with a heterozygous mutation in D6S626, D6S270) and studied the 8 coding exons, their flanking the ATRX Zn finger domain and a totally skewed X inactivation intronic sequences, the 5’UTR and 3’UTR of ARG1 by sequencing . No pattern genetic defect was found . C. Badens1,2, N. Martini1, S. Courrier2, V. DesPortes3, R. Touraine4, N. Levy1,2, We have excluded here an ARG1 gene variation as a major causative P. Edery5,6; event of HbF overproduction in SCD patients . As no other known gene 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, La Timone, Marseille, France, 2Centre in the HPFH locus seems to be involved in HbF production, it will be of d’Enseignement et de Recherche en Génétique Médicale, Faculté de Méde- great interest to investigate new ORFs with unknown function pointed cine, Marseille, France, 3Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Debrousse, Lyon, out in this region . France, 4Service de Génétique, Hôpital Nord, Saint-Etienne, France, 5Service de Cytogénétique, Lyon, France, 6Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France. P0024. Array cGH characterization of patients with Mutations in the X-encoded gene ATRX are known to give rise to Retinoblastoma and associated malformations. syndromic mental retardation in male patients whereas carrier female R. Caselli1, C. Pescucci1, C. Speciale1, F. Mari1, K. Sampieri1, M. Bruttini1, patients usually present a skewed X-inactivation pattern leading to an I. Longo1, T. Pramparo2, O. Zuffardi2, R. Frezzotti3, A. Acquaviva4, T. Hadjis- asymptomatic phenotype . Here, we describe a 4 years old girl with typical tilianou5, A. Renieri1; features of ATRX syndrome, carrying the recurrent R246C mutation of 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, ATRX . Surprisingly, the X-inactivation pattern was totally skewed and Italy, 3Emeritus Professor in Ophthalmology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, the activated X chromosome, which proved to be maternally inherited, 4Pediatrics Department, Siena, Italy, 5Retinoblastoma Refferal Center, Dep. of was the one carrying the ATRX mutation . To our knowledge, this is the Ophthalmology, Siena, Italy. first ATRX syndrome case reported to date in a female patient. Since We report 3 patients with retinoblastoma, dysmorphic features and this girl was born after in vitro fertilization, we discuss the possible developmental delay . Case 1 is a 2 y/6 m old male with high and responsibility of assisted reproduction technologies in the unexpected broad forehead, deeply grooved philtrum, thick everted lower lip, and methylation pattern of her X chromosomes . thick anteverted lobes . He also has a prenatal growth retardation, iris heterochromia, and short fifth toe. Unilateral retinoblastoma was P0027. clinical and molecular characterizationof a case of diagnosed at the age of 10 months . Case 2 is a 1 y old female with autism associated with an interstitial 1q deletion (1q23.3-24.2) in similar facial features except for thick lower lip . In addition, she has a patient with a de novo apparently balanced 1;5 translocation dolico-macrocephaly, micrognazia, ephicantic folds and toe crowding . G. Scarano1, M. Della Monica1, M. Ciavarella1, C. Lombardi1, T. Pramparo2, A. Bilateral retinoblastoma was diagnosed at the age of 5 m . Case 3 is a Uberti1, O. Zuffardi2, F. Lonardo1; 8 y old female with moderate growth retardation, severe microcephaly, 1A.O.R.N. “G. Rummo” - U.O.C. di Genetica Medica, Benevento, Italy, 2Biologia thick lower lip and ephicantic folds . At the age of 2y/5m was diagnosed Generale e Genetica Medica, Università degli Studi di Pavia, Pavia, Italy. by unilateral retinoblastoma . Whole genome array CGH analysis Reciprocal translocations represent one of the most common structural demonstrates a de novo 13q deletion of different size in case 1 and rearrangements observed in man, with an estimated prevalence case 2 . On the contrary, case 3 has a 200Kb deletion on chromosome ranging from 1/673 to 1/1000 . They usually are inherited, but can also 7q (7q11-21) inherited from the mother . A 75 Kb resolution array CGH occur as de novo mutations, that are much rarer entities . analysis was unable to identify other genomic deletion . Germ-line RB1 We report on a male patient showing developmental delay, minor point mutation analysis was negative. Our results confirm that there dysmorphic features and autism . Standard cytogenetic analysis is a distinct facial phenotype related to 13q deletion contigous gene revealed that he carried a de novo apparently balanced translocation, syndrome characterized by high and broad forehead, deeply grooved t(1;5)(q23;q22). Searching for cryptic chromosome abnormalities, YAC philtrum and thick anteverted lobes . Patients with retinoblastoma and clones in the region of the chromosomal breakpoints were selected and other malformations without a distinct facial phenotype may have a used as FISH probes . The patient showed a deletion in chromosome 1 different contigous gene deletion syndrome or a casual association from q23 .3 to q24 .2, with a loss of about 8 Mb . In an attempt to further of mental retardation and retinoblastoma due to a somatic RB1 gene characterize the deletion, with the aim to delineate a better genotype- mutation . phenotype correlation, whole genome screening was conducted using array-based CGH analysis, at a resolution of 75 kb . The array CGH P0025. Genetic aberrations and its association with recurrent data confirmed a cryptic deletion in the q23.3 to q24.2 region, without ARt failure other imbalances. The breakpoints were better refined and the size of R. Dada, R. P. Kumar, R. Kumar, K. Kucheria; the deletion was evaluated in 4 .97 Mb . All India Institute of Medical Sciences, N Delhi, India. When an individual carries an apparently balanced de novo Genetic aberrations may result poor blastocyst development, rearrangement, the risk for phenotypic abnormalities is significantly implantation failure and failure of InVitro fertilization (IVF). Assisted higher than for an individual who has inherited a similar rearrangement Reproductive Technology (ART) has revolutionised the management from a normal parent . A number of different mechanisms can be of infertility and allows infertile couples to procreate . responsible for the abnormal phenotypes . In our patient the clinical Genetic analysis was done in 265 infertile males and 30 couples picture is most likely caused by deletion of one or more genes in going in for IVF . Chromosomal abnormalities were found in 46 infertile 1q23 .3-->q24 .2, a region of rising interest in the research for autism males . We found 26 cases with Klinefelter Syndrome (KFS), 28 cases susceptibility genes . were KF mosaics and 8 were mosaic variants, three cases with 46,XY 1qh+ and two case with 46,XY16h+. and five cases with robertsonian translocation . In 5 of the 30 couples opting for ART genetic analysis in the female partner revealed 46,XXq- chromosomal complement in two cases and Yq microdeletion in the AZFc region in 2 cases and one case had deletion of AZFa,b and c loci . Deletion of long arm of X chromosome(Xq-) in the female partner might have resulted in Clinical genetics 106 P0028. Ring chromosome 17 in a girl with autism P0030. two novel mutations in the ELN gene in patients with M. Havlovicova1, D. Novotna1, E. Kocarek1, K. Novotna1, B. Petrak2, M. Hrdlic- autosomal dominant cutis laxa and systemic manifestations ka3, Z. Sedlacek1; B. L. Callewaert1, B. Albrecht2, B. L. Loeys1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach2, I. 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2 nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles Haußer3, O. M. Vanakker1, P. J. Coucke1, Z. Urban4, A. M. De Paepe1; University in Prague, Praha 5 Motol, Czech Republic, 2Dpt. of Child Neurology, 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2In- 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Praha 5 Motol, Czech stitut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 3Depart- Republic, 3Clinic of Paediatric Psychiatry, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles ment of Dermatology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Depart- University in Prague, Praha 5 Motol, Czech Republic. ment of Pediatrics, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, United States. A mosaic of ring chromosome 17 and chromosome 17 monosomy was Autosomal dominant cutis laxa (ADCL) is a rare connective tissue found in a girl with neurofibromatosis, mild dysmorphic features, growth disorder, characterized by generalised loose skin folds . Apart from mild and mental retardation, and atypical autism . The ring chromosome was pulmonary emphysema, the condition has historically been considered further analysed using fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) and as a strictly dermatological disease . However, recently aortic root multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) of subtelomeric dilatation was reported in 4 patients from two families . ADCL is caused regions . The classical cytogenetics mapped the breakpoints on both by frameshift mutations at the 3’ end of the elastin gene (ELN), resulting arms of the ring chromosome to the terminal G-bands . The molecular in an extended protein . So far, only 7 mutations have been reported . methods showed the absence of both subtelomeric loci but presence We performed direct sequencing of the 3’end of the ELN gene (exons of the MDLS region on 17p . Therefore, the extent of the deletions must 28-34) and found two previously unpublished de-novo mutations in be between 0 .6-2 .5 Mb on 17p, and 0 .6-10 Mb on 17q . Interestingly, exon 33, c .2278_2281dupGCAG and c .2315delC respectively, in two the girl meets the NIH criteria for neurofibromatosis. Based on this and patients with generalised cutis laxa . Light- and electronmicroscopic on a literature review we argue that in addition to the universal “ring examination of their skin biopsies showed pronounced rarefaction of syndrome” which is based on ring instability and is less specific for elastic fibres as well as diminished and disorganised elastin deposition. the chromosome involved, various ring chromosomes may underlie Importantly, both patients presented progressive aortic root dilatation their own characteristic phenotypes . In our patient the symptoms of and mitral valve insufficiency at respectively 3 and 11 years old. neurofibromatosis could be attributed to the mosaic hemizygosity Interestingly, the latter also had a bicuspid aortic valve and a dilatation for the NF1 gene in some of her somatic cells . Several candidate of the ascending aorta . It is likely that the presence of the bicuspid loci for autism have been mapped to chromosome 17, and mosaic aortic valve aggravated the aortic enlargement due to the deficient hemizygosity or direct involvement of respective genes in the elastin . Moreover, she also presented severe pulmonary emphysema aberration could possibly influence also this facet of the phenotype (rest volume 208%; Tiffeneau index 40.4%). of our proband . It is a question if the chromosome 17 monosomy in a Our data contribute further evidence that ADCL is a systemic disease substantial fraction of her somatic cells can also have consequences with cardiovascular and pulmonary complications . Progressive aortic for other future risks, for example due to her mosaic hemizygosity for dilatation underscores the need for regular echocardiographic follow- the BRCA1 and TP53 genes . up . We are currently investigating the mechanism underlying this aortic Supported MZO000642036508 aneurysm formation . P0029. Phenotypic and genetic characterization of a family with P0031. type ii autosomal dominant osteopetrosis in three autosomal dominant autoimmunity asymptomatic brothers caused by a mutation in the cLcN7- A. Ballarini1, A. Näke1, L. Senenko1, K. Engel1, M. Gahr1, M. Lee-Kirsch1,2; gene. 1Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Insti- M. H. H. van Roij1, F. P. Coxon2, J. G. Greenhorn2, M. H. Helfrich2, A. Frattini3, tut für Klinische Genetik, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany. J. C. Netelenbos4, J. M. van Hagen1; Autoimmune diseases result from dysfunctions during development 1Department of Clinical and Human Genetics, VU University Medical Center, and maintenance of self-tolerance and affect 3-5% of the general Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, population . Apart from rare monogenic forms such as APECED and University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 3Istituto di Tecnologie Bio- IPEX the etiology is multifactorial . We describe a nonconsanguineous mediche, CNR, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Endocrinology, VU University Medi- German family with more than 25 members over 4 generations 5 of cal Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. whom suffer from autoimmune diseases . Of those 3 females were Osteopetrosis is a genetic disease characterized by an increase in diagnosed with type 1 diabetes (T1D) and autoimmune thyroiditis (AT), bone density due to impaired bone resorption . Autosomal recessive and 1 female with T1D, AT, and celiac disease (CD), and 1 female with AT . autosomal dominant forms exist . Autosomal dominant osteopetrosis The age of onset ranges from 8 months to 35 years . Extensive serologic (ADO) type II, is characterized by a generalized osteosclerosis, investigations revealed the presence of autoantibodies specific for predominantly involving the spine (Rugger-Jersey spine), the pelvis Addison´s disease, primary biliary cirrhosis, pernicious anemia, T1D, (“bone-in-bone” appearance), and the skull base . ADO type II has AT, and CD among affected as well as 5 additional family members variable clinical expression and incomplete penetrance and is caused without apparent clinical disease . Candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, by heterozygous mutations in CLCN7 . and mutations in the AIRE-gene were absent excluding the diagnosis Here, we report on three asymptomatic brothers (one twin-brother) with of APECED. Thus, the findings in this pedigree are consistent ADO type II, who showed a heterozygous missense mutation (R767W) with autosomal dominant autoimmunity resembling autoimmune in CLCN7, previously described in 3 other families with variability in polyendocrinopathy type 2. Since organ-specific autoimmune diseases clinical phenotype . Radiologically, we found increased bone density are T-cell mediated we carried out gene expression profiling in in the skull in 2 brothers, Rugger-Jersey spine and increased pelvic cultivated T-cells from 2 affected and 2 normal controls using the HG- bone density in all three brothers (bone-within-bone appearance in 1 U133 microarray . We found a number of differentially expressed genes brother) . In one brother bone scintigraphy showed increased uptake involved in chemokine activity, signal transduction, and proliferation in humeri, left SI joint and distal femurs . Functional studies showed suggesting a pathogenic role of impaired T-cell function . Currently, we that osteoclast generation from peripheral blood of one brother was are carrying out whole-genome linkage analysis to map the disease normal and that these osteoclasts were able to polarise and form locus. Identification of the gene causing this form of autoimmune acidic and TRAP containing vesicles, but had markedly reduced polyendocrinopathy may shed light onto the pathogenesis of more resorptive capacity compared to controls . By transmission EM the common forms of autoimmune disease such as T1D and AT . osteopetrotic osteoclasts showed rudimentary ruffled borders and multivesicular bodies, which are associated with uptake of resorbed matrix . However, they contained increased numbers of secretory vesicles, which is associated with reduced resorption, as described in other types of osteopetrosis . The in vitro data support the clinical picture, demonstrating normal osteoclast formation coupled with reduced, rather than abolished, osteoclast function in individuals with this mutation .Clinical genetics 10 P0032. Genetic analysis in men with azoospermia - iVF-mEsA/ P0035. Brachydactyly type A1 manifestations in a 22-year-old tEsE candidates girl with monosomy 5p13.3→pter R. Gaillyová, M. Vilémová, B. Ravčuková, I. Valášková, R. Beharka, D. Pacík, R. Posmyk, B. Panasiuk, A. T. Midro; I. Crha, P. Ventruba, J. Šoukalová, S. Prášilová, A. Oltová, P. Kuglík; Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical Academy, Bialystok, Poland. University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. Two gene loci are known so far for brachydactyly type 1 (BDA 1) a We performed complex genetic counselling in 45 men with azoospermia Mendelian disorder characterized by shortened or malformed digits, - candidates for IVF-MESA/TESE . short metacarpals, metatarsals and others . One such locus was We performed the routine genetic counselling, pedigree analysis, localized on 5p13 .3-5p13 .2 by linkage analysis, therefore we can cytogenetic analysis and DNA analysis of the CFTR gene (mutations expect such abnormalities in monosomy of a long segment of 5p with F508del, dele2,3(21kb), G542X, G551D, R553X), analysis of the 5T 5p13 .3-5p13 .2 included . alele in intron 8 CFTR gene and analysis of deletions in AZF region We present the natural history of a 22 years-old girl with monosomy (Yq) . 5p13.3→pter with many classical for Cri du chat syndrome traits and In 5 of our patiens we found serious health complications . In 3 men we skeletal findings belonging to brachydactyly A1 syndrome spectrum found pathological karyotype . We detected genotype CFTR F508del/ with changes in hands and feet such as: as clinodactyly of 5th fingers, F508del in one patient, in 4 patients we found one pathological short 4th metacarpals, small, broad feet, short, broad toes (especially mutation in CFTR gene and in 4 men the 5T alele in intron 8 CFTR in 3rd, 4th and 5th toes of right foot) and scoliosis . gene .The deletion in AZF region we found in two men . It is worth to notice, that the recently mapped ADAMTS12 gene at Our analysis detected pathological findings in more then 25% of the 5p13 .3 corresponds to breakpoint position at 5p13 .3 of presented patients . patient . The possible role of deletion of ADAMTS12 gene or two We recommend complex genetic counselling in men with azoospermia other candidate genes CDH6 and NPR3 should be considered in before planning of methods of assisted reproduction . Our departement pathogenesis of occurence of skeletal changes observed in presented would offer genetic counselling and precise prenatal or pre-implantation girl . genetic diagnostics in most of these families . P0036. Benign familial neonatal convulsions: clinical and P0033. Genetic diagnosis in a foetus with Baller-Gerold genetic analysis in seven Dutch families syndrome N. E. Verbeek1, M. J. A. van Kempen1, W. F. M. Arts2, H. Stroink3, A. D. Bader1, M. Biervliet1, J. Van Den Ende1, K. Storm1, E. De Baere2, A. Siitonen3; K. ten Berg1, J. S. Starreveld4, R. Baarsma5, F. M. C. van Berkesteijn1, O. van 1Center of Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Laboratory of molecular Ge- Nieuwenhuizen1, D. Lindhout1; netics, University of Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Molecular Medicine KTL, 1University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medi- Nat. Public Health Institute Helsinki, Finland. cal Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3TweeSteden Hospital, Tilburg, The We report on a foetus of 23 weeks, diagnosed with Baller-Gerold Netherlands, 4Groene Hart Hospital, Gouda, The Netherlands, 5Medisch Spec- syndrome . trum Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands. After a second pregnancy in which serious malformations on ultrasound Background: Benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC) is an were present again, a genetic diagnosis could be made . autosomal dominantly inherited epilepsy characterized by seizure The parents were healthy and there was no consanguinity . onset around the third day of life, spontaneously resolving within a few The first pregnancy was interrupted at 23 weeks because of serious months . In general, psychomotor development is normal, but 10-15% of malformations : craniosynostosis, bilateral short forearms with curved patients develop epilepsy later in life . BFNC is caused by mutations in ulnae and absence of the radius and the thumbs . A tentative diagnosis the voltage-gated potassium channel subunit gene KCNQ2 (20q13 .3) of Baller-Gerold syndrome was made . or, less frequently, KCNQ3 (8q24) . A second pregnancy was interrupted ad 11,5 weeks because of Methods: Analysis of the KCNQ2 gene was performed in seven families following abnormalities : bilateral absence of the thumbs, oligodactyly and linkage analysis in one . of the hands and feet, short limbs and absence of one kidney . Results: In four families, four different mutations were detected; Diagnosis of VACTERL, Roberts syndrome, Saethre-Chotzen and one nonsense mutation (c .1756C>T, p .Gln586Stop), one missense Fanconi were considered but had to be rejected . mutation (c .1076C>A, p .Thr359Lys) and two frameshifts (c .1229delC, Mutational analysis of the RECQL4 gene led to a genetic diagnosis . p.Pro410fs; c.1601delC, p.Pro534fs). The missense mutation was found in a proband and her affected mother, but not in the unaffected P0034. A large turkish Bazex - Dupre - christol syndrome family grandparents, indicating a new mutation. In a fifth large family, linkage R. O. Rosti, A. Uzumcu, A. D. Kocbas, O. Z. Uyguner, H. Kayserili; analysis excluded the KCNQ3-locus, but screening of the KCNQ2- Medical Genetics Department , Istanbul Medical Faculty , Istanbul University, gene did not reveal a mutation . The proband was homozygous for Istanbul, Turkey. a polymorphism (c .2339A>C, p .Asn780Thr) in this gene, while her Bazex - Dupré - Christol ( BDC) syndrome is characterized by daughter did not carry this allele . This indicated a large deletion of the hypotrichosis , generalized state of atrophoderma , multiple milia KCNQ2-gene, to be confirmed by MLPA-analysis. of face mostly disappearing with puberty and development of basal Conclusion: Five different mutations (71%) in the KCNQ2-gene were cell carcinomas mainly affecting the skin and mucosa. It was first detected in seven families with BFNC. This confirms that the KCNQ2- described in 1964 by Bazex in six members of a family . In 1977 gene is a major locus for BFNC, also in the Netherlands. Our findings Viksnins suggested X - linked dominant inheritance based on the illustrate that mutation analysis is also relevant in small families fact that there was no male to male transmission in all the pedigrees and, probably, sporadic cases, and should include testing for large published . Although several other large families have been reported deletions . since 1964 with approximately 120 affected members from 16 families , BDC syndrome can still be considered as a rare genodermatosis . In P0037. Bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria in combination with 1995 , Vabres et al . obtained evidence in three families for assignment cleft palate. connection or coincidence? of the gene to the Xq24- 27 region . F. S. van Dijk1,2, J. M. van Hagen1,2, M. S. van der Knaap1,3, J. A. Baart1,4; We here report- to the best of our knowledge - the largest BDC family 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of with 29 affected members in four generations . Pedigree showed no male Clinical and Human Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Department of to male transmission supporting X - linked inheritance . In an attempt to Child Neurology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Oral and Maxil- identify the responsible gene , we first aimed to eliminate any candidate lofacial Surgery, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. genes located in the BDC critical region . Therefore , NDUFA1 gene Bilateral Perisylvian Polymicrogyria (BPP) is a condition characterized encoding an accessory protein identified in mitochondrial complex 1 , by a specific combination of clinical signs and radiological features. downregulated in basal cell carcinoma , was selected and excluded by This syndrome should be suspected clinically in infants presenting with sequence analysis in three affected family members . Further studies mild developmental delay, epilepsy and pseudobulbar palsy . However, are planned to perform chromosome X wide linkage analysis to map the diagnosis is based upon the typical MRI features, which consist of the disease causing gene . the bilateral presence of polymicrogyria in the area surrounding the sylvian fissures.Clinical genetics 10 Both non-genetic and genetic causes have been described . In 2002 Table 1: MAOA allele frequencies in the studied groups Villard et al . mapped a locus for BPP to the distal long arm of the X Allele Case Control P value for case-control chromosome (Xq28) . a0 26 17 0.066 Here we report on a woman who presented with speech disturbances a1 7 13 0 . 251 and submucous cleft palate . History showed that she had been born a2 10 12 0 .849 a3 14 11 0 .371 at term to non-consanguineous parents . In the following years she a4 16 25 0 .250 experienced a delay in speech development . At the age of three a a5 14 24 0 .165 submucous cleft palate was discovered which was closed at the age a6 22 18 0 .305 of seven . Two years later, a pharyngoplasty was performed . When a7 28 30 0 .885 she was eight years old, she was referred to the child neurologist a8 13 15 0 .913 because of persisting speech disturbances, consisting of dysarthria in a9 5 8 0 .509 combination with impaired buccal, lingual, mandibular and swallowing a10 1 - 0 .292 functions . Evident pseudobulbar pathology was noticed . With the use Table 2: VNTR allele frequencies in the studied groups of MRI, bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria was recognized at the age of twenty-six . To our knowledge the combination of cleft palate and Allele Case % Control % P value for case-control V1 12 .2 18 .8 0 .103 BPP hasn’t been described before . The question remains if there is a V2 48 .1 49 .1 0 .856 link between BPP and cleft palate . V3 8 .3 14 .5 0 .082 V4 31 .1 16 .4 0.002 P0038. Presentation of a case with autosomal dominant V5 -- 1 .2 0 .168 hypospadias and biliary atresia polysplenia syndrome G. Tumgor1, A. Y. Ekmekci2, O. Cogulu2, S. Aydogdu1, F. Ozkinay2; P0040. Post-axial polydactyly in a child with Branchio-Oculo- 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Facial (BOF) syndrome Gastroenterology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- A. M. A. Lachmeijer1, D. S. de Vries2, J. P. W. Don Griot3, J. M. van Hagen1; ment of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Genetics and Teratology, Izmir, Turkey. 1VU University Medical Centre, Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, The Biliary atresia is the most frequent cause of neonatal cholestasis Netherlands, 2Kennemer Gasthuis Location EG, Dept. of Pediatrics, Haarlem, and the most common indication for liver transplantation in children . The Netherlands, 3VU University Medical Centre, Dept. of Plastic Surgery, Am- It is associated with congenital, particularly splenic malformation sterdam, The Netherlands. in approximately 25 % of cases . Less commonly annular pancreas, BOF syndrome (OMIM #113620) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder intestinal malrotation, preduodenal portal vein, situs inversus, absent with highly variable expression . Typical are the cervical branchial inferior vena cava, anomalous hepatic arteria and cardiac defects may sinus and infra-auricular skin defects which can include remnants of also be components associated with this clinical status . Hypospadias thymic tissue. Craniofacial findings include sparse hair, hypertelorism, is another congenital anomaly which occurs in 0 .3-1/100 of male upslanting palpebral fissures, flattened nose tip and malar hypoplasia. newborns . Autosomal dominant and autosomal resesive forms of A majority of patients has ‘pseudoclefting’ of the upper lip . Upper lip isolated hypospadiases have been reported . But there is a multifactorial pits are seen in some patients. Ocular findings include coloboma, cause in most cases . Other malformations related to hypospadias nasolacrimal duct stenosis/atresia, microphthalmia and anophthalmia . are present in about 15% of infants with hypospadias however the Ears may be low-set with uplifted earlobes . Developmental delay, combination of this anomaly with biliary atresia polysplenia syndrome mental retardation, pre- and post-natal growth retardation and pre-axial (BAPS) has not been reported in the literature to date . Here we present polydactyly (n=1) has been described . A gene locus for BOF syndrome a 6-month-old male infant who has biliary atresia, polysplenia, absent has not yet been identified.Here we describe a Dutch girl with BOF vena cava inferior, double collecting system, atrial septal defect and syndrome . She is the fourth child of non-related parents . Pregnancy hypospadias . Pedigree analysis also revealed hypospadias in the and delivery were uneventful . Birth weight, length and OFC were all father without other features of BAPS . -2 SD . She has a pseudocleft, an upper lip pit, small bilateral retro- auricular skin defects, upslanting palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, a P0039. Genetic studies of bipolar disorder in iran broad nose bridge and nose tip, low-set ears with uplifted earlobes, M. Eslami-Amirabad, R. Mazinani, H. Najmabadi, F. Esteghamat, S. Foroozan; bilateral post-axial polydactyly of the hands, and chronic ocular Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. discharge due to bilateral nasolacrimal duct obstruction . Karyotype Although genetic factors have an important role in the etiology of bipolar and FISH22q11 analyses were normal . Ophthalmologic investigation disorders, but no specific gene has been conclusively identified, to be revealed bilateral coloboma of the papilla, and a small chorioretinal related to this disorder . Now, the investigators are studying on several coloboma in the left eye . Renal and brain ultrasound were normal . Her genes may be related to bipolar disorder . One of the most important parents and siblings do not show any feature of BOF syndrome . To our genes that surveyed is MAOA gene that codes MAOA enzyme, such knowledge this is the first description of a patient with BOF syndrome changes, can lead to manifestation of symptoms of mood disorders . In with post-axial polydactyly . this study , 100 patients with bipolar type I disorder and 100 healthy subjects from Iranian population have been selected and studied for P0041. Genetic polymorphisms, clinical risk factors and bone three polymorphic markers of MAOA gene including the MAOA-CA disease of preterms repeat , the MAOA restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) , S. Funke, É. Morava, M. Czakó, G. Vida, T. Ertl, G. Kosztolányi; and a repeat directly adjacent to the variable number of tandem repeats University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. (VNTR) locus. There was no significant difference between cases and The analysis of risk factors for bone disease of very low birth weight controls in RFLP results . The results regarding to MAOA and VNTR are (VLBW; <1500 g) infants is of special significance. In adults it has been shown in tables 1, and 2 . The results show that in Iranian population shown that osteoporosis is associated with polymorphisms of vitamin- allelic distribution is similar to other regions of the world, but the type of D-receptor (VDR), estrogen-receptor (ER), and collagen Iα1 (COLIA1) alleles related to this community is different from others . genes . No data are available whether genetic polymorphisms play a role in bone disease development in premature infants . We performed a pilot study to analyze the possible association between bone disease in VLBW infants and allelic polymorphisms of the candidate genes for osteoporosis, and we tried to identify fetal and maternal factors influencing bone turnover. Sixty-five VLBW infants were included. Twenty infants (30 .8%) were diagnosed with bone disease based on positive radiological signs and high activity of bone formation (serum alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin) and bone resorption (urinary excretion of calcium and pyridinolin crosslink) markers . Statistically significant correlation between (Thymine-Adenine) repeat allelic n variant of ER gene and bone disease was observed . Infants without Clinical genetics 10 bone disorder carried more often a high number of repeats (TA>18) 12 families, comprising 3 with BDC, 3 with ASPED, 2 with Grebe (OR: 0 .17, 95%CI: 0 .05-0 .55) . Low number of repeats (TA<19) was syndrome, 1 isolated case with acromesomelic chondrodysplasia, and found more frequently in infants suffering from bone disease (OR: 6 .00, 3 families with either complex brachydactyly or acrodysostosis . So 95%CI: 1.77-20.31). Furthermore, significant interaction (p=0.009) far 5 mutations have been identified (in the BDC or ASPED cases), between VDR and COLIA1 genotypes was observed . In a logistic including 3 which had not been previously reported . In these families, regression model using bone disease as dependent variable and some individuals presented with non previously described features controlling for different infant and maternal conditions, bone disorder such as dental anomalies, renal malformations, or cardiac rythm of preterms significantly correlated with male gender (p=0.002), lower anomalies . Although CDMP1 does not seem to be expressed in the gestational age (p=0 .015), homozygous allel variants of high number kidney, it is expressed in the dental pulp and in the heart . of (TA) repeats (p=0 .006) and interaction between VDR and COLIA1 n genotype (p=0 .009) . P0044. Fetal cNs malformations in a recurrence of Knobloch syndrome with splice mutation in cOL18A1 gene P0042. Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome M. Gerard-Blanluet1, M. Passos Buenos2, B. Keren1, F. Menez3, O. T. Suzuki2, with additional anomalies due to an interstitial deletion of D. Bremond Gignac4,5, M. Elmaleh6, N. Blanc1, L. Titomalio7, C. Baumann1, A. chromosome 3q Verloes1,5, A. L. Delezoide3; C. von der Lippe1, B. Eriksen2, E. Ormerod1, M. Fannemel1, O. K. Rødningen1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2De- 1Dep. of Medical Genetics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Dep. of partment of Genetics and Evolution Biology, Institute of Biosciences, Sao Pediatrics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. Paulo, Brazil, 3Department of Developmental Biology, Hôpital Robert Debré, We present a boy with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus Paris, France, 4Department of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Hôpital Robert Debré, syndrome (BPES) and additional findings. Family history is non- Paris, France, 5INSERM 6764, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 6Depart- contributory . Pregnancy was normal but culminated in delivery 9 days ment of Pediatric Radiology, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 7Department before term by caesearian section because of fetal hypoxia . Birth of Pediatric Neurology, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. weight 2389 g (2 .5%), length 47 cm (10%) . Findings at birth included: Knobloch syndrome is a combination of posterior midline encephalocele, blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus, anteverted nares, macular abnormalities, high grade myopia, vitreoretinal degeneration low-set posteriorly rotated ears, cleft palate, absent uvula, a right- with retinal detachment and normal intelligence, suggesting alterations sided inguinal hernia, a small umbilical hernia, short neck, adducted during early neuroectodermal morphogenesis . 28 cases have been thumbs, gingival hypertrophy, second toe overiding hallux bilaterally reported insofar . It has been shown to be due to mutations in COL18A1 and a partial lack of separation of penoscrotal skin. Feeding difficulties gene, mapped to 21q22 .3 . It leads to abnormal expression of collagen necessitated placement of a gastrostomy tube . At 3 months of age he XVIII and endostatin . Endostatin is the non triple-helical C-terminal is globally delayed with microcephaly . NC1 globular domain of collagen XVIII . Chromosome analysis by routine G-banding revealed an interstitial We followed a 3 year-old girl born to consanguineous Maghrebian deletion of chromosome 3q (karyotype: 46,XY,del(3)(q24q25 .3)) . parents with high grade myopia (-15d), perimacular pseudo- Micro-array CGH delineated a more centromeric de novo deletion; colobomatous lesions, septo-optic dysplasia (septal agenesis and del(3)(q22 .3q24) . This region includes the FOXL2 and ATR genes . optic nerve hypoplasia), symmetric frontal micropolygyria, occipital Further investigations are planned to determine whether the deletion meningocele and subnormal psychomotor development . This girl is maternal or paternal in origin . harbors a splice site mutation in intron 36, which is predicted to alter Interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 3 are uncommon the splicing of the RNA . and often give rise to BPES which maps to 3q23 . Heterozygous The next pregnancy was terminated at 17 weeks of gestation, mutations in, and deletions of, the FOXL2 gene, which encodes a because of the recurrence of the syndrome, discovered on presence forkhead transcription factor, cause BPES . Deletions involving regions of the posterior encephalocele . Pathological analysis showed a larger than 3q23 have been described in patients with BPES with different pattern of brain malformation, with vermian agenesis and microcephaly, mild mental retardation and growth delay . It has been an hamartomatous lesion of the mesencephalic roof . These patients suggested that these additional features result from the absence of a expand the range of CNS malformations observed with Knobloch maternally inherited copy of the gene encoding ataxia-telangiectasia syndrome and confirm the implication of endostatin in neuronal and Rad3-related protein (ATR) . migration and CNS . P0043. Brachydactyly type c and angel-shaped phalangeal P0045. Branchio-Oculo-Facial syndrome in 2 unrelated patients dysplasia: broadening the spectrum of cDmP1 mutations - follow-up studies and new case report s. manouvrier-hanu1, f. escande2, v. cormier3, m. le merrer3, j. roume4, a. gol- I. V. Naumchik, N. V. Rumyantseva; denberg5, j. lambert6, a. mézel7, m. holder-espinasse1; Republican Medical Center “Mother and child”, Minsk, Belarus. 1Service de génétique clinique, Lille, France, 2Service de biochimie et biologie We presented clinical data of 2 children from different families with rare moléculaire, Lille, France, 3Service de génétique clinique, Paris, France, 4Servi- Branchio-Oculo-Facial syndrome (BOFS) and reviewed literature data ce d’histo-embryologie, Poissy, France, 5Service de génétique clinique, Rouen, for further delineation of phenotype . France, 6Service de génétique clinique, Nice, France, 7Service de chirurgie Patient 1 (male) was born to a healthy 40-year old mother and 32- orthopédique pédiatrique, Lille, France. year old father . At infancy microcephaly, malformed ears, right- CDMP-1 is mapped on chromosome 20q11 .2 and is closely related sided microphthalmia, cataract, ptoses, strabismus, nasolacrimal to the bone morphogenetic proteins . It is a cartilage specific member duct stenosis, broad nasal bridge, flattened tip, hypoplastic alae, of the TGFß superfamily of secreted signalling molecules, expressed high-arched palate, bilateral cleft lip and alveolar process, bilateral predominantly at sites of cartilage differentiation in developing limbs, hemangiomatous cervical skin defects, brachydactyly, fifth fingers where it may function as a signal for chondrogenesis, growth, and clinodactily were demonstrated . At follow-up examination (3-13 patterning of the developing vertebrate skeleton . There is a wide range years old) he had growth, mental, speech delay, normal hearing, of phenotypes associated with CDMP-1 mutations, from no discernable hypertrichosis, one absent incisor, dilatation of calicopelvis system clinical and radiographical findings, to classic brachydactyly type C (ultrasound) . He attends a special education . (BDC) with or without other skeletal manifestations, angel-shaped Patient 2 - a girl was the only child of young healthy parents, at birth phalangeal dysplasia (ASPED), isolated short stature, vertebral bilateral cervical skin defects were documented. At first examination (1.5 abnormalities, and developmental dysplasia of the hip . In humans, years old) she showed normal growth and psychomotor development, homozygous and compound heterozygous CDMP-1 mutations cause high forehead, broad nasal bridge, flattened thick nasal tip, bilateral acromesomelic chondrodysplasia (Grebe and Hunter-Thomson types), nasolacrimal duct stenosis, cyst of the upper lip, supra-auricular soft Du Pan syndrome or even BDC . Heterozygous mutations can lead tissue mass on the left, cervical hemangiomatous skin defects partly to milder phenotypes, such as BDC, ASPED, brachydactyly type A2, healed, her distal phalanges of hands and foot was broad with pressed mild shortening of 4th and 5th metacarpals or proximal symphalangism . nails . Ultrasound scan detected two additional chords of heart and In our study, CDMP1 molecular analysis has been performed in normal kidneys . Kariotype was normal of both children .Clinical genetics 110 Our patients showed typical phenotype of BOFS, what was severe P0048. Glucocorticoid receptor Bcli variant in children with in boy and mild in girl . She had supra-auricular soft tissue mass and bronchial asthma. cyst of the upper lip, not previously described by BOFS . The wide M. V. Zhdanova, A. N. Voitovich, M. A. Bogdanova, O. R. Romashkina, G. A. expression of abnormalities requires careful examination of probands Novik, V. I. Larionova; and parents to diagnose mild forms . Saint-Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Fed- eration. P0046. Optimal selection for BRCA1 and BRCA mutation OBJECTIVE We investigated whether there were differences in allele testing using a combination of “easy to apply” probability and genotype frequencies of the BclI polymorphism in the glucocorticoid models receptor gene among children with different levels of asthma severity D. Bodmer1, M. Ligtenberg1, A. van der Hout2, S. Gloudemans1, K. Ansink1, J. and with different sex . The BclI polymorphism is a C/G substitution in Oosterwijk2, N. Hoogerbrugge1; intron 2, 646 nucleotides downstream from exon 2 (Van Rossum EFC 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre Nijme- et al ., 2003) . gen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University SUBJECTS Our study group consisted of 485 children in age of 2-17 Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. suffering from asthma, control group consisted of 151 healthy children Purpose To establish a reliable and easy to apply risk assessment tool in the same age (Table 1) . to select families for BRCA testing, using available probability models Methods The BclI polymorphism was detected by PCR-RFLP as for BRCA mutation analysis . described (Fleury I . et al ., 2003) . Allele and genotype frequencies were Patients and methods In 263 families, utility of the Frank (Myriad), compared through Chi-square test . Gilpin (FHAT) and Evans (Manchester) model to select 49 BRCA RESULTS mutation positive families was analysed . For various cut off levels Table 1 Genotype frequencies in asthma patients and controls and combinations, the sensitivity and specificity were calculated and study group (485) control group (151) compared . The optimal combination was subsequently applied to two additional control groups . Genotypes boys girls boys girls Results Comparable sensitivity and specificity were obtained with 396 (81,6%) 89 (19,4%) 78 (51,7%) 73 (48,3%) the Gilpin and Evans models . They were shown to be complementary to the Frank model . To obtain an optimal sensitivity, 5 “individual CC 40,4% 40,4% 32% 34,2% criteria” were introduced that are specific for the selection of small or CG 44,7% 43,9% 51,3% 52,1% informationless families. The optimal selection criteria for the first serie GG 14,9% 15,7% 16,7% 13,7% is “Frank ≥ 16% or Gilpin ≥ 16 or one of five individual criteria“. These criteria also proved valuable in the two other patient groups . In this Table 2 Genotype frequencies among children with different levels of combination, „Gilpin ≥ 16%“ can be replaced by „Evans1 or 2 ≥ 10. asthma severity conclusion Efficient selection of families for mutation testing of levels of asthma severity BRCA1 and BRCA2, can be improved by using a combination of risk assessment tools . mild moderate severe Genotypes boys girls boys girls boys girls P0047. Association of ERa, ERbeta and AR genes with Breast 89 12 216 45 91 32 cancer (22,5%) (13,5%) (54,5%) (50,6%) (23%) (36%) A. Tsezou1,1, M. Tzetis2, C. Gennatas3, E. Giannatou4, A. Pampanos2, E. Kana- vakis2, S. Kitsiou2; CC 41,6% 33,3% 39,4% 37,8% 41,8% 46,9% 1University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2Athens University, Athens, Greece, CG 41,6% 58,3% 47,2% 48,9% 41,8% 31,3% 3Athens University, Areteion Hospital, Athens, Greece, 42nd Department of GG 16,9% 8,3% 13,4% 13,3% 16,5% 21,9% Pediatrics, Athens, Greece. Genetic variation in genes involved in estrogen biosynthesis, CONCLUSION We not found differences in allele and genotype metabolism and signal transduction have been suggested to play a role frequencies in asthma patients and controls and previously reported in breast cancer risk . To elucidate the possible role of genetic variation populations (Table 1) . Allele and genotype frequencies were similar in the estrogen receptors α and β (ΕR-α, ΕR-β) and androgen receptor in groups of children with different levels of asthma severity, and with (AR) genes in breast cancer risk, the -1174(TA), c .1092+3607(CA) n n different sex (Table 2) . and c .172(CAG) repeat polymorphisms of the three genes were n studied . A case-control cohort of 79 women with breast cancer and P0049. GENcOR: a national registry for patients and families 155 controls were used. No significant difference was observed in suffering from a familial heart disease in the Netherlands the frequency distribution of -1174(TA) and c .1092+3607(CA) 7-27 10- in the ER-α and ER- β gene between patients and controls, while W. Hermans1, I. Christiaans2, I. van Langen2, Y. Arens3, A. Wilde1,2, Y. Pinto1,3; 26 a significant difference was observed in the frequency distribution 1The Interuniversity Cardiology Institute of the Netherlands, Utrecht, The Neth- of repeat polymorphism c .172(CAG) in the AR gene (p≤0.0001) erlands, 2Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Academic 6-40 with the mean number of CAG being higher in controls. A significant Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. difference was observed in the repeat genotype distribution (SS, SL, Introduction: Developments in DNA-diagnostic techniques allow us LL) in the ER-β gene (p<0 .0001) and for the AR gene (p≤0.0001). A to genotype an important amount of all patients with familial heart significantly decreased odds ratio for breast cancer risk was observed diseases (arrhythmias, cardiomyopathies etc .) and to identify family in individuals having the SL genotype for ER-β gene compared to members with the same disease in early stages . Early treatment can SS genotype (OR=0.013; 95%CI 0.004-0.041; p<0.0001) and LL prevent sudden cardiac death . However, data on long term outcome genotype for AR gene (OR= 0.040; 95% CI 0.011-0.138; p<0.0001). in unselected genotyped patients are scarce due to a lack of large The protective effect of SL genotypes for ER-β and LL for AR gene registries . In 2005 a national internet-based registry for familial heart remained evident (p=0 .004 and <0 .0001) even after adjustment for diseases in the Netherlands, named GENCOR, has been developed various risk factors . In conclusion an association for breast cancer risk in collaboration with the Interuniversity Cardiology Institute of the between short alleles for both c .1092+3607(CA) and c .172(CAG) Netherlands . repeat polymorphisms of the ER- β and AR wa13s-2 7found in women o8f- Objectives: GENCOR aims to assess the prevalence of familial heart G34reek descent . diseases in patients and families in the Netherlands and to facilitate research to improve the quality of diagnostics and therapy in familial heart diseases . Methods: Patients who visit the (cardio)genetic outpatient clinic are informed about GENCOR and consent is asked to store information about cardiac examinations, family history and DNA-diagnostics from all visits . Patients’ data are entered in GENCOR by the cardiologist or Clinical genetics 111 clinical geneticist in attendance . Additional information can be stored P0052. Association between Alpha-1-Antitrypsin mutations and for scientific research. sevierity of cF Results: The registry has been tested in two university hospitals S. Zare Karizi1, M. Gorjipoor2, R. Mirfakhraie1,3, F. Mirzajani3; which resulted in the inclusion of more than 200 patients . In 2006 all 1Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic university hospitals will start using GENCOR . Two research projects Republic of Iran, 2Khatam university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National have already started using GENCOR . Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Conclusions: GENCOR is already a success, regarding the number of Iran. included patients and the related research projects in a limited period Cystic Fibrosis (CF) transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) of time . GENCOR provides easy internet-based access for authorized genotype does not explain the heterogeneity observed in CF pulmonary scientists throughout the country . disease severity. Modifier genes are implicated for this heterogeneity. Alpha-1-antitrypsin (Alpha-1-AT) is one of the few antiprotease capable P0050. Haplo-insufficiency of the Cat eye critical region has no of inactivating neutrophil elastase . We investigated whether Alpha-1- clinical relevance AT alleles (Z, S deficient alleles and The 3’ G → A mutation) is 1237 M. Kriek1, K. Szuhai2, S. G. Kant1, S. J. White1, H. Fiegler3, N. P. Carter3, J. associated with increased disease severity and Alpha-1-AT acute Knijnenburg2, J. T. den Dunnen1, H. J. Tanke2, M. H. Breuning1, C. Rosenberg4; phase response during pulmonary exacerbations . 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Dept. Mo- 70 CF patients were genotyped for the S and Z, Mutation and G → A 1237 lecular Cell Biology, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, polymorphism of the Alpha-1-AT gene using PCR-RFLP Method . Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4University of São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 200 Control individuals were also screened for G→A mutation in The presence of four highly homologous sequences, known as low order to find the frequency disease.of this polymorphism in Iranian copy repeats (LCRs), predisposes for unequal recombination within population . the 22q11 region . This can lead to genomic imbalances associated Our result suggest no correlation between allelic alteration in Alpha-1- with several known genetic disorders . We report a developmentally AT gene and CF . delayed patient with congenital malformations carrying three different rearrangements on both chromosome 22 homologues, including a P0053. cFtR gene mutations in iranian cystic Fibrosis patients previously unidentified deletion of the 22q11.1 region. Although four F. Mirzajani1, R. Mirfakhraie2,1, M. Amiri3, M. Jalalirad1, H. Kianifar4, M. Rafiei5, copies of the region are known to cause the Cat eye syndrome, we E. Talachian6, M. Houshmand1; postulate that a deletion of this region has no clinical relevance, as 1National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Re- five healthy family members also carried this deletion. In addition, public of Iran, 2Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Teh- the patient had a duplication of the DiGeorge critical region (22q11 .2) ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Khatam university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of and a deletion of chromosome band 22q12 .1 . As several clinical Iran, 4Mashhad Medical University, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Tabriz features, present in our patient, did not fit in the spectrum of the Medical University, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Iran Medical University, duplication 22q11 .2 syndrome, it is argued that an interstitial deletion Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of chromosome band 22q12 .1 might be related to the congenital Numerous mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance malformations seen in the proband . regulator (CFTR) gene have been found to impair CFTR activity to This study highlights the value of using different genomic approaches different extent, causing CF . This disorder exhibits considerable allelic (MAPH, MLPA, tiling-path-array and FISH) to unravel chromosomal heterogeneity in different populations and ethnic groups . Due to very alterations in order to study their phenotypic impact . high heterogenousity of Iranian population identification of mutations specific to the Iranian population would be helpful in designing an P0051. congenital central Hypoventilation syndrome: clinical appropriate CF molecular diagnosis . and molecular review of a UK cohort of 22 cases with PHOX2B 80 blood samples from unrelated CF families were collected from mutations. different provinces of Iran . DNA samples were screened for the most J. C. Evans1, T. Patrick1,2, P. Lunt3, P. Fleming4, J. Amiel5, C. Gaultier5, M. Wil- common mutations including delF508, G542X, W1282X, and N1303K liams1; using ARMS-PCR . Exons 4, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 20, and 21 were screened 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Current address: York- using SSCP-Sequencing . shire Regional Genetics Service, Leeds, United Kingdom, 3St Michael’s Hospi- DelF508 mutation covered only 18% of the mutated alleles, followed by tal, Bristol, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Child Life and Health, Bristol, United W1282X( 11%), G542X(7%) and N1303K(2 .5%) respectively . SSCP- Kingdom, 5Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. Sequencing also revealed the occurrence of some rare mutations Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS; OMIM: 209880) including R117H, R347H, A120T, S549R, 1677delTA and 2183AA>G . is a rare, life-threatening disorder, characterised by an impaired Moreover M470V mutation was found in high number of Iranian CF response to hypercapnia and hypoxia, resulting in hypoventilation . patients . Other autonomic nervous system anomalies such as Hirschsprung disease and neuroblastoma, may also be present . P0054. molecular analysis of charcot-marie-tooth in spanish Heterozygous mutations in the paired-like homeobox gene, PHOX2B patients negative for the PMP duplication (OMIM:603851) occur in up to 98 .5% of CCHS patients . The most P. Blanco-Arias1, C. Concheiro-Álvarez1, M. J. Sobrido2, B. Quintáns1, C. Ruiz- common mutations are expansions of a 20-residue polyalanine tract Ponte2, M. Arias3, J. A. Calviño4, M. T. Darnaude5, J. Pardo3, Á. Carracedo1,2; by +5 to +13 alanines . Other mutations described include nonsense 1Grupo de Medicina Genómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Fundación mutations and frameshift deletions/insertions . Pública Galega de Medicina Genómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Ser- Bristol has provided a UKGTN molecular testing service for PHOX2B vicio de Neurología, Hospital Clínico de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de mutations since February 2005 and has identified mutations in 22/33 Compostela, Spain, 4Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Xeral Cíes, Vigo, Spain, probands, including 22/25 with a clinical diagnosis of CCHS . Three of 5Laboratorio de Genética, Hospital de Móstoles, Spain. the mutations were found in neonates, permitting rapid confirmation Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is the most common inherited of the diagnosis . Two of the three patients with clinical CCHS but no neuropathy and more than 19 genes have been involved to date . PHOX2B mutation had multiple hypothalamic abnormalities including This genetic heterogeneity, together with the fact that sometimes the disorders of thermoregulation as well as sleep related hypoventilation . same gene accounts for different CMT subtypes and/or inheritance Mutations found in this cohort were all polyalanine expansions (+5 patterns complicate diagnostic decisions . Genetic epidemiology of to +12 residues), except for one 38bp frameshift deletion beginning CMT in a given population is essential in order to establish a rational within the first codon of the polyalanine tract. protocol for molecular analysis . We investigated a group of 47 Spanish Molecular investigations of parents in 14/22 cases revealed two full patients (mostly from the Galician region) with a clinical diagnosis mutation carriers (one known to be symptomatic) and two asymptomatic of probable CMT and who had tested negative for the duplication mosaic cases, suggesting a higher frequency of mosaic cases than of a chromosomal segment containing PMP22, the most frequent was previously reported . molecular alteration in demyelinating CMT . Systematic sequencing of the coding region and exon-intron junctions of PMP22, MPZ, GDAP1 Clinical genetics 11 and LITAF was performed . We found two patients carrying previously demonstrated in one mother . Nevertheless, a recessive CHARGE-like described mutations in MPZ: the first had a G to A substitution in exon syndrome remains - theoretically - a hypothesis . 3 (R98H) and the second, a 486delC in exon 4 causing a frameshift Unfortunately, as of this abstract submission, results of CHD7 gene mutation (M172fs262). Additionally, we identified two novel coding study in this family are not yet available . Whatever these results may sequence alterations: i) one patient had a G to C substitution in the be, this familial report shows the familial variability of the presentation first coding exon of PMP22, predicting a leucine to phenylalanine of CHARGE syndrome . change in the protein (L5F) and ii) two apparently unrelated patients exhibited a heterozygous GAA deletion in exon 5 resulting in the loss P0057. Deletion within chromosome 22q11 in two subjects with of an arginine (R224del) in the GDAP1 protein. Other five nucleotide cHARGE syndrome substitutions not contained in dbSNP were found in intronic regions . M. Ottaviani1, L. Giunti1, S. Guarducci1, S. Stagi1, L. Carosi1, P. Fiorini2, E. We describe the phenotype of the patients carrying these sequence Agostini2, L. Di Medio1, S. Toccafondi1, E. Lapi1, M. L. Giovannucci Uzielli1; changes and discuss their possible role in the development of CMT . 1University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Children’s Hospital, Florence, Italy. The acronym CHARGE, coined by Pagon, refers to a non-random P0055. cHARGE syndrome -mutational analysis of cHD7 gene in cluster of characteristic associated anomalies, first described by Finnish patients Hall, including ocular coloboma, choanal atresia, hearing loss, P. Vuorela1, M. Penttinen2, K. Huoponen1, H. Kääriäinen1,3; cardiovascular malformations, urogenital anomalies and retarded 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Turku growth and development, ear abnormalities and/or hearing loss . University Central Hospital, Turku, Finland, 3Family Federation of Finland, Hel- Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and abnormal olfactory bulb sinki, Finland. development were recently included in the phenotypic spectrum . CHARGE (MIM # 214800) is a frequently diagnosed syndrome Arhinencephaly and semicircular canal agenesis were two constant in infants (1 in 8500 births) and has been named after a pattern of features in all observed fetuses with CHARGE syndrome and CHD7 congenital anomalies: coloboma, heart malformations, choanal atresia, mutations . CHARGE syndrome, initially referred to as an association, retardation of growth and/or development, genital abnormalities and ear is now a well-established multiple-malformation syndrome with anomalies . Recently, heterozygotic mutations in CHD7 gene located distinctive consensus diagnostic criteria . Recent studies have showed in 8q12 were proven to cause ~60% of clinically diagnosed cases . that the syndrome is caused in about 60% of cases by CHD7 gene Most of the mutations are intragenic, but in few cases microdeletions mutations, a chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein gene, on encompassing the whole CHD7 gene have been detected . In individual chromosome 8q12 .1 . Because a locus on chromosome 22q11 is cases mutations have also been detected in the SEMA3E gene and in deleted in most individuals with DiGeorge, Shprintzen syndromes or the chromosomal area 22q11 .2, thus indicating locus heterogeneity . other isolated or syndromic heart abnormalities, we have searched The purpose of this study is to set up molecular diagnostic test for for deletions in eight children with CHARGE syndrome associated to this syndrome, clarify mutational spectrum in Finnish patients and outflow-tract heart defects. Deletions within chromosome 22q11 were give tools for clinicians to improve clinical diagnostics . To achieve found in two subjects . CHD7 mutations and/or 22q11 deletions may this, samples of clinically diagnosed patients and parental samples thus be regarded as contributing factors to genetic heterogeneity of have been collected from Clinical Genetics Units of the five University CHARGE syndrome . Hospitals in Finland . The coding area and intron-exon boundaries of CHD7 gene are analysed by direct sequencing to detect intragenic P0058. CHARGE-like phenotype and neurofibromatosis type 2 mutations, and samples without intragenic mutations are screened with due to an intersitital deletion of chromosome 22q quantitative real-time PCR to detect possible microdeletions in 8q12 T. E. Prescott1, O. C. Borota2, H. Lybæk3, G. Houge3; area . The results are currently being analysed and will be reported . 1Dept. of medical genetics, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 2Dept. of pathology, Even though Finnish population has a very unique genetic background Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 3Center for medical genetics and molecular medi- our hypothesis is that in case of CHARGE the mutation spectrum will cine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. turn out to be similar to other European populations . CHARGE is an acronym for coloboma, Heart defects, Atresia choanae, Retardation of growth and/or development, Genital defects, P0056. A cHARGE-like syndrome in two sibs Ear anomalies and/or deafness . Mutations in the CHD7 gene on A. Delahaye1, C. Baumann1, S. Wiener-Vacher2, S. Lyonnet3, J. Amiel3, A. Ver- chromosome 8q cause CHARGE syndrome . loes1, D. Sanlaville4; CHARGE syndrome was diagnosed in a boy with choanal atresia, 1Unité de Génétique clinique et INSERM U676, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, an ASD, preauricular tags, an undescended testes, right-sided Paris, France, 2Service ORL, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, France, microphthalmia, left-sided corneal opacification, scoliosis and a 3Service de Génétique, hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, bladder diverticulum. Transient swallowing difficulties resolved after 4Service de Cytogénétique, hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, infancy . His hearing and sight were severely congenitally impaired . He France. did not have ocular colobomas, documented congenital cranial nerve CHARGE syndrome (OMIM #214800) is a well known MCA syndrome dysfunction or known abnormalities of the semi-circular canals . that usually occurs sporadically . Recently, CHD7 gene (Chromodomain His karyotype on routine G-banding was 46,XY and there was no Helicase DNA binding 7 gene) has been shown to be mutated in deletion of 22q11 .2 with FISH technique . roughly 60% of the cases . The pathogenic mechanism seems to be He acquired pigmented nodular skin lesions in childhood . During haploinsufficiency. Furthermore, a mutation of SEMA3E gene was his late teens he became withdrawn and passive . His hearing and reported in a single case . balance deteriorated and he stopped walking . A gastrostomy was We report two brothers with an association of abnormalities compatible inserted because he stopped eating . When he died at age 22, autopsy with CHARGE syndrome . Both have vestibular dysfunction associated revealed the cause of death to be bilateral vestibular schwannomas with hypoplastic semicircular canals, mental retardation and facial i.e. neurofibromatosis type 2. dysmorphism with dysplastic ears . None has choanal atresia and only Post mortem microarray CGH on a banked blood sample revealed patient 2 presents with coloboma . Patient 1 has multiple congenital a 6 Mb de novo deletion approximately 6 Mb distal to the DiGeorge abnormalities: bilateral cleft lip and palate, esophageal atresia with syndrome locus encompassing about 100 genes including the NF2 tracheo-oesophageal fistula, complex heart defect and vertebral gene . Revised karyotype: 46,XY .rev ish dim(22)(q11 .23q12 .2) . abnormalities . Patient 2 has no mediastinal malformation, but is Mutation analysis revealed no abnormality of the CHD7 gene . epileptic . The mother has some signs that could be compatible with a In conclusion, neurological deterioration is not a feature of CHARGE mild CHARGE syndrome . syndrome . Progressive neurological signs and symptoms in a person Familial cases of CHARGE syndrome are rare . It is now established diagnosed with CHARGE syndrome should be investigated and should that CHARGE syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder with a prompt diagnostic re-evaluation . variable penetrance . Proven recurrence of CHD7 gene mutation in two sibs has already been reported in relation with maternal germinal mosaicism, and somatic mosaicism of CHD7 mutation has been Clinical genetics 11 P0059. the presence of genetic disorders associated chest wall We would like to present a family with two different chromosome malformations rearrangements in two siblings . The proband, a girl, was investigated V. David1, A. Radulescu2, M. C. Popoiu2, M. Puiu3, E. S. Boia4, O. Adam2, R. shortly after birth because of multiple congenital malformations (cleft Iacob2; lip and cleft palate, bilateral talipes, short fourth fingers, epicanthi and 1Childrens Hospital “ Louis Turcanu “Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Childrens narrow palpebral fissures). Subsequently chronic bilateral neuritis Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor cochlearis with a partial hearing loss was diagnosed . Cytogenetic Babes “- Department of Human Genetics Timisoara, Romania, Timisoara, Ro- analysis performed from peripheral blood lymphocytes using standard mania, 4Children’s Hospital “Louis Turcanu“– Department of Pediatric Surgery,, G banding technique resulted in the karyotype 46, XX, del(18)(q21) . Timisoara, Romania. Proband’s elder brother showed some phenotypical abnormalities Background: Although the pectus excavatum is the most common such as tall stature, long slim arms, scoliosis . His karyotype was 47, malformation of the anterior wall of a child’s thorax, today the causes XXY (Klinefelter syndrome) . The karyotypes of both parents were that determine the appearance of this malformation are not known . normal . Mother’s age at birth of the son and the daughter was 22 and There is increasing evidence nowadays that genetics plays an 29 years, respectively . important role in the appearance of chest wall malformations . The phenomenon of different chromosomal rearrangements in Objectives: The purpose of this study was to identify the cases that siblings born to cytogenetically normal parents implies the necessity have associated with the chest wall malformation a genetic condition to investigate the genetic, environmental or complex causes of that might have a role in the appearence of the malforation in the first abnormal gametogenesis . One possible explanation could be a not yet place . determined error in DNA repair . Material and Method: The present is a retrospective study that analizes a number of 121 medical records of pacients affected by chest wall P0062. chromosome 7 duplication in a young girl with malformations such as pectus excavatum , pectus carinatum treated at congenital heart disease, unusual behaviours and low iQ level: the Childrens Hospital Louis Turcanu ,Department of Pediatric Surgery clinical and cytogenetical characterisation in Timisoara,during 1986-2003 . I. Sezgin1, A. Colak2, E. Cakar1, F. Ozen1, N. Kocak1, M. Yildirim1, O. Ozdemir1; Results: In the analyzed group of subjects 5 patients presented Poland 1Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Sivas, Turkey, 2Faculty of syndrome ,1 had Marfan syndrome, 1 presented Turner syndrome and Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Sivas, Turkey. 1 had associated with the chest wall malformation syndactily of the We report the case of a 15 years-old girl, who was found to carry a hands . chromosome 7 duplication by karyotype analysis . The proband was The male/female ratio was 2 .1/1 in favor of male patients . The average referred for genetic evalution because of behavioural disturbance and age range was between 5-17 years,80% patients being teenagers . abnormal anxiety . Many patients with postoperative relapses were those that had Clinical examination found congenital heart disease, unusual associated with their condition a genetic disorder . behaviours, partial simian line in both palms, movement difficulties Conclusions: With regards to the conclusions of this study, we noticed and low IQ (60 percentage) level . The most frequent abnormality the importance of genetical disorders that undoubtedly complicate the of chromosome 7 is as trisomy or as polysomy, which is present in management of the chest wall malformations . 65-90% of reported cases . A partial trisomy chromosome such as in It is equally important for these patients to get a genetics specialist our patient is a rare event and represents only 13% of all trisomies . counselling to improve the outcome of their condition . The oncogene EGFR that is located on chromosome 7p12 is the most frequently amplified gene in astrocytic tumors of glioblastoma P0060. chiari type i malformation in six unrelated patients multiform types . affected with Fabry disease Conventional cytogenetic analysis identified an abnormal chromosome 7 K. Benistan, P. Halimi, D. P. Germain; for the proband and her mother, whereas other autosome chromosomes Hopital Europeen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France. were normal . All methaphases showed 46,XX,dup(7)(pter)mat in her final Fabry disease (FD, OMIM 301500) is an X-linked lysosomal storage karyotype . The segmental duplication of chromosome 7 is discussed disorder caused by one of numerous mutations of the GLA gene based on the present results. The current proband showed no signs encoding lysosomal enzyme α-galactosidase A. The inherent of the Williams syndrome . As is found in patients with deletion of the metabolic defect leads to intralysosomal accumulation of neutral long arm of chromosome 7 . In this study, we analyzed the relationships glycosphingolipids . The disease is associated with ischaemic between a segmental duplication of chromosome 7 and behavioural complications involving kidneys, heart and brain, severe multi-organ disturbance, congestive heart disease and abnormal anxiety in a case . dysfunction, and premature death . Among neurological symptoms, Our results suggest that specific genes at 7pter are exquisitely sensitive strokes and transient ischaemic attacks (TIA) have been reported . A to dosage alterations that can influence human low IQ and special 30-year-old male patient, with FD, was referred to us for evaluation behavioural disturbance capabilities . of a sudden episode of dizziness, with disequilibrium, and diplopia, in agreement with the diagnosis of a TIA . Head magnetic resonance P0063. A novel missense mutation in ciAs1 encoding the pyrin- imaging (MRI) showed no cerebrovascular involvement but revealed like protein, cryopyrin, causes familial cold autoinflammatory the presence of Chiari type I malformation (CMI), a pathological syndrome in a family of Ethiopian origin continuum of hindbrain malformations defined by downward herniation S. Allon-Shalev1, E. Sprecher2, M. Indelman2, Y. Hujeirat1, M. Rottem3; of the cerebellar tonsils of more than 5 mm below the foramen magnum . 1Genetics Institute Ha’Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, 2The Laboratory of We subsequently performed head MRI in a cohort of 44 consecutive Molecular Dermatology, Department of Dermatology, Rambam Medical Center, hemizygous male patients and 10 heterozygous females affected with Haifa, Israel, 3Allergy and Immunology Service, Ha’Emek Medical Center, Afula, FD, and identified 4 additional cases (one male and three female) and Israel. one case with borderline criteria of CMI . To the best of our knowledge, Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (FCAS MIM 120100) is this is the first time that CMI was found in association with Fabry a rare autosomal dominant condition characterized by unremitting disease . Whether this is coincidental or whether there is an increased attacks of cold-induced urticaria, often accompanied by other systemic occurrence of CMI in FD is yet unknown but our data suggest that CMI manifestations . The disorder was previously shown to be caused by should be ruled out in all patients with FD . mutations in CIAS1, encoding a pyrin-like protein also involved in the pathogenesis of Muckle-Wells syndrome (MWS MIM 191900), P0061. two different chromosomal anomalies in siblings: and CINCA syndrome (Chronic Infantile Neurological Cutaneous and Klinefelter syndrome and del(18)(q21) Articular syndrome, MIM 607115) . In the present study, we assessed a L. Cimbalistiene, V. Sliuzas, B. Tumiene, V. Kucinskas; two-generation family of Jewish Ethiopian origin, including 3 members Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithu- affected with FCAS. Using direct sequencing, we identified a novel ania. CIAS1 mutation, F525C . The mutation was shown to affect a highly There are very few case reports about different chromosome conserved residue of the protein and to segregate with the disease rearrangements in siblings born to cytogenetically normal parents . throughout the extended family . Our results add to the expanding Clinical genetics 11 spectrum of mutations in CIAS1 and provide evidence for striking was to assess the prevalence of associated malformations in a phenotypic heterogeneity in inherited autoinflammatory syndromes . geographically well defined population. Associated malformations in infants with OCs were collected between P0064. The first case of Chronic Infantile Neurological 1979 and 2003 in 334,262 consecutive births in the area covered by cutaneous and Arthropathy (ciNcA) syndrome in Lithuania the registry of congenital anomalies of Northeastern France . R. Janavicius1, M. Jakutovic2, A. Jankauskiene2, B. Skerliene3; The results showed that 35,9 % out of the 651cleft infants born during 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius Uni- this period had associated malformations .Associated malformations versity Children’s Hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Vilnius University Medical Fac- were more frequent in infants who had cleft palate(47,9 %) than in ulty, Vilnius, Lithuania. infants with cleft lip and palate(34,9 %) or with cleft lip only(14,4 %) . Background: Chronic Infantile Neurological Cutaneous and Malformations in the central nervous system and in the skeletal system Arthropathy (CINCA) syndrome, also called Neonatal Onset were the most common other anomalies, followed by malformations in Multisystem Inflammatory Disease (NOMID) is a rare congenital the urogenital and cardiovascular systems . inflammatory disorder characterized by the triad of permanent Weight, length, and head circumference of children with OCs and cutaneous rash from birth, central nervous system involvement and multiple associated malformations were lower than in controls joint manifestations with recurrent fever and inflammation. About Prenatal diagnosis was rarely done by fetal ultrasonographic 100 cases are reported worldwide although this syndrome is clearly examination in isolated clefts . However, even in multiple associated underdiagnosed . Mutations in CIAS1 gene are reported up to 60% of malformations, prenatal diagnosis by fetal ultrasonographic CINCA cases, but exact underlying pathogenic mechanisms are still examination had a low sensitivity,43 .9% . unclear . In conclusion the overall prevalence of malformations, which was case report: We report the first sporadic case of CINCA syndrome in one in more than three infants, emphasizes the need for a thorough Lithuania diagnosed in a 8 year old boy . Diagnostic sequence ranging investigation of infants with clefts . A routine screening for other from allergic dermatitis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis and hypopituitarism malformations especially skeletal, central nervous system, and cardiac is presented and clinical disease course till 16 years is described . defects may need to be considered in infants with clefts, and genetic Characteristic findings of the syndrome phenotype were observed counseling seems warranted in most of these complicated cases . as follows: alternate non-itching urticaria present from birth; chronic meningitis reflected by occasional headache and vomiting, atrophy of P0067. symptomatic charcot-marie-tooth. A pair of concordant the optic nerve, optic disc edema and recurrent febrile attacks; limited monozygotic twins mobility, progressively deforming symmetrical arthropathy of elbows G. J. Braathen1,2, J. C. Sand3, M. B. Russell1,4; and knees with typical metaphyseal and epiphyseal radiological 1Faculty Division Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, 1474 Nord- changes, abnormal ossification, patellar overgrowth, clubbing of byhagen, Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Occupational and Environmental Medi- fingers and small stature. Skull anomalies including macrocephaly, cine, Genetic section,Telemark Hospital, 3710 Skien, Skien, Norway, 3Institute hydrocephaly, frontal bossing, saddleback nose and late closure of for clinical epidemiology and molecular biology (Epi-Gen), Akershus University fontanelles were obvious . Laboratory analyses documented a non- Hospital, 1478 Lørenskog, Oslo, Norway, 44Department of Research and De- specific inflammatory response. A progressive visual defects and velopment, Akershus University Hospital, 1478 Lørenskog, Oslo, Norway. perceptive deafness occurred with increasing age . Some symptomatic A pair of monozygotic twin brothers was referred due to hereditary peculiarities are also discussed . peripheral neuropathy . The clinic and neurophysiology was compatible conclusion: Despite characteristic features of CINCA syndrome only with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease with late onset . Molecular genetic the long term clinical observation helps to differentiate it from other analysis excluded mutations in PMP22, connexin32 and MPZ . The types of early onset chronic arthritis with systemic manifestations . twins were employed in PVC production and developed symptoms after 14 years of massive exposure . We conclude that the monozygotic P0065. congenital lobar emphysema: a report of ten cases from twin pair have symptomatic CMT, i .e . a phenocopy, since it is primarily one genealogy caused by environmental and not by genetic factors . Phenocopies D. Serapinas1, D. Barkauskiene1, A. Babusyte2; occur, but it is extraordinary that the two patients in a family do have 1Department of Pulmonology and Imunology, Kaunas University of Medicine, a symptomatic rather than the hereditary form of CMT . This illustrates Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Institute for Biomedical Research, Lab of Pulmonology, the importance of an occupational history even in the molecular genetic Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania. era . Congenital lobar emphysema (CLE) [MIM130710] is an autosomal dominant lung disease with hyperinflated lobe of the lung, compressed P0068. Frequency of 17p11.2 duplication/deletion in a group of normal lung tissue, bronchial cartilage hypoplasia . Here we report Portuguese patients with charcot-marie-tooth type 1 (cmt1A) a family with 10 cases of CLE. The first patient was a 40 years old and hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies man, who had symptoms of chronic obstructive lung disease, lobar (HNPP) emphysema, history of two events of sporadic pneumothorax . KT P. Magalhães1, I. Silveira1, T. Coelho2, J. Sequeiros1,3; showed left upper lobe emphysema with compression of other part 1IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2HGSA, Porto, Portugal, 3ICBAS, Porto, Portugal. of the lung . Thoracotomy and left upper lobectomy were performed CMT type 1 and HNPP are autosomal dominant sensory motor for decompression of healthy part of the lung . Biochemical analysis peripheral neuropathies . The most frequent mutations are a reciprocal for quantitative alpha-1 antytripsin level in serum was at lower range duplication and deletion of one copy of the gene encoding peripheral of normal limits . Genealogy showed 9 more cases of CLE . Affected myelin protein 22 (PMP22), at the CMT1A/HNPP locus (chromosome members were almost in all generations . In all cases disease 17p11 .2) . CMT is characterized by slowly progressive weakness and manifested after puberty . Both of the proband’s children (son and atrophy of distal muscles in the feet and/or hands, often associated with daughter) also had lobar emphysema . Other affected members were diminished deep tendon reflexes. Nerve conduction velocities, when a cousin, two sisters, a nephew, two nieces and grandmother . It is carefully performed, are frequently decreased (10-30m/s) . Molecular interesting that proband’s father (son of affected grandmother) was testing, performed since 2001, detects above 95% of patients with healthy . We think, that incomplete penetrance is the reason why CMT1A and approximately 100% of the HNPP cases . patients’ father is healthy . We represent the most numerous family with To ascertain the frequency of duplication/deletion of PMP22, we late onset of CLE in Lithuania . analyzed 84 Portuguese patients referred for molecular diagnosis of CMT1A/HNPP, for seven highly polymorphic CA repeats (D17S921, P0066. Associated malformations in cases of oral clefts D17S955, D17S839, D17S122, D17S1357, D17S1358, D17S1356), C. Stoll, Y. Alembik, B. Dott, M. P. Roth; one tetrametric (4A) and one pentametric repeat (9A), spanning the Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France. 1 .5 Mb duplicated in CMT1A and deleted in HNPP . The duplication Infants with oral clefts(OC) often have other associated congenital occurred in 18 patients and the deletion only in one . Among all markers, anomalies .The reported incidence and the types of associated 9A was the most informative, detecting 14/18 (77 .7%) of all CMT1A malformations vary between different studies .The aim of this study cases, while D17S122 detected 10/18 (55 .5%) .Clinical genetics 11 Confirmation of CMT1 (detection of the PMP22 duplication) was (1) Ikegami T . et al . Am . J . Med . Genet . 71:246-248(1997) . achieved only in a small number of the cases (21%) . This could be due to an incomplete clinical characterization: if we considered only the P0071. Arg94Gln mutation in the MFN gene is most frequent in cases with known family history or with suggestive electrophysiological the patient with charcot-marie-tooth type 2 disease from Russia. signs, the frequency of CMT1A molecularly confirmed cases would O. A. Schagina1, E. L. Dadali1, V. P. Fedotov2, A. V. Polyakov1; rise to about 45% (14/31) . A more detailed clinical characterization is 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Vorone- essential, including EMG studies and NCV for a better diagnosis of zhskaya medical genetics consultation, Voronezh, Russian Federation. CMT . Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy (CMT) is a genetically heterogeneous group of hereditary nervous - muscular diseases with a similar clinical P0069. De novo homozygous tandem duplication in a spanish picture . There are two big groups of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease: patient affected with cmt1A myelinopathy (CMT1) and axonopathy (CMT2) . Both consists of further M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas, M. Fenollar-Cortes, J. Aguirre-Lamban, J. Gallego-Merlo, subtypes . CMT2A is the most frequent type among axonopathies, it is A. Gimenez-Pardo, I. Lorda-Sanchez, C. Ayuso; caused by mutation in the gene of mitochondrial GTPase Mitofusin 2 Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. (MFN2, 1p36 .2) . Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A is an autosomal dominant We have investigated 59 families with a clinical diagnosis of CMT2 demyelinating neuropathy where PMP22 gene is implicated . Two and 28 families with CMT unknown type, in total 87 unrelated mechanisms are responsible for CMT1A: 1) Dosage effect of PMP22; families . Mutations have been found in 10 families (all of them have 2) Point mutations of the gene . diagnosis CMT2) . The most frequent mutation is Arg94Gln . We have The former mechanism is due to a tandem duplication of a 1 .5Mb found it in five unrelated families. We have analyzed the cause of region originated from an unequal crossover during meiosis and it is the high frequency for this mutation by haplotype analysis using five present in over 70% of patients . Sporadic autosomal dominant CMT polymorphic markers and seven intragenic SNPs . We determined that type 1 cases cannot clinically be differentiated from recessive CMT . this mutation had independent origin in various families . In two other Diagnosis in our laboratory is performed with 11 STR markers that families a mutation Arg94Trp was found in the same codon . These are located inside the microduplication as well as using the MLPA dates lead us to conclude that codon 94 is «hot spot» for mutation in system . the MFN2 gene . We report a sporadic case of a woman affected with CMT1A that shows a de novo homozygous tandem duplication . DNA from parents P0072. High Prevalence of cohen syndrome amongst irish was required to construct the haplotypes and a false paternity was travellers ruled out with informative markers located on chromosomes 13, 18, A. M. Murphy, A. Green, S. A. Lynch; 21 and X . National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick Children, The duplication was originated from the same paternal haplotype and Dublin, Ireland. was also observed in a foetus from this affected patient . Cohen syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, prevalent in We propose that an unequeal crossover occurred in a mitotic division the Finnish and Jewish populations. We report five cases of Cohen during an early embryonic stage, prior to the formation of the three syndrome amongst three Irish Traveller families from Galway . We are embryonic layers . The presence of a disease phenotype points aware of a sixth case in a UK based Irish Traveller child . All six have obviously to the ectoderm; the presence of the actual duplication in an identical homozygote mutation c .4471G>T mutation in the COH our molecular analysis of blood tissue, points to mesoderm; and the 1 gene . Using Traveller population data, from the 2002 census, we fact that the patient transmitted the duplication to the next generation estimate a minimum prevalence of Cohen syndrome of 8 per 1000 points also to the endoderm . amongst Irish Traveller children in the County of Galway . There are >30 other autosomal recessive conditions known to occur P0070. Novel mutation of the myelin P0 gene (MPZ) in a in this population . The prevalence of autosomal recessive disorders Portuguese family with cmt1B disease is unknown but a recent study in County Galway reported that 2 % of R. S. Cerqueira1, L. Lameiras1, H. Gabriel1, T. Coelho2, M. Santos3, P. Tava- Traveller children have Hurler syndrome, 2% have Galactosemia, 1% res1,4, A. R. Fernandes1,5; have autosomal recessive OI and 3% are deaf . In addition, a further 1CGC Centro de Genética Clínica, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço de Neurologia, 5% had some form of disability and 28% of Traveller parents have Hospital Geral Santo António, Porto, Portugal, 3Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital suffered the death of a child . Maria Pia, Porto, Portugal, 4Genética Médica, FMDP, Porto, Portugal, 5ULHT, A delay in diagnosis occurred as many of the features were only Lisboa, Portugal. apparent in later childhood and, in the context of this community, follow Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1B (CMT1B) is an autosomal up is difficult as families move. dominant peripheral neuropathy associated with mutations of the The UK based case and our cases 4&5, who are unrelated to case 1,2 major peripheral myelin protein (Po) gene (MPZ) . The Po protein & 3, suggest that this disorder occurs throughout this community and functions as a homophilic adhesion molecule in myelin compaction . As is not isolated to one clan. Molecular confirmation in this population other CMT1 types, CMT1B is a demyelinating peripheral neuropathy is easy because the mutation is known . We recommend considering characterized by distal muscle weakness and atrophy, sensory loss, this diagnosis in any child from this population who presents with and slow nerve conduction velocity . It is usually slowly progressive and developmental delay and microcephaly . often associated with pes cavus foot deformity and bilateral foot drop . The range of the phenotypes associated with these neuropathies is P0073. Report of 10 new patients with a heterozygous mutation very wide, and correlations between the phenotypes and the individual in the cOL11A1 gene and review of genotype-phenotype mutations are useful . correlations in type Xi collagenopathies. Here we report a portuguese family with CMT1B associated with a novel K. P. Hoornaert1, M. Majava-Elo2, D. Batholdi3, M. C. Bouma4, K. Bouman4, M. Po point mutation . Four clinical affected members of three consecutive Carrera5, K. Devriendt6, J. Hurst7, G. Kitsos8, D. Niedrist3, M. B. Petersen9, D. generations had a heterozygous mutation (278G>C) in exon 3, leading Shears7, I. Stolte-Dijkstra4, J. M. Van Hagen10, L. Ala-Kokko2, M. Männikkö2, G. to a Gly93Ala substitution . In healthy family members no Gly93Ala was R. Mortier1; found . Gly93 is conserved among many other species suggesting that 1Center Med Genet, Univ Hosp Ghent, Gent, Belgium, 2Dpt Mol Biol, Univ Oulu, it is important in the formation of an extracellular Ig domain . Ikegami Oulu, Finland, 3Center Med Genet, Univ Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, et al . (1) reported a family with CMT1B associated with a Po point 4Dpt Clin Genet, Univ Med Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, mutation in the same position of exon 3 (278G>A, Gly93Glu) . 5Centro Patologia Celular, Inst Univ Dexeus, Barcelone, Spain, 6Center Med The age of onset of symptoms varied from 11 to 51 years, suggesting Genet, Univ Hosp Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 7Dpt Clin Genet, Churchill that in addition to the type and intragenic location of the mutation, Hosp, Oxford, United Kingdom, 8Dpt Ophthalmol, Univ Ioannina, Ioannina, other mechanisms acting at the level of MPZ gene expression, mRNA Greece, 9Dpt Med Genet, Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece, 10Dpt Clin stability and posttranslational protein modification may have an and Human Genet, VU Univ Med Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. important effect on the ultimate clinical phenotype . A series of 35 unrelated patients with variable features of either Clinical genetics 116 Stickler or Marshall syndrome and normal COL2A1 screening were the case with previously reported cases with Warburg Micro syndrome investigated for mutations in the COL11A1 gene . Heterozygous as well as with the other syndromes including common findings and COL11A1 mutations were found in 10 individuals . In 8 cases a splice features . site alteration (involving introns 44, 47, 50, 53, 55) was present with one (c .3816+1G>A) being recurrent in two patients . One patient had P0076. congenital malformation - a risk factor for infectious an in-frame deletion of 18 nucleotides in exon 36 and in another patient pathology a missense mutation (Gly1471Asp) was observed . In 6/10 patients V. Botiu, D. Iacob, M. Boia, M. Puiu, R. Iacob, A. Manea; the phenotype was classified as Marshall syndrome because of the University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. early-onset severe hearing loss and the severe midfacial retraction Introduction: Congenital malformations represent a fundamental with short nose and protruding eyes . Ectodermal abnormalities were pathology problem correlated to incidence, etiology, pathology and absent in all patients but myopia and retinal detachment observed medical and social implications . in some of them . One patient even had a type 1 vitreous anomaly Purpose: This study wants to establish the correlation between which has been considered to be specific for Stickler syndrome type 1 congenital malformations of the newborns and the infections pathology (caused by mutations in COL2A1) . In this group of 6 patients, 5 had a they developed . splice mutation and 1 had the 18 nt deletion in exon 36 . The phenotype Material and method: Clinical examinations and laboratory data have in the remaining 4/10 patients was similar to Stickler syndrome type been used for this study . 1 . The midface hypoplasia was less pronounced and only one patient Results: Of a total number 2610 hospitalized new born 6,89% had presented with early-onset sensorineural hearing loss . We conclude congenital malformations, 3,73% male and 3,54% female . The types that (in contrast to previous reports) splice mutations in COL11A1 can of malformations are cardiovascular 2,68%, gastrointestinal 0,28%, result in either a Marshall phenotype or a Stickler phenotype . We also the urinary tract 0,38%, central nervous system 0,38% and complexes show that the vitreous phenotype is not always reliable in predicting malformations 0,09% . the molecular defect in patients with the Stickler-Marshall phenotypic The infectious pathology of the new born is he following: skin and spectrum . mucous 4,02%, respiratory infection 3,64%, bacteremia 1,15% and urinary infections 0,86% . P0074. An audit of a mutation screening service for the 21- Of a total number of positive cultures we found staphylococcus hydroxylase gene aureus 65,65%, e . colli 18,32%, enterobacter 6,87%, klebsiella H. B. Schlecht1, S. Tobi1, N. Gregersen2, S. Ramsden1, R. Elles1; 3,05%, staphylococcus R 3,05%, pseudomonas aeruginosa 2,29%, 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Na- staphylococcus epidermidis 0,76% . tional Health Laboratory Service and University of the Witwatersrand, Johan- Maternal infections circumstances: the premature rupture of the nesburg, South Africa. amniotic membranes 22,22%, green amniotic fluid 30,55%, maternal Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a group of autosomal infections 19,44% . recessive genetic disorders, which result in a deficiency of enzymes in Conclusions: 1 . because of the immaturity of the imunitary system at the the cortisol synthesis pathway . The majority (>90%) of CAH is caused new borns with congenital malformations, the infections pathology is by 21-hydroxylase enzyme deficiency (21OH). more frequent; 2. the most frequent bacterial agent are staphylococcus In response to concerns about the management of CAH patients in aureus and e . colli . the UK an audit of CAH referrals to the laboratory was conducted . A total of 495 CAH families referred for molecular testing of the CYP21 P0077. congenital pulmonary lymphangiectasis in two female gene between January 2000 and June 2005 were examined . The half-siblings. audit highlighted a requirement for further information on the complex H. Peeters1,2, A. Debeer1, K. Devriendt2, P. Moerman3, R. Devlieger4, V. genetics of this disease and indicated that current population carrier Cossey1, H. Devlieger1; risks may need reviewing [N .Gregersen et al . 2006 . In preparation] . 1Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, University of Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Another area the audit highlighted was the correlation between Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium, 3Department of Pathology, genotype and phenotype . In patients where two mutated alleles had University of Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, been identified we compared the expected mutation effect to the University of Leuven, Belgium. phenotype of the patient . The phenotype was as predicted from the We report on two female half-siblings with congenital pulmonary identified genotype in 80.7% of cases. It was also noted that in 31% lymphangiectasis (CPL) . These children were born to a healthy mother of patients only one mutation had been identified. To increase our with a negative family history regarding congenital anomalies . Both detection rate we have developed a rapid test, using pyro-sequencing, pregnancies had been achieved by in vitro fertilization using different for another relatively common mutation in CYP21, the exon 6 cluster anonymous, unrelated sperm donors. The first child was prenatally mutation (g.1380T>A, g.1383T>A). To date we have identified 12% diagnosed with hydrops fetalis and bilateral hydrothorax . She was born (5/42) of patients, where only one mutation had previously been at a gestational age of 32 .4 weeks with a birth weight of 3450 g . Postnatal identified, as positive for the exon 6 cluster mutation. This new test pleural drainage showed a bilateral chylothorax . In spite of drainage avoids the need for sequencing the majority of the CYP21 gene, a time and maximal ventilatory support, the patient died after 5 days from consuming and expensive test . respiratory insufficiency. Post mortem examination showed prominent cystic pulmonary lymphangiectasis and pancreatic lymphangiectasis P0075. Warburg micro syndrome in a turkish Boy in the absence of cardiovascular anomalies . Identical to her half-sister, G. Yesil1, A. Yüksel1, C. Aras2, M. Seven1; the second child also presented prenatally with a bilateral chylothorax . 1Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical Fac- She was born at a gestational age of 31 weeks with a birth weight of ulty, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Ophtalmology, Istanbul University Cerrah- 2600 g. She presented with severe respiratory insufficiency of which pasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey. she died after 2 days . Post mortem examination showed and identical We report here a 4-year-old Turkish boy with Warburg Micro pathology, i .e . prominent pulmonary lymphangiectasis and pancreatic syndrome (WMS) who was born to consanguine parents and was lymphangiectasis . Karyotypes of both patients and the mother were referred due to psychomotor retardation and cataract . He had similar normal . A PTPN11 mutation (Noonan syndrome) was excluded in the physical features and findings with patients reported previously with first child. WMS like; microcephaly, deep-set eyes, prominent ears and nasal CPL (MIM 265300) usually is a sporadic condition . Recurrence root, micrognathia, hypertrichosis and truncal hypotonia,spastic in siblings has been reported, suggestive of autosomal recessive diplegia,joint contractures, hypogenitalism and hypoplasia of corpus inheritance . However, the present observation, with CPL in two female callosum . Sequence analysis of exon 8 of the RAB3GAP gene has half-siblings is compatible with an autosomal dominant inheritance, confirmed the presence of a splice donor mutation (748+1G>A) in the with either gonadal mosaicism in the mother or, less likely, non- homozygous state . Skin hyperextensibility and joint hypermobility in penetrance in the mother . the affected child have not been reported in WMS cases to date . The purpose of this report is to compare the symptoms and features of Clinical genetics 11 P0078. molecular analysis of connexin 26 (GJB2) gene among observed a combined effect of GSTM0/0 and MMP9CT conferred 8-fold 114 iranian families at risk of Hereditary Hearing Loss (HHL). higher risk of COPD. (14%vs.3%; OR 7.7, CI95% 1.1-53.3, P=0.05). S. B. Azimifar1,2, P. foulady1, V. Lotfi1, M. Masrouri1, A. Abdolhosseini1, F. III)Baseline spirometric examination has not showed differences of a Ehterami1, S. Zeinali1,3; lung function in carriers of genotypes described above in both groups . 1Medical Genetics Laboratory of Dr. Zeinali., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Over 5 years of follow-up examination, GSTM10/0 was associated with 2Department of Biology, Shahid Beheshti University,, Tehran, Islamic Republic more decline of FEV1 in compare to GSTM1+ (28.9±4.0 vs. 38.4±3.3; of Iran, 3Department of Biotechnology, Pasteur Institute., Tehran, Islamic Re- p=0.052) and FVC (55.4±4.1 vs. 69.2±4.2; p=0.057). Retrospective public of Iran. analysis in COPD patients aged 35-45, 46-55 and 56-65 years showed Mutations in Connexin 26 (GJB2) gene are the common cause of more fast decline of lung function in carriers of GSTM10/0 vs . GSTM1+ Autosomal Recessive (AR) Hereditary Hearing Loss (HHL) in many in group aged 56-65 years: FEV1 31 .87±5 .16vs . 44 .66±4 .62 (p=0 .050) populations . Molecular analysis of GJB2 gene performed, using and FVC 56 .23±6 .19 vs . 73 .25±4 .79 (p=0 .056) . These results suggest ARMS/PCR and direct sequencing techniques, for 114 unrelated that GSTM1, but not GSTT1 and MMP9 genotypes are associated with Iranian families which had affected individuals with HHL . Of these, the risk of disease and decline of lung function in COPD . GJB2 mutant alleles were found in 32 families (28% or 32/114 of the families) which most of them (i .e . 64% or 21/32 of the families with P0081. Results of routine diagnostics of cornelia-de-Lange- GJB2 mutation) were from North-western of the country . The most syndrome: screening for point mutations and deletions in the found common mutations were 35delG (75% or 48/64 of the found NiPBL gene mutant alleles), W24X (6% or 4/64), R127H (5% or 3/64), IVSI+1 G>A A. Lott, A. Gencik, H. Gabriel; (5% or 3/64), delE120 (4% or 2/64), R32H (1/64), 167delT (1/64), Zentrum fuer Medizinische Genetik, Osnabrueck, Germany. R184P (1/64) and 299delAT (1/64), respectively . Homozygosity for the Cornelia-de-Lange-syndrome (CdLS) is a heterogeneous autosomal- 35delG mutation was the most common cause of HHL in the patients . dominant disorder characterized by typical facial features, growth Our finding of mutation types and their frequencies would be helpful for retardation, developmental delay, upper-extremity malformations and developing HHL mutation screening plan in Iran and other neighbor’s a variety of other abnormalities . The prevalence of CdLS is estimated countries . to be around 1/10,000 . Most cases are sporadic, although several familial cases are described . P0079. mutation analysis of the connexin-26 gene in patients Since 2004 it is known that up to 50% of CdLS cases are caused by with ARNsHL in two provinces of iran mutations in the NIPBL gene on chromosome 5p13 . This gene consists A. Sadeghi1, M. Sanati2, F. Alasti2; of 47 exons and mutations were found in the entire coding region . 1Tarbiat Modarres University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Re- We introduced the mutation screening of NIPBL in 2005 and so far search Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NRCGEB), Tehran, 23 patients were referred to our lab for testing of CdLS . To identify Islamic Republic of Iran. mutations, we established a DGGE-screening protocol for the rapid Mutations in GJB2 gene at the DFNB1 locus on chromosome 13q12 and economical detection of mutations in all 46 coding exons and the are associated with autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss splice consensus sites of the NIPBL gene . We detected 5 causative (ARNSHL) .There are many known mutations in this gene that cause mutations: one missense, two nonsense, one frameshift and one hearing loss . A single frame shift, at position 35(35delG) accounts for splice site mutation . 50% of mutations in Caucasian population with carrier frequency of To find out if the low mutation detection rate is partly due to 1 .5-2 .5% . In this study we investigated the prevalence of the GJB2 rearrangements resulting in deletion or duplication of one or more gene mutations using direct sequencing the coding exon of this gene exons, we tested the NIPBL gene for copy number changes with the within ARNSHL individuals from 53 families in two Iranian provinces . MLPA (multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification) technique. We Eight different GJB2 variants were identified one of which (Deletion 16 detected no exon deletions in the 18 patients without point mutations . nt at 176-190) was notpreviously reported for the Iranian population . Our data indicate that DGGE is a highly sensitive screening method for Five GJB2 mutations including 35delG, 233delC, 176-191del16nt, detection of mutations in the NIPBL gene . Exon deletions in NIPBL are W24X, L90P were found in 10 of 53 families (18 .87%) .Two different not a common cause of CdLS . polymorphisms V153I and S86T were also found . One variant A171T with unknown effect also is detected . Six of 53 families were observed P0082. interaction among mtHFR, PAi-1 and ecNOs gene to have GJB2 mutations in both alleles (11 .32%) .The most common polymorphisms predict the severity of coronary artery disease mutation was 35delG so that 3 (30%) out of 10 families that have GJB2 in turkish patients mutations contained 35delG mutation in both alleles and the frequency D. Agirbasli1, M. Agirbasli2, S. M. Williams3, J. A. Phillips III4; of 35delG allele is 0 .50 between 10 out of 53 families . 1Department of Genetics,Marmara University Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey, Thus, contribution of GJB2 mutations appears less significant in 2Department of Cardiology,Marmara University Medical School, Istanbul, Tur- familial deafness in Iran . This necessitates further assessment for the key, 3Division of Cardiovascular Medicine ,Vanderbilt University Medical Center, other known gene regions as well as search for new genetic factors in Nashville, TN, United States, 4Division of Medical Genetics, Department of hereditary type of genetic deafness in Iranian population . PediatricsVanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States. Genetic factors play a role in the onset of coronary artery disease P0080. Associations of glutation-s-transferase m1 0/0 (Gstm1 (CAD) . The objective of our study is to evaluate the single locus and 0/0), Gstt1 0/0 and -1562 c/t matrix metalloproteinase 9 (mmP9 combined effects of 3 different genetic polymorphisms (Methylene ct) genotypes with a risk and clinical features of cOPD tetrahydrofolate reductase C677T polymorphism, plasminogen E. D. Yanchina1, T. V. Ivtchik1, N. E. Khodzhayants1, N. Yakovleva2; activator inhibitor 4G/5G polymorphism and endothelial nitric oxide 1Scientific Research Centre, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Scientific synthase 3-27 base pair repeat polymorphism) on the presence and and Research Institute of Pulmonology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. extent of CAD in patients with early onset coronary artery disease . It is possible that a character of decline in lung function is a result Materials & Methods: DNA samples were obtained from 102 consecutive of genetic susceptibility. COPD is defined by irreversible airflow patients with early onset CAD documented by coronary angiography . obstruction . It pathogenesis is associated with xenobiotic metabolism Severity of CAD in patients was stratified into 3 groups as 1, 2 or 3- and proteinases imbalance . The aim of study were I)to investigate vessel CAD . 102 control subjects were selected among subjects with frequencies of GSTM10/0, GSTT10/0 and MMP9CT in Russian COPD angiographically normal coronary arteries . Information on standard patients, II)to estimate their combined effects and III)their associations risk factors was collected . Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction (MDR) with quantitative spirometric indices (FEV1 and FVC in % of predicted analysis was performed to seek a model of coronary artery disease value) . It was examined 72 COPD patients and 39 heavy smokers based on these 3 genetic polymorphisms . without history of chronic bronchitis (Smokers) . I)Frequency of Results: Single locus effects of the 3 polymorphisms were not GSTM10/0 was different between COPD (0 .38) and Smokers (0 .21) significantly related to the presence or severity of coronary artery (OR 2.58; 95% CI, 1.16 to 5.75; P=0.04). Differences in distribution disease (p values for PAI-1 4G/5G, MTHFR C677Tand ecNOS 3-27 are of MMP9CT and GSTT10/0 genotypes were not significant. II)We 0 .14, 0 .26, 0 .14 respectively) . However when gene-gene interactions Clinical genetics 11 were studied, the severity of disease was related to the frequency of On abdomen ultrasound kidneys were small and dysplastic . Brain CT high risk alleles (p= 0 .01, Spearman R= 0 .26), yet MDR and haplotype scan showed additionally large cisterna magna and cortical atrophy . analysis did not detect a significant genetic model (p=0.24). Karyotype was 46, XX and DNA analysis for FGFR genes was Conclusion: These 3 genetic polymorphisms are susceptibility loci and normal . genotypes of these genes are neither necessary nor sufficient for the Patient´s mother terminated her next pregnancy at the 23rd week of CAD to occur, but co-existence of high risk alleles may increase the gestation since the fetal ultrasound raised the suspicion of a similar severity of CAD . clinical syndrome which was confirmed by the fetal histological report. CED is a very rare condition and accurate diagnosis contributes to the P0083. A novel RyR2 mutation in a family with symptomatic ahead of time genetic counseling . and asymptomatic catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. P0085. Autosomal recessive nonspesific craniosynostosis P. J. G. Zwijnenburg1, L. A. J. Rammeloo2, W. E. Kok3, Z. A. Bhuiyan4, J. M. which is not mapped to FGFR1-3, msX2 and tWist loci van Hagen1; B. Akın1, I. Vargel2, S. Kamaci3, H. Okur1, G. Tuncbilek2, A. Cila4, S. Balci1, E. 1VU university medical center, Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Mavili2, K. Benli5, I. Sayek6, Y. Erk2, N. A. Akarsu1; 2VU university medical center, Dept. of Pediatrics, Amsterdam, The Nether- 1Hacettepe University, Gene Mapping Laboratory, Ankara, Turkey, 2Plastic and lands, 3Academic Medical Center, dept of Cardiology, Amsterdam, The Neth- Reconstructive Surgery, Ankara, Turkey, 3Orthodontics, Ankara, Turkey, 4Radiol- erlands, 4Academic Medical Center, dept of clinical genetics, Amsterdam, The ogy, Ankara, Turkey, 5Neurosurgery, Ankara, Turkey, 6Surgery, Ankara, Turkey. Netherlands. We report a consanguineous family manifesting multiple suture Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is an synostosis, exophthalmos, midfacial retrusion and relative mandibular autosomal dominant inherited disorder characterized by adrenergic prognatism, parrot-beaked nose and short upper lip without limb induced polymorphic ventricular tachycardias and risk of sudden malformations . Complete pedigree structure consists of a total of 72 death . The human cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (RyR2) has been individuals who are descendants of a single ancestor couple . Clinical linked to CPVT and RyR2 mutations are considered to cause defective presentation of the affected cases is mostly resembled autosomal Ca2+ channel function . dominant Crouzon’s syndrome (MIM # 123500) although intrafamilial A 65-year-old female was referred to our hospital because of recurrent variations are documented . However, the observation of six affected syncope after physical and emotional stress . Routine cardiac members who were born to two radiologically normal parents in examinations revealed no structural abnormality . A treadmill exercise three different branches of the same family considered autosomal test induced premature ventricular contractions and ventricular recessive (AR) inheritance. Twenty five well examined individuals from tachycardia . The administration of beta-blockers was effective in three generations were used to test for a linkage to known disease suppressing the arrhythmias . We performed genetic screening by loci . Homozygosity mapping excluded the following loci: FGFR1- DNA sequencing and a novel mutation c .6636A>C (p .2212Lys>Asn) 3 on chromosomes 8p12, 10q26 and 4ptel, TWIST and MSX2 on in exon 43 of RyR2 was identified .The mutation predicts a amino acid chromosomes 7p21 and 5q35 respectively . Linkage analysis also substitution K2212N, located near the FKBP12 .6 domain . Lysine on excluded all of these loci assuming autosomal dominant inheritance position 2212 is a highly conserved amino acid . This mutation was not with reduced penetrance . AR inheritance has been suggested as a detected in 100 healthy controls . likely mode of inheritance for this type of craniosynostosis in 1970’s Subsequently we evaluated the patients’ offspring . None of the family (MIM # 218500) . However, this assumption was not further supported members demonstrated a history of exercise-induced complaints . The since accumulating number of pedigrees clearly showed autosomal 43-year-old daughter carried the RyR2 mutation; however, no premature dominant tranmission . Moreover, heterozygote disease causing ventricular contraction or ventricular tachycardia was observed in mutations mainly in FGFR genes were also shown in many sporadic exercise testing . The patient’s granddaughter, a 13-year-old-girl, also cases with unknown entity . Neither a locus nor a gene has been carried the RyR2 mutation and exercise testing showed premature reported for AR form of this disorder as yet . Our study now provides ventricular contractions and short runs of ventricular tachycardia . On an evidence to reconsider a recessively inherited mutation at an beta-blocking drugs, repeated exercise testing showed no ventricular unmapped novel locus predisposing Crouzon-like craniosynostosis arrhythmia’s . Exercise testing in familymembers in whom we did not (Supported by Hacettepe University Research Fund # 0201101010) . find the mutation revealed no abnormalities. Our findings in this family with a novel RyR2 mutation confirm the importance of predictive testing P0086. craniofrontonasal Dysplasia of (asymptomatic) family members during childhood . B. Bozorgmehr, R. Tajbakhsh, S. Mahdavi, S. Nazari; shahid beheshti hospital, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P0084. cranioectodermal dysplasia. A case report We studied 2 affected sisters,aged 17 and16, with frontonasal dysplasia G. Leventopoulos1, S. Psoni1, A. Konstantinidou2, P. Kaminopetros3, E. Kana- and craniosynostosis, born to Iranian nonconsanguineous parents . vakis1, H. Fryssira1; The first child has marked hypertelorism, a broad bifid nose, low 1Medical Genetics University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Pathol- posterior hair line, with a widow’s peak . She has neck webbing, ogy, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 3”Mitera” Maternal rounded shoulders, abnormal clavicles . Her IQ is normal . The second Hospital, Athens, Greece. child has the same problems plus widely spaced teeth . Cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED) is an autosomal recessive Their parents are normal with no other pregnancies or offsprings . We disorder characterized by defects of ectoderm-derived structures found their paternal grand mother had the exact same features that our and characteristic skeletal anomalies . We report on a 3-year-old girl cases have. Surprisingly their father has none of the findings. with CED . She was born at 38th week of gestation due to IUGR and Parent to child transmission has been shown but there is a oligohydramnio and referred to the genetic clinic because of dysmorphic predominance of affected females . Autosomal dominant inheritance features . In patient´s history chronic renal failure associated with renal with some sex limitation seems likely . dysplasia and diabetes insipidus were noticed . On clinical examination developmental delay and low growth parameters (<3rd centile) were P0087. A new craniosynostosis syndrome noticed . C. Azimi1, S. J. Kennedy2, A. S. Teebi3; The child had short upper and lower limbs, frontal bossing, ptosis of 1Dept. of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital, and Dept. of the eyelids, micrognathia, high palate , low set ears with abnormal Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,Tehran University of Medical Sciences, ear helices, brachydactyly with skin syndactyly of the fingers, 2-3 toe- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, syndactyly, abnormal dermatoglyphic pattern,fine sparse hair and The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Division of Clinical and dysplastic nails . Radiologic examination revealed craniosynostosis of Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. the right coronary suture, narrow thorax with dysplastic ribs, bowed Craniosynostosis can be either classified as simple or multiple. When femurs with abnormal upper epiphyses, short ulnae, brachydactyly the sagittal suture is synostotic in conjunction with both coronal , wide metacarpals, short and bowed tibiae, short metatarsals sutures, the membranous bone of the calvaria expands between and triphalangeal hallux. The above findings were indicative of the sutures, resulting in a characteristic lobulated skull configuration acromesomelic dysplasia with craniosynostosis . known as cloverleaf skull such as Carpenter Syndrome . We report on Clinical genetics 11 a patient with bilateral multiple craniosynostosis involving the coronal neurological (34%) and gastrointestinal anomalies (25%) . Exposure and lambdoid sutures .The proposita was the second child born to a conjunctivitis, poor visual acuity and optic atrophy were less frequent healthy non-consanguineous couple . The similar manifestations of the complications (18%) than shown in the literature . Midface hypoplasia Carpenter Syndrome and our case were: Acrocephaly, Brachycephaly, contributed to the development of high-arched palate and probably Cloverleaf skull, Sloping forehead, Upturned nasal tip, Flat nasal bridge, explains the high frequency (55%) of mouth breathing and tooth Epicanthic folds, Hypertelorism, Shallow orbits, Bilateral ptosis,Partial crowding . Congenital heart defects were noticed in 9%, while only one syndactyly of the feet, Micrognathia, High-arched, Short stature, patient had acanthosis nigricans involving eyelids and the skin of the Obesity, AR . Except to the above characteristics, our patient had other neck . Five patients (42%) presented with mental retardation . Molecular manifestations included: Acral anomalies, Vertebral anomalies, High analysis by DGGE and direct sequencing in exons 8,10 of FGFR2 and myopia, Proptosis, Anodontia . There were some typical features in exons 7,10 of FGFR3, revealed mutations in 8 cases . Among the 3 Carpenter Syndrome which we could not find in our case including: FGFR2 mutations that we identified, two were missense substitutions Midfacial hypoplasia, Syndactyly, camptodactyly, Brachydactyly , (Cys342Tyr, Gly338Arg) and one patient was compound heterozygote clinodaclyly & Single flexion crease of the hands, Hypoplasia of the of Phe276Cys/Val277Ala . The most frequent missense mutation in the middle phalanges, Preaxial polydaclyly of the feet, Dysplastic ears, transmembrane domain of FGFR3 was Ala391Glu, while one patient Low-set ears, Genital abnormalities, Sclerocornea, CHD, Mental carried the P250R in exon 7 of FGFR3 . In all familial cases, the origin deficiency, hearing loss. The features of our case were not typical of of mutations was maternal . Detection of the molecular defect in CS any known craniosynostosis syndrome . Search of POSSUM, LDDB allows phenotypic-genotypic correlation, proper genetic counseling and the medical literature uncovered no similar case . The constellation and prenatal diagnosis . of manifestations in this patient suggests a previously unrecognized syndrome resembling Carpenter Syndrome . Therefore, we conclude P0090. subtelomeric FisH analysis in 80 patients with mental that our patient may represent an extension of the Carpenter Syndrome retardation or most probably a new Craniofacial Syndrome . E. Belligni1, J. Messa2, M. De Gregori2, L. Sorasio1, A. Del Monaco1, G. B. Fer- rero1, O. Zuffardi2, M. Silengo1; P0088. Low GABA concentrations in csF in crisponi syndrome: 1Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università di Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Dipartimento di a sign of poor prognosis? Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy. F. Rutsch1, F. Strasser2, P. Gutdeutsch3, T. Reese4, O. Debus1, T. Marquardt1, Mental retardation (MR) affects approximately 1 to 3% of the G. Kurlemann1, C. Jakobs5; general population . The etiology is still poorly understood, and it is 1University Children’s Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 2Pediatric Practice, Nab- estimated that one-half of the cases are due to genetic factors . burg, Germany, 3Municipal Children’s Hospital, Weiden, Germany, 4Mathi- Cryptic subtelomeric aberrations has been found in roughtly 5 asspital, Rheine, Germany, 5VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The to 7% of all cases . We performed a subtelomeric FISH analysis Netherlands. in 80 unrelated mentally retarded children with normal standard In 1996, Giangiorgio Crisponi described a recessive syndrome karyotype ascertained by a checklist that evaluates the grade of characterized by recurrent hyperthermia, truncal hypotonia, facial developmental delay, dysmorphisms, growth defect, and associated contractions, camptodactyly and feeding difficulties. Phenotypic congenital malformations . Nine cryptic chromosomal anomalies have overlap with Schwartz-Jampel syndrome type 2 (Stüve-Wiedemann been identified (11,25%): four de novo deletions of 1p, 6q, 7q, 11p, syndrome) exists . In the original report, Crisponi determined a low respectively, three unbalanced translocations of parental origin, der( level of gamma-amino-butyric acid (GABA) in the cerebrospinal fluid 20)t(16q24;20q13.3)pat; der(6)t(6;1) (p22.3,q44)mat, and a der(7)t(7; (CSF) in an infant, who died at 12 weeks of age . 12)(q34;q24.32)mat, two de novo unbalanced translocations: t(6pter; Our patients (two males and two females) are the offspring of three 6qter) with partial 6q trisomy and 6p monosomy and t(5;10)(pter;qter) unrelated Turkish families . All children presented with perioral with 10q partial trisomy and 5p partial monosomy . Clinical features contractions, dyspnea on exertion and camptodactyly in the neonatal of most of these patients are consistent with the corresponding new period . Bowing of the long bones was not observed . They developed emerging chromosome phenotypes, further supporting the role of truncal hypotonia and recurrent episodes of hyperthermia up to 42°C cryptic subtelomeric analysis in the work-up of children affected by in the first month of life. Because of severe swallowing problems, all mental retardation . children needed a nasogastric feeding tube, which was followed by a percutaneous gastrostomy tube in two of the patients . In the most P0091. Estimation of cystic fibrosis mutation dF508 frequency in severely affected child, low levels of GABA were detected in the Latvia. CSF at the age of 18 and 19 months, respectively . In the three other T. Maculins, L. Kornejeva, A. Krumina; children, CSF-GABA levels were within the normal range . These three RSU, Riga, Latvia. patients are surviving with mild developmental delay, scoliosis and Previous investigation of the mutation frequency in pure Latvian dysautonomia symptoms . The child with the low GABA concentrations individuals (Krumina et al ., 1996), has shown that the average died at the age of 30 months . frequency of dF508 mutation is 1:42 . The estimation of the expected We conclude that Crisponi syndrome can be distinguished from Stüve- CF incidence in the Latvian population showed that the frequency Wiedemann syndrome by the absence of bowing of the long bones . of non-mild CF cases in newborns should be 1:3300 . The average Our data indicate, that low levels of GABA in the CSF of children with number of newborns per year in the period 2000 to 2004 was 20260 . Crisponi syndrome might be associated with a poor prognosis . So, the expected number of CF patients should be 6 per year . However in this 4-year period only 5 new CF patients were registered . This P0089. crouzon syndrome: twelve new Greek patients clinical discrepancy we wanted to explain by the ethnic diversity of Latvian and molecular investigations inhabitants (Russians-28 .6%, Belorussians-3 .82%, Ukranians-2 .55%, H. Frysira1, S. Gryllis1, V. Touliatou1, A. Stratoudakis2, J. Traeger-Synodinos1, Lithuanians-1 .37%) . In these populations, the frequency of dF508 E. Kanavakis1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1; mutation is less common . 1Medical Genetics Laboratory, University of Athens, Choremio Research Labo- The aim of this study was to detect the frequency for dF508 mutation ratory, Athens, Greece, 2Greek Craniofacial Center, Maternity and Surgical in the population of Latvia . 124 individuals were investigated (Latvians- Center “Mitera”, Athens, Greece. 59 .67%, Russians-30 .64%, Belorussians-3 .22%, Ukranians-3 .22%, Crouzon syndrome (CS) is a well-recognized disorder characterised Poles-3 .22%) . DNA diagnosis was performed using phenol-ethanol by cranial synostosis, shallow orbits with proptosis and maxillary DNA extraction method and PCR technique . Four individuals were hypoplasia . It is inherited with an autosomal dominant pattern with found to be carriers of the dF508 mutation . Consequently, the high penetrance and variable expressivity, while 44-67% of cases heterozygote frequency for the population of Latvia for CF dF508 represent new mutations . We present clinical and molecular data of mutation is 1:31 . 12 Greek patients aged 2 months-36 years with a clinical diagnosis of In the beginning of the study it was expected that dF508 mutation CS . Nine cases were sporadic and three familial . The most consistent frequency in the population of Latvia is less than previously reported . findings were craniofacial dysmorphic features (100%), followed by Instead, the mutation was found at a higher rate than it was expected . Clinical genetics 10 Since the expected number of CF patients in Latvia is much greater Background . CF is one of most frequent monogenic diseases in that are presently being diagnosed, the likely explanation is that CF in Caucasians . Latvia is being misdiagnosed . Methods . Was analyzed correlation of genotype and phenotype of 70 patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) from 2 months to 24 years, 43 male, P0092. Genotype-phenotype correlation in cystic fibrosis 27 female . associated liver disease- is it real? Results . By polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment I. M. Popa1, I. Popa1, L. Pop1, L. Tamas2, Z. Popa3; length analysis were identified the following mutations: DF508 - 50%, 1Clinic II Pediatrics, Timisoara, Romania, 2Biochemistry Department University including in 14 .3% of cases homozygote and in 35 .4% -heterozygote, of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babeş” Timişoara, Romania, Timisoara, and R334W - 4 .3% . Romania, 3CF Centre Timişoara, Romania, Timisoara, Romania. DF508 is associated with pancreatic insufficiency (100% homo, 88% Cystic fibrosis(CF) is the most frequent monogenic disease in in heterozygous) . In all homozygous and in 70% heterozygous was Caucasian population, potentialy lethal, with marked clinical variability . revealed severe course of disease . In 30% of patients with DF508 were Hepatobiliary manifestation consists in: elevation of liver enzymes, revealed cases of chronic colonization of sputum by Ps . aeruginosa . In cholestasis, hepatosteatosis, focal biliary cirrhosis, multilobular 35% was decreased nutritive status . The mutation of 7 exon, R334W, cirrhosis, cholelithiasis, microgallbladder . Liver disease is frequently was founded in 4 .3% of cases in compound heterozygote status, with associated with male gender, history of meconium ileus, increase age relative mild course of disease . Was revealed homozygote by metH and severe genotype; therefore questions concerning a genotype- polymorphism, and, despite the early debut in 3 months-old patient phenotype correlation . the disease slow progressing, at present the age of patient is 17, and Aim study: evaluate the genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with status is stable . cystic fibrosis associated liver disease. 85 patients were followed up by In 44.3% the mutations were not identified, in 28.6% of these patients clinical assessment, genetic tests(ElucigeneTM CF29 kit), biochemical suffered from mixed form of CF, 11 .4% from pulmonary form and 4 .3% markers, ultrasound examinations. 42% had hepatobiliary disease; in from intestinal form of CF . The course of disease were severe in 12 .9% 56 children younger then 10 years, only 11% had elevation of liver of patients and moderate in 31 .4% . enzymes, 2 associated neonatal cholestasis and jaundice (ΔF508 Conclusion . DF508 which present in 50% of patients determine homozygous).28% of children (over 10 years) had liver disease; in severity of the disease and life span of patients with CF from Moldova . about 8 % of the patients, multilobular cirrhosis was diagnosed, in The high part of non-identified mutations suggest necessity to improve 4 confirmed at biopsy. Genotype structure of 85 patients revealed molecular diagnosis of CF in Moldova . 32 ΔF508 homozygous genotypes, 22 - ΔF508/X, 5 - non - ΔF508/ X and 26 unknown (X/X), the frequency of ΔF508 allela being 50, P0095. Phenotypic variability in Dandy-Walker complex 58%.Severe liver disease developed in 7 patients, 4 children-ΔF508 C. Jurca, M. Bembea, R. Harbuz, D. Bembea, A. Jurca, M. Platon; homozygous genotype, 1 with 2183AA >G/621+1G>T, 1-ΔF508/ Clinical Children Hospital, Oradea, Romania. G542X, 1-G542X/x. Between 32 ΔF508 homozygous genotypes, only Background: The Dandy-Walker malformation is a rare congenital 13 had a hepatobiliary disease . anomaly characterized by vermis agenesis or hypoplasia, cystical We could not establish a correlation of phenotype and a specific dilatation of the 4th ventricle and a large posterior fossa . The syndrome mutation . Different evolution of cases with same genotype remains is defined by the mere presence of these three signs. The Dandy- unexplained, suggesting that “genetic modifiers“ and/or environmental Walker complex (DWC) includes cystic malformations of the posterior factors influenced disease expression. (Study performed through fossa, such as Dandy-Walker malformation, Dandy-Walker variant, Grant Research Programme-CNCSIS A/1188/2004) mega cysterna magna and posterior fossa arachnoid cyst . Objective . Presentation and discussion of three cases with different P0093. Detection of mutations in patients suspected of cystic morphologic and clinical forms of the Dandy-Walker complex . In fibrosis all three cases, diagnosis was reached by incorporation of clinical N. Nalbandyan, A. Arakelyan; (macrocephaly, seizures) and imaging (X-ray, CT, MRI) data . Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia. Results . Patient #1 was diagnosed with Dandy-Walker syndrome . Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common severe inherited disease in Patient #2 was diagnosed with a posterior fossa arachnoid cyst, left- Caucasians, occurring in approximately 1 in 2500 births . It results sided Claude-Bernard-Horner syndrome, congenital heart disease from mutations in the CFTR gene, a transmembrane chloride ion (coarctation of the aorta, mitral stenosis) and gastroesophageal channel . The defect in the chloride channel leads to a viscous mucous reflux. Patient #3 was diagnosed with Dandy-Walker variant in a rare production which, in turn leads to pathology in primarily three organ association with neurofibromatosis. systems . The classic form of CF involves chronic pulmonary disease, Conclusions . Dandy-Walker complex is a malformative association pancreatic insufficiency and infertility. Although there is wide range of of the central nervous system . Its clinical, radiological and functional clinical expression, most individuals with CF experience substantial manifestations are variable and require adequate diagnostic and morbidity and require lifelong care . therapeutic measures . There is no data of this mutation and frequencies of carriers in Armenian population . In 55 patients with a clinical suspicion of CF P0096. Low sperm motility due to mitochondrial DNA multiple molecular testing has been performed for 25 frequent mutations deletions and 8 polymorphisms . The genotyping analysis of these patients M. H. Salehi1, M. Houshmand2, A. Bidmeshkipour1, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi3; revealed mutations in 8 cases. The detected mutation are ΔF508(1 1Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Razi University, Baghabrisham, case), and 3659delC ; 2184delA in compound heterozygote (7 cases). Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetic, Na- There have also been detected Poly(T)-5,7 or 9 polymorphisms . The tional Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic important difference with Poly(T) testing is that the role of 5T depends Republic of Iran, 3Department of Medical Genetic, National Institute for Genetic on its relationship with R117H and that 5T variant alone was not Engineering and Biotechnology, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran. usually associated with classic CF . It is important testing in CF carrier There is increasing evidence that mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) screening, because if one parent has R117H and 5T together on one anomalies in sperm may lead to infertility . Point mutations, deletions chromosome and the other parent carries another CF mutation, their and depletion have been associated with decline of fertility and motility children are at risk for having classic CF . of human sperm . It has been proposed that mtDNA genetic alterations can also be responsible for sperm dysfunction . Sperm motility is one P0094. Phenotypic and genotypic peculiarities of cystic fibrosis of the major determinants of male fertility and is required for successful in Republic of moldova fertilization . N. I. Barbova1, V. V. Egorov2, A. P. Gavriliuc2; It is becoming increasingly evident that both point mutations and large- 1State University of Medicine and Pharmaceutics “N. Testemitsanu, Chisinau, scale deletions may have an impact on sperm motility and morphology . Republic of Moldova, 2National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical In this study we investigated association between occurrence of Genetics, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. mtDNA Δ4977 bp deletion with diminished fertility and motility of Clinical genetics 11 human spermatozoa . The possible relationship between multiple P0099. Denys-Drash syndrome and gonadoblastoma in a patient deletions of mtDNA and the decline of fertility and motility in human with Klinefelter syndrome spermatozoa was further explored in 50 subjects including sub-fertile G. A. Tanteles1, S. Oakley2, M. Christian3, D. O’Neill2, M. Suri1; and infertile males . Our results showed that the ratio of the deleted 1Clinical Genetics Service, Nottingham City Hospital, Nottingham, United King- mtDNA in the spermatozoa with poor motility and diminished fertility dom, 2Department of Pathology, Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham, United were significantly higher than those in the spermatozoa with good Kingdom, 3Children and Young People’s Kidney Unit, Nottingham City Hospital, motility and fertility. Our findings suggest that mutation and deletion Nottingham, United Kingdom. may play an important role in some pathophysiological conditions of Denys-Drash syndrome (DDS) is characterised by the triad of human spermatozoa. congenital or early-onset nephropathy, male pseudohermaphrodism and Wilms’ tumour . It is caused by constitutional heterozygous exonic P0097. Deletion of the short arm of chromosome 18-case point mutations in WT1 . We report a phenotypically female child presentation with congenital nephropathy associated with end-stage renal failure, M. S. Militaru, R. A. Popp, E. Dronca, I. V. Pop, M. Militaru; Klinefelter syndrome (47, XXY) and a heterozygous missense mutation University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (c .1180C>T, p .R394W) in the WT1 gene . She underwent nephrectomy The objective of the presentation is a case of holoprosencephaly because of the risk of Wilms‘ tumour, and gonadectomy because of the in a newborn with structural anomaly of chromosome 18 .The risk of gonadoblastoma . Histology of her kidneys revealed mesangial diagnosis was established on the basis of clinical history,clinical glomerulosclerosis and the presence of dysplastic tubules with no examination,caryotyping and imagistic investigations .There is a case of evidence of Wilms’ tumour . Examination of the dysgenetic gonads female newborn of 36 weeks of gestation .In clinical examination there revealed ovarian stroma showing bilateral unifocal gonadoblastomas . is a craniofacial dismorphism,with microcephaly,low implantation of the To the best of our knowledge this is the first reported patient of DDS ear lobe,celocephaly and proboscis nasi .A respiratory failure is present with Klinefelter syndrome . Gonadoblastoma has been previously due to surfactant deficiency and nasal anomaly.Cerebral sonography reported in association with DDS . confirms the presence of a single ventricular chamber of increased dimensions,separated cervical plexus and separated thalamic nuclei . P0100. Prevalence of Lim Domain-Binding 3 (LDB3) gene Radiography of the facial bones confirms the absence of nasal septum mutations in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. and the caryotype analysis (G-banding) confirms female gender M. Grasso1, A. Pilotto2, N. Marziliano1, M. Pasotti3, M. L. Rossi4, C. Campana3, and deletion of the short arm of chromosome 18(46,xx,18p-) .Based A. Gavazzi5, L. Tavazzi3, E. Arbustini1, A. Brega6; on the above presented data,the case was diagnosed as non-lobar 1Center for Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases-IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, holoprosencephaly with the deletion of the short arm of chromosome Pavia, Italy, 2IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Cardiology Depart- 18 and respiratory failure .The only therapeutic care was the palliative ment-IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 4Cardiology Unit-Istituto one,in a severe cerebral anomaly with associated mental retardation . Clinico Humanitas, Rozzano-Milan, Italy, 5Cardiology Department-Ospedali Key word:newborn,holoprosencephaly,chromosome 18 deletion Riuniti Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy, 6Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. P0098. Female with partial turner syndrome, normal Familial Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDCM) is a genetically menstruation, deletion Xp22.33, and duplication Xp22.12- heterogeneous . Disease . Among disease-causing genes, LDB3 22.32 analysed using array-based Multiplex Amplifiable Probe (MIM+605906) mapping at 10q22 .2-q23 .3) has been recently reported Hybridisation (array-mAPH) as causally linked to both non-compaction left ventricle (NCLV) and H. Puusepp1,2, R. Zordania3, K. Männik1, L. Kousoulidou4, C. Sismani4, O. IDCM . DB3 encodes a protein that is a component of the Z-line in both Bartsch5, P. C. Patsalis4, K. Õunap2,6, A. Kurg1; skeletal and cardiac muscle . Recent studies have demonstrated that 1Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Uni- LDB3 knock-out mice develop cardiomyopathy and that defects of the versity of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, gene may cause familial IDCM . Six mayor cDNA isoforms of LDB3 Tartu, Estonia, 3Tallinn Children’s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 4Department of have been identified in human striated muscle and are generated by Cytogenetics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, alternative splicing of a single gene . 5Department of Human Genetics, University Clinic, Mainz, Germany, 6Medical We screened the LDB3 gene in 115 unrelated index patients Genetics Center, United Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia. diagnosed with IDCM according to WHO criteria . The gene screening Mosaics and partial deletions or duplications of the chromosome X was performed by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography result in different degrees of the Turner syndrome . Minimal deletions of (DHPLC) and bidirectional sequencing of hteroduplex amplicons . chromosome Xp including SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing Five mutations were identified in six probands (5,21%): D117N (2 gene) can cause short stature, short metacarpals, cubitus valgus, unrelated probands), S196L (one proband), T358A (one proband), Madelung deformity, high arched palate, and/or short neck . The T357I (one proband), V588I (one proband) (known mutations are proposita was born at term, weight was 2,300 g and length 45 cm . At in bold) . The Val588Ile, although reported as rare polymorphism, the age of fourteen years she consulted a geneticist because of short was absent in 120 healthy controls . None of the patients showed stature . Height was 140 .2 cm (-5 SD), weight 43 .5 kg (-2 SD), and OFC echocardiographic features suggestive for NCLV according to Chin et 54 cm (-0 .5 SD) . Findings included low occipital hairline, numerous al . and McKenna et al . criteria . pigmented nevi, Madelung deformity, normal pubertal development We confirm LDB3 gene as candidate gene for familial IDCM, and growth hormone deficiency. Karyotyping from peripheral blood independently on echocardiographic pattern of NCLV . The prevalence revealed a chromosome Xp rearrangement . Fluorescent in situ of the LDB3 gene mutations in a consecutive series of more than 100 hybridization (FISH) showed a complex aberration with a distal patients is 5%. Despite the description of NCLV as specific feature Xp22 .3 deletion including the SHOX gene and a proximal Xp22 .3 associated with LDB3 gene mutation the clinical phenotype did not duplication including the STS gene. Array-based multiplex amplifiable show specific clinical markers. probe hybridization (array-MAPH, Patsalis et al. EJMG 2005; 48:241- 9) revealed a duplication spanning from Xp22 .12 to p22 .32 . Array- P0101. mutational analysis in a family with Autosomal Dominant MAPH results were confirmed using FISH with BAC clones. The final Optic Atrophy (ADOA). karyotype was 46,Xadd(X)(p) ish der(X)(wcpX+,SHOX-,STS++,RP11- A. La Russa, R. Cittadella, M. Liguori, V. Andreoli, I. Manna; 431J24++,RP11-160F21++,RP11-326G24++,RP1-60N8++,RP11- Institute of Neurological Science, National Research Council,, Cosenza, Italy. 88F09++,RP11-406A18++,RP11-261M11+,DXZ1+) . In conclusion, Autosomal dominant optic atrophy (ADOA) is the most prevalent the proposita has a rare complex rearrangement of the distal part hereditary optic neuropathy of chromosome Xp . The case demonstrates that array-MAPH is resulting in progressive loss of visual acuity, centrocoecal scotoma and a powerful and convenient technique for analyzing small complex bilateral temporal atrophy of the optic nerve with an onset within the chromosome rearrangements . first two decades of life. Genetic linkage analyses localized a dominant atrophy gene (OPA1) to chromosome 3q28-qter, and mutations of the OPA1 gene in familial ADOA were identified.Clinical genetics 1 We present an ADOA Italian family with four related affected females . hydrocephaly, X-ray - dysplastic ribs with partially accretion . Cardiac The purpose of this study was 2-fold: to determine the types and ultrasonography showed stenosis of a . pulmonalis, dilatation right size frequency of matations in OPA1 which caused ADOA in our family, of the heart . Renal abnormalities have included hypoplastic kidney and to determine whether a second condition, Leber’s hereditary optic with renal dysfunction . neuropathy with a similar pathology to ADOA, could also be caused by In our patient we detected a de novo duplication of the short arm mutations in OPA1 . of chromosome 6 identified on a 400 band chromosomal analysis. For this, initially we screened the proband and the family members for Cytogenetic analysis was performed from GTG banded metaphases . the 3460A, 11778A, and 14484C LHON mutations by PCR amplification The girl‘s karyotype was 46, XX, dup(6)(pter→p21). Parental followed by mutation-specific restriction endonuclease digestion, but karyotypes were normal . this search was negative . The analysis of the entire coding region of the OPA1 gene by direct sequencing of PCR- amplified exons in all P0104. Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa pruriginosa in italy: familial cases revealed four polymorphisms described previuosly : molecular characterization and pathogenetic aspects 473G in exon 4, 2109T in exon 21, +51G, and +25A . The molecular B. Drera1, D. Castiglia2, N. Zoppi1, R. Gardella1, G. Tadini3, N. De Luca2, C. analysis of other asymptomatic members of family confirmed the same Pedicelli4, S. Barlati1, G. Zambruno2, M. Colombi1; polymorphisms . 1Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Biomedical Sciences and These data suggest that OPA1 gene is not involved in ADOA in our Biotechnology, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 2Laboratory of Molecular family . and Cellular Biology, Istituto Dermopatico dell’Immacolata IRCCS, Rome, Italy, Further studies are required to identify the causative ADOA gene in 3Institute of Dermatological Sciences, Policlinico IRCCS, Milan, Italy, 4VII Divi- this family and to delineate the role of this locus . sion of Dermatology, Istituto Dermopatico dell’Immacolata IRCCS, Rome, Italy. Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa pruriginosa (DEB-Pr) is a rare variant P0102. the meiotic stage of chromosome 21 nondisjunction as of DEB due to COL7A1 dominant and recessive mutations which indicated by stR polymorphic markers among Down syndromes is characterized by severe itching and lichenoid or nodular prurigo- in iran like lesions mainly involving the extremities . Less than 20 patients S. Aleyasin, S. Rezaee; have been described showing variable disease expression and, National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic frequently, delayed age of onset . We report the clinical and molecular Republic of Iran. characterization of 7 Italian DEB-Pr patients, 3 with recessive DEB-Pr Down syndrome is one of the main causes of mental and growth (RDEB-Pr) and 4 with dominant DEB-Pr (DDEB-Pr) . In all patients the retardation mainly happened due to chromosome 21 nondisjunction . signs were typical of a mild DEB phenotype, until the pruritus onset, This is the first study in Iran categorizing cases of Down syndromes after which the distinctive skin lesions of DEB-Pr appeared . Nine by parental origin and stage of meiotic error of chromosome 21 . mutations were disclosed in COL7A1, 5 recessive and 4 dominant . We studied 224 families having a child with Down syndrome using These mutations allowed in all patients the production of a given conventional cytogenetic analysis and chromosome 21 specific STR amount of partially functional type VII collagen (COLLVII), detected at markers (D21S11, D21S1414, D21S1440, D21S1411, D21S1412) . the dermal-epidermal junction (DEJ) . Three mutations were novel, and Parental origin and stage of meiotic error were studied using five one arose de novo . Furthermore, 2 unrelated RDEB-Pr patients were STR markers . Meiotic nondisjunction of chromosome 21 was studied carrying the recurrent c .7344G>A Italian mutation and 2 unrelated in 202 cases with free chromosome 21 . The parental origin and the DDEB-Pr patients were carrying 2 different mutations in intron 87, meiotic stage of chromosome 21 nondisjunction were detected in leading to the in frame skipping of exon 87. In order to find factors 190 of cases . Parental origin of nondisjunctions were derived as 167 involved in the pathogenesis of DEB-Pr, we analysed the patients skin (88%) maternal and 23 (12%) paternal . In maternally derived cases, for the presence of Igs by direct immunofluorescence. In a patient IgG meiotic I nondisjunction was observed in 121 (64%) and meiosis II and C3 linear deposits along the DEJ were present, in another IgM in 46 (24%) of cases whereas in paternally derived cases meiosis deposits were detected in the same location . These results underline I was detected in 13 (7%) and meiosis II in 10 (5%) cases . There for the first time the possible involvement of immunological factors, was no significant difference in the distribution of maternal ages likely an antibody-mediated autoimmune reaction, at least in some between maternal meiosis I error versus maternal meiosis II error . DEB-Pr patients . It is unexpected that a nondisjunction at especial of maternal ages between maternal meiosis I error against maternal II error, related P0105. the genetic causes of early onset hereditary hearing loss significantly to the rising incidence of Down syndrome with advancing among Estonian children maternal age . This data is usable in analysis of maternal and paternal R. Teek1,2, E. Raukas2, E. Oitmaa3, K. Kruustük4, R. Zordania5, K. Joost5, M. genetic or environmental risk factors to understand better the cause of Kull1, K. Õunap2,6; chromosome 21 trisomy . 1Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2United Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 3Asper Biotech, P0103. the partial trisomy for the distal short arm of Tartu, Estonia, 4Ear Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 5Tallinn chromosome 6 (region pter→p21) in a girl with psychomotor Children’s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 6Department of Pediatrics, University of development delay and dysmorphic features Tartu, Tartu, Austria. A. Matulevičienė1, B. Aleksiūnienė1, E. Zarakauskaitė2, V. Kučinskas1,2; During last 6 years (2000-2005) 119 children with early onset hearing 1Medical Genetics Center, Vilnius University Hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Dept. loss, as a main complaint, have been referred to genetic counseling . Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. Eighty five percent of them had moderate to profound and 9% mild We report a girl presenting a de novo partial trisomy for the distal short bilateral hearing loss (sensorineural, conductive or mixed); 6% of arm of the chromosome 6. Our patient is a two-year-old girl, first child patients had unspecified hearing loss. of healthy non consanguineous parents from complicated pregnancy Careful clinical investigation was performed in all of them for excluding with symptoms of miscarriage . The dysmorphic features were seen syndromic hereditary impaired hearing (HIH) . Since 1999 we have from the birth of this girl . Facial dysmorphism is characterized by a investigated 35delG mutation in GJB2 gene, which encodes the microcephaly, craniosynostosis, facial asymmetry, high, prominent gap junction protein connexin-26 . Since 2005 we have investigated forehead with depressed frontal bone on the right size, ocular the genotype of the children with HIH by arrayed primer extension hypertelorism, blepharophimosis/short palpebral fissures, ptosis, flat (APEX) method, which covers 201 mutations in 8 genes (6 nuclear nasal root, very short nose, long philtrum, thin lips, small mouth, high genes: GJB2, Connexin-30, Connexin-31, Connexin-43, Prestin and arched palate, simple, low-set pinnae with poorly developed lobes and Pendrin gene, and 2 mitochondrial genes: 12S-ribonuclear-RNA and small chin. Unusual dermatoglyphic changes are identified on the girl‘s the transfer RNA for serine gene) . palms . The nipples are hypoplastic and abnormally placed from each Thirty eight patients (32%) were homozygous for 35delG mutation other . There are expressed hirsutism on the pubic bone area . The in GJB2 gene, 15 (13%) were heterozygous for 35delG mutation, short stature attends this partial trisomy . and in 9 of them the mutation in the second allele has already been Clinical follow-up showed these clinical findings: CT scan showed mild identified (35delG/R143W, 35delG/167delT, 35delG/M34T, 35delG/Clinical genetics 1 312del14, and 35delG/IVS1+G>A genotypes) . One patient was P0108. EEc syndromes and p63 mutation compound heterozygote for R143W/M34T mutations in GJB2 gene . B. Çolak1, N. H. Elcioglu1, Ö. Çelebiler2, M. U. Erdim2, H. Scheffer3; In one patient with profound bilateral sensorineural hearing loss M34T 1Department of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University Hospital, Istanbul, mutation was found in one allele of GJB2 gene and F335L mutation in Turkey, 2Department of Plastic Surgey, Marmara University Hospital, Istanbul, one allele of Pendrin gene. In 6 patients syndromic HIH was identified Turkey, 3Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, (branchio-oto-renal, Leopard, Stickler, Klippel-Feil syndrome and The Netherlands. neurofibromatosis). Ectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-clefting (EEC) syndrome is a rare In summary, 55 patients (46%) the exact etiology of HIH was identified, autosomal dominat multiple congenital anomaly syndrome with variable in 49 (42%) of them nonsyndromic HIH and in 6 (5%) of them syndromic expression and penetrance . The most common clinical features are HIH . ectodermal dysplasia, ectrodactyly (distal limb anomaly), cleft lip/ palate, lacrimal duct and urogenital anomalies with usually normal mental P0106. mutations in the EDAR gene are not uncommon among development . EECs has been shown clinical and genetic heterogeneity patients with hypohydrotic ectodermal dysplasia. and linked to chromosome 7q11 .2-q .21 .3 (EEC1), chromosome H. Gabriel1, B. Heye2, A. Gencik1; 19 (EEC2) and to chromosome 3p27 (EEC3) where heterozygous 1Zentrum fuer Medizinische Genetik, Osnabrueck, Germany, 2Institut fuer Hu- p63mutations were detected in unrelated EEC families . The p63 gene mangenetik, Klinikum rechts der Isar der TU München, Munich, Germany. is a transcriptional co-activator and is of crucial importance for correct Ectodermal dysplasia is a genetic heterogenous disorder characterized development of the limbs, ectodermal appendages (skin, nails, teeth, by malformation of teeth, sparse hair and the lack or reduced number hair, glands), lip and palate . Several autosomal dominantly inherited of sweat glands . Mutations in the ED1 gene cause X-linked ectodermal human syndromes have recently been shown to result from mutations dysplasia . in the p63 gene . These syndromes have various combinations of limb Autosomal forms result from mutations in either the EDAR gene or the malformations fitting the split hand-split foot spectrum, orofacial clefting, EDARADD gene . There have been only a few publications reporting and ectodermal dysplasia with some overlapping features . The p63 mutations in the EDAR gene . To evaluate the contribution of EDAR syndrome family includes the EEC syndrome, AEC syndrome (eyelid mutations, we analysed 8 families with clinical symptoms of ectodermal adhesion/ ankyloblepharon-ectodermal dysplasia-clefting), ADULT dysplasia so far . All patients where previously tested negative for ED1 syndrome (acro-dermato-ungual-lacrimal-tooth), Limb-mammary mutations . syndrome (LMS), and non-syndromic split hand/split-foot malformation In a large german kindred with 9 affected family members the mutation (SHFM). The specific pattern of heterozygous mutations is distinct for Arg420Gln was detected in EDAR . The index patient is the youngest each of these syndromes and the functional effects on the p63 proteins affected member of the family . She has only six molars, which was the also vary as well . In all of these syndromes, the mutation appears to reason to finally ask for genetic counselling. Missing front teeth and have dominant negative effect with gain of new function . Four isolated reduced ability to sweat are known in this family . Only the affected cases quoted from the joint- cleft clinic, with a wide clinical spectrum of grandmother shows very thin hair . In this family the phenotype of EEC Syndrome and their p63 gene screening, including one mutation ectodermal dysplasia is variable . result, will be presented . In a sporadic case we detected a novel compound heterozygous point mutation: Glu379Lys inherited from the father and the splice P0109. intrafamiliar phenotype heterogeneity associated with site mutation IVS5+1ds G>A inherited from the mother . Neither the p63 mutation - case report mother nor the father show clinical features of ectodermal dysplasia A. Puchmajerová1, A. Krepelova1, A. Baxova2, P. Goetz1, M. Cerny3, M. Hav- suggesting a recessive trait . lovicova1; Finally, in another german family the novel dominant mutation 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, University Hos- 1165delGA was detected . pital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, In conclusion we think that mutations in the EDAR gene are more 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department common than it was thought . Testing for EDAR mutations should be of Neonatology, 2nd Medical Faculty, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech considered in all cases tested negative for the X-linked form . Republic. Ectrodactyly-Ectodermal dysplasia-Clefting syndrome (EEC) is a P0107. Familial ectopia lentis in three generation rare AD condition with variable expression, results from specific C. C. Albu, E. Severin, D. F. Albu; mutations in the p63 gene located on 3q27 . Ectrodactyly is the defect “Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. in midportion of hands and feet . Ectodermal dysplasia consists of We report a case of ectopia lentis in a three-generation family in which the anomalies of skin and its adnexa, partial anodontia, microdontia, blue proband has a less severe ocular phenotype and a few manifestations irides, photophobia, defects of lacrimal duct system . Clefting include of Marfan syndrome in the skeletal system . Objectives: to describe cleft lip and/or palate . Another anomalies include congenital defects of and compare clinical manifestations of ectopia lentis in younger and genitourinary tract . older generations; to study the phenotype-genotype correlation. We report the case of a 35 years old pregnant woman with cleft lip and Patients and methods: five affected persons from three generations palate, hypacusis, photophobia, defect of lacrimal duct system, sparse were investigated; evaluation included physical examination and a hair, ectrodactyly of hands and feet, nail dysplasia . Prenatal ultrasound detailed family history . Ocular examination included visual acuity and diagnosed in the fetus cleft lip, left hand ectrodactyly and mild unilater visual field testing, retinoscopy and refraction, slit lamp examination, hydronephrosis . Mother decided to continue the pregnancy, which fluorescein angiography. Results: the clinical expression of lens was uneventfull . The boy was born at term, without any afterbirth dislocation was variable in this family . The family pedigree showed an complications . He had cleft lip and palate, sparse hair, nail dysplasia, autosomal dominant mode of inheritance with complete penetrance deficit of the 2nd finger and syndactyly of the 3rd and 4th fingers on and variable expressivity . Consanguinity was not present in this his left hand . There were no other abnormalities on the extremities . family . Family history was remarkable because grandmother and Subsequent mutation analysis of the p63 gene of mother and her mother’s siblings of our patient expressed severe phenotype of marfan newborn son, performed after delivery, revealed heterozygosity for syndrome-associated ectopia lentis (severe ocular, musculoskeletal, a mutation in exon 5 (R204Q) This mutation has previously been cardiovascular and dermatological manifestations) . The patient and described in association with EEC syndrome . his mother shared similar phenotype (less severe than their relatives) . Our case documents intrafamiliar phenotype heterogeneity associated All cases were defined by clinical signs and submitted to surgery for with p63 mutations . correction of ectopia lentis . conclusions: ectopia lentis is a hereditary The parents are planning further pregnancy and they decided to condition with clinical variation; surgical results depend on the severity terminate it in case of handicapped fetus . Discovery of the causal of the phenotype; molecular-genetic data should be integrated with the mutation enables us to perform prenatal diagnosis of EEC syndrome . corresponding clinical findings. Supported by MZO00000064203Clinical genetics 1 P0110. New cases with ectrodactyly, ecdodermal dysplasia and chromosomes) was performed . Two repetitive regions on factor VIII macular degeneration syndrome including one in intron 13 and the other in intron 22 were amplified and M. S. Yıldırım1, T. C. Ogun2, U. Kamiş3, H. Acar1; resolved on 10% polyacrylamide gel and detected by silver staining . 1Selcuk Unıversıty, Department of Medıcal Genetics, Konya, Turkey, 2Selcuk Results: Different allelic bands were used as markers . These markers Unıversıty, Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Konya, Turkey, 3Sel- were made by the recovery of each band and T/A cloning of them . cuk Unıversıty, Department of Ophtalmology, Konya, Turkey. Studies have shown that there are six (18-23) allelic markers for intron EEM Syndrome (ectodermal dysplasia, ectrodactyly, macular 13 . Sequencing analysis of intron 22 had shown two repetitive units degeneration) is a very rare condition characterised by ectodermal including AG (6-7) and GT (16-18) . This made it polymorphic but the dysplasia, ectrodactyly and macular dystrophy . In addition to this a differences between each unit were identified by direct sequencing or number of other abnormalities such as alopesia, cataract, absent SSCP . eyebrows, oligodontia are the syndrome. The entity was defined conclusion: Haplotype analysis of these intragenic dinucleotide as the EEM syndrome . The ocular fundus is identical for EEM repeats has shown to be more informative than RFLP analysis and syndrome which is separated from the other ectrodactyly syndromes . could help us to provide carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis for We report one brothers and one sister with EEM syndrome born to familial cases . Although dinucleotides are polymorphic they may lead consanguineous parents . In contrast to other ectrodactyly syndromes us to genotyping errors of heterozygotes and homozygotes in the autosomal recessive inheritance is most likely . The proband is a 34 studied population . year old woman. Her parents were first cousins and had no signs of ectrodactyly or ectodermal dysplasia . Her brother of the proband was P0113. the neonatal exons 24-32 FBN1 region: clinical and 36 years old with clinical features of EEM similar to those of the first mutation type analysis from an international series of 1057 proband upon examination . One of their brothers having the features of probands with a pathogenic FBN1 mutation the EEM syndrome also died at 45 years of age . The following reports L. Faivre1, G. Collod-Beroud2, A. Child3, B. Callewaert4, C. Binquet5, E. Gauti- of a brother and sister contribute to the existing knowledge on this rare er5, E. Arbustini6, K. Mayer7, A. Kiotsekoglou3, C. Bonithon-Kopp5, C. Beroud2, syndrome, and may help further identify its features . M. Claustres2, P. Comeglio3, C. Muti8, H. Plauchu9, P. Robinson10, U. Francke11, J. De Backer4, P. Coucke4, L. Ades12, A. De Paepe4, G. Jondeau8, C. Boileau13; P0111. A cellular test for Ehlers-Danlos syndromes diagnosis 1Departement de Genetique, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de Genetique Molécu- M. Colombi1, N. Zoppi1, P. J. Coucke2, M. Mottes3, A. De Paepe2, S. Barlati1; laire, Montpellier, France, 3Departement of Cardiological Sciences, London, 1Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Bio- United Kingdom, 4Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 5Centre d’Epidemiologie technology, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Clinique - Investigation clinique, Dijon, France, 6Molecular diagnostic Unit, University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 3Division of Biology and Genetics, Pavia, Italy, 7Molecular Genetics, Martinsried, Germany, 8Consultation Pluri- Department of Mother and Child, Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, disciplinaire Marfan, Hopital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France, 9Service de Verona, Italy. Genetique, Lyon, France, 10Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Berlin, Germany, Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDSs) are hereditary connective tissue 11Department of Genetics and Pediatrics, Stanford, CA, United States, 12Depart- disorders with clinical, genetic and allelic heterogeneity . In the six ment of Paediatrics, Sydney, Australia, 13Laboratoire de Genetique Moléculaire, EDS forms, mutations in genes encoding type I, III and V collagens Hopital Ambroise Pare, Boulogne, France. (COLI, III, V), lysyl hydroxylase, ADAMTS-2 and tenascin X have been Mutations in the FBN1 gene cause Marfan syndrome (MFS) and a wide reported . EDS patients clinical diagnosis, following the Villefranche range of overlapping phenotypes . The severe end of the spectrum is Nosology criteria, must be confirmed at molecular level. Protein and represented by neonatal MFS (nMFS), the vast majority of probands mutation characterization are performed starting from cultured patients carrying a mutation within exons 24-32 . To assess patients carrying a skin fibroblasts. We report a cellular test for EDSs fibroblasts based mutation in this so-called neonatal region, we compared the clinical on the immunofluorescence analysis of a panel of proteins involved and molecular characteristics of 207 probands (20%) with a mutation in the formation and organization of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of in exons 24-32 with patients carrying a mutation in other exons from cultured cells. Skin fibroblasts derived from 27 patients affected with a series of 1057 probands . 25% of patients with a mutation in exons the different EDSs showed the absence of fibronectin (FN) and fibrillin1 24-32 presented a nMFS phenotype . Patients with a mutation in exons (FBN1) ECM, disorganization of their receptor, the α5β1 integrin, and 24-32 presented earlier manifestations than patients with mutations organization of the alternative αvβ3 integrin receptor (FN-FBN1-α5β1- located elsewhere (p<0 .0001), including younger age at diagnosis of αvβ3+). Six control fibroblasts strains showed an FN+FBN1+α5β1+αvβ3- MFS (50% at 8 years vs 25 years), at diagnosis of scoliosis (50% at phenotype . Fibroblasts derived from other connective tissue disorders 16 years vs 30 years), ectopia lentis (50% at 22 years vs 33 years), (15 strains), showed different patterns and combination these proteins aortic dilatation (50% at 13 years vs 30 years), aortic surgery (50% organization . Therefore, the FN-FBN1-α5β1-αvβ3+ phenotype seems to at 37 years vs 46 years) and shorter survival (79 .4% at 30 years vs be specific for EDS fibroblasts. In addition to these markers, specific 98 .8%) . Similar results were found if patients with neonatal MFS were alterations were identified in the different EDSs, i.e. lack of: COLV- and excluded . Mitral valve abnormalities and joint contractures were over- COLIII-ECM in classic EDS; COLIII-ECM in vascular EDS; tenascins represented (p<0 .0001) . Also, an over-representation of missense in hypermobile EDS; COLI and COLIII in kyphoscoliotic EDS; COLI-, mutations and an under-representation of non sense mutations COLIII- and COLV-ECM in arthrochalasic EDS . Further analysis on a were noted (p<0 .0001) . When considering the overall results of larger number of EDS cells mutants will allow to verify if these markers the genotype-phenotype correlation study in patients with a FBN1 are a common feature and may address the molecular analysis . mutation, it appears that the location of mutations within exons 24-32 is the main severity criterion for Marfan syndrome . P0112. Using short tandem repeats for carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis of factor Viii gene in iranian population P0114. Expanding the clinical spectrum of mYcN related Feingold syndrome A. Rabbani, B. Rabbani, H. Khanahamd, E. Kamali, S. Dehghanizadeh, R. Habibi, Z. Moghaddam, E. Shafieiyeh, F. Maryami, B. Zarbakhsh, M. Moham- A. Tészás1, R. Meijer2, H. Scheffer2, G. Kosztolányi1,3, H. van Bokhoven2, R. madi, M. Nosaeed, S. Zeinali; Kellermayer1; Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Re- 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, public of Iran. Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Background: Patients affected with hemophilia A are due to lack Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3MTA-PTE Clinical Genetics Re- of factor VIII protein in the coagulation cascade . Factor VIII gene is search Group, Pécs, Hungary. located on Xq28 and comprises 26 exons . There is a need for genetic Feingold syndrome (MIM#164280) is an autosomal dominant counseling despite the improvement of replacement therapies . Using disorder characterized by variable combinations of microcephaly, polymorphic markers in linkage studies would help in carrier detection limb malformations, oesophageal and duodenal atresias and learning and prenatal diagnosis . In this report we investigated the frequency of disability/mental retardation . Hand and foot abnormalities may two short tandem repeats on factor VIII gene in Iranian population . include hypoplastic thumbs, clinodactyly of second and fifth fingers, methods: DNA amplification of 70 unrelated individuals (93 X syndactyly (characteristically between second-third and fourth-fifth Clinical genetics 1 toes), and shortened or absent middle phalanges . Cardiac and renal sites . Together, these data suggest that the breakpoint occurred within malformations, vertebral anomalies and deafness have also been an aphidicolin sensitive fragile site, expressed in the father . It is the described in a minority of patients . As a result of the versatile clinical first time that an aphidicolin induced fragile site may be linked to in vivo picture, this entity has also been reported as ODED (oculo-duodeno- chromosome breakage in the progeny . esophageal-digital) syndrome, microcephaly-oculo-digito-esophageal- Further study is necessary to investigate whether disturbances in this duodenal syndrome and MMT (microcephaly-mesobrachyphalangy- cascade could possibly be responsible for the clinical symptoms of the tracheoesophageal-fistula) syndrome. However, some of the variable Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome . features of Feingold syndrome are included in “microcephaly-digital abnormalities-normal intelligence” (MIM#602585), described as P0117. Population screening for Fragile X syndrome in children an independent, distinct condition . The critical region of Feingold using antiFmRP test syndrome was mapped to chromosome 2p23-p24 (Celli et al ., C. Rusu1, F. Zugun2, A. Sireteanu3, L. Butnariu1; 2003) and a recent article revealed MYCN (2p24 .1), as a causative 1University of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, Romania, 2Uni- gene in Feingold syndrome (Bokhoven et al ., 2005) . We report on versity of Medicine, Department of Immunology, Iasi, Romania, 3Children’s two unrelated patients - expressing variable features of Feingold Hospital, Iasi, Romania. syndrome - who carry novel mutation of MYCN . One of their mothers Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is a common genetic cause of mental carries the pathogenic mutation, but only possesses the clinical retardation . Clinical picture is very mild in children . Our previous studies phenotype of “microcephaly-digital abnormalities-normal intelligence” revealed a relatively low frequency of FXS in Romanian population . disorder. Our cases highlight the significantly variable expressivity of For this reason and because DNA tests are not yet available on a large MYCN mutations in Feingold syndrome and support evidence that scale we have introduced a population screening using antiFMRP “microcephaly-digital abnormalities-normal intelligence” represents a immunohistochemical test . We have examined 254 children with mild form of this genetic entity . delayed speech/ MR/ autism/ family history of MR or autism . We have applied a diagnostic score for children and selected 103 cases that P0115. Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva: a case with were tested with antiFMRP test (done both on hair root and blood cells) . calcification of papillary muscle of left ventricle. Following the identification of the affected children, we have examined K. Boduroglu, G. Cinel, Y. Alanay, I. Devrim, T. Karagoz, G. Secmeer; their families to identify new cases . Finally, 15 affected individuals HACETTEPE UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL, ANKARA, Turkey. were identified. Results in both immunohistochemical methods were Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a rare connective tissue concordant . We present the clinical features of these cases, as well disorder which is associated with fibroblast proliferation and extensive as a statistical analysis of their frequency . The occurrence of different inflammatory infiltrates in the subcutaneous tissue, tendons, ligaments clinical and behavioral features at different ages will be provided . Based and muscles leading to heterotopic bone formation with progressive on our cases, the diagnostic score for children will be analyzed . We endochondral ossification. Major clinical findings are short great toe found that the method on hair root is less traumatic for the patient and with hallux valgus, tender soft tissue lumps on trunk or extremities, we were able to reduce the amount of necessary reagents (15 times), progressive stiffness of neck, back and decreased mobility, occasionally reason why we decided to use this technique for future practice . deafness develop in the course of the disorder . We present a case of In conclusion we present a population screening using antiFMRP FOP in a girl with typical clinical and radiological findings. Interesingly, test in order to discuss the importance of different clinical features for our case had calcification in the papillary muscle of the left ventricule diagnosis in children, as well as the methods we have used in order to which had not been reported before in the literature . reduce the cost of the test . A 3-years-old girl was admitted to our hospital because of multiple hard lumps located on the scalp, neck, back and arms . She was the P0118. Fragile X screening in mental retardation only child of a nonconsanguineous healthy couple and psychomotor M. Gribaa1, D. H’mida1, H. Ghezal1, C. Triki2, N. Gaddour3, A. Saad1; development had been normal till now . On her physical examination, 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique et de Biologie de la Reproduction, Sousse, there were multiple painful lumps on her scalp, neck, extremities and Tunisia, 2Service de Neurologie - EPS Habib Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service paraspinal muscles of the back . These lumps were limiting the mobility de Psychiatrie - Hôpital Universitaire Fattouma Bourguiba, Monastir, Tunisia. of the neck, shoulder, elbow and the back and she had torticollis . She The fragile X syndrome is the most frequent X linked Mental Retardation could not be able to sit or squat down by herself . She had bilateral (XLMR) cause . It is due to mutation of FMR1 gene on Xq27 .3 which short great toes with hallux valgus, inverted nipples and III/IVº pan- consists of an expansion of triplets CGG located at exon 1 . This systolic murmur . On her radiological examination, multiple amorphous mutation incidence is estimated to 1/4000 men . calcifications located in the muscles were seen. Echocardiographic Our study consist of the screening of 40 males having mental findings were influential as there was a calcification like echodense retardation associated to variable other clinical features . These patients appearance in the middle part of the left ventricule papillary muscle . consulted our service of Cytogenetic and Biology of the Reproduction from July 2004 to July 2005 . The clinical investigation of these patients P0116. A new fragile site at chromosome 18q22.2, possibly reveals no prenatal, no neonatal and no postnatal origin of their mental associated with in vivo chromosome breakage retardation . The caryotype was normal for all . K. Debacker1, B. Winnepenninckx1, N. Ben-Porat2, D. Fitzpatrick3, B. Kerem2, The molecular study, according to the international recommendations F. Kooy1; for the diagnosis of the fragile X syndrome, was performed by two 1Center of Medical Genetics, Wilrijk, Belgium, 2Department of Genetics, The different techniques: fluorescent CG rich PCR and Southern blot. Life Sciences Institute, Jerusalem, Israel, 3MRC - unit of Human Genetics, Four of the screened patients (10%) showed an expansion of their Edinburgh, United Kingdom. triplets CGG region confirming their X fragile status. We are studying a patient with an 18q22 .2 truncation, suffering from Among these 4 patients only one is 13 years old . This one presents Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), characterized by overgrowth strongly evocative clinical features of fragile X syndrome . The 3 others, and loss of IGF2 imprinting . The father of the patient expressed a aged between 6 and 9 years, have poor clinical features . Indeed, hitherto undescribed aphidicolin induced fragile site, located in the except MR, the other clinical criteria of X fragile syndrome appear chromosomal breakpoint region of the infant . The chromosomal only after puberty, which makes difficult the clinical diagnosis at a very breakpoint was cloned and it was shown that the truncation is stabilized young age . in vivo by the addition of repetitive telomeric sequence (TTAGGG) . The Because of the important frequency of this syndrome in MR, its breakpoint disrupts the DOK6 gene, which plays an important role in phenotypic heterogeneity and its great risk of recurrence in the same the activation of receptor tyrosine kinases . family, make its molecular diagnosis obligatory in front of any syndromic In order to investigate the potential role of the observed fragile site in or not syndromic MR . the breakage mechanism we performed flexibility analysis, using the Twistflex computer program, of the entire 18q22.2 region. The results revealed that the 100 kb surrounding the breakpoint is extremely rich in AT-dinucleotide repeats, characteristic of aphidicolin induced fragile Clinical genetics 16 P0119. Fraser syndrome; Report of two affected siblings with a Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of new Finding, in a consanguineous iranian family Iran, 4Iran Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Mashhad Medi- G. Vakili1, Y. Shafeghati1, N. Momenin1, M. H. Karimi-Nejad2; cal University, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Genetics Research Center, University of Welfare Sciences and Rehabilitation, One hundred and fifty unrelated families, clinically suspected of Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Karimi-Nejad/ Najmabadi Genetics Lab, Teh- galactosemia were screened by qualitative measurement of galactose ran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1 phosphate uridyl transferase (GALT) activity in blood RBCs using Background: Fraser syndrome is a very rare autosomal Beutler’s method. Deficient enzyme activity was confirmed in 18 recessive disorder, characterized by major malformations such as families . All of these 18 families were submitted to the diagnosis of cryptophthalmos or anophthalmia, laryngeal abnormalities, orofacial common mutations in GALT gene including Q188R, K285N using clefting, craniofacial dysmorphism, genitourinary tract anomalies, PCR-RFLP method . In order to determine the unknown mutations mental retardation and musculoskletal anomalies . the entire coding region of GALT was subjected to sequencing . The materials & methods: Here, we report the clinical and pathological most common molecular defect observed in Iranian population was findings of two affected patients from an Iranian family. We knew Q188R (60%) . Four rare mutations including S135L, K285N, A320T the history of the first sib, so in the second pregnancy, we followed and Y209S were also detected . the fetus by ultrasound, and on the weeks 25, the same anomalies were detected in the fetus . The pregnancy was terminated and fetus P0122. mutation detection for Glucocerebrosidase gene in an extracted by hystrotomy . iranian family with history of type 3 Gaucher disease Results: The clinical findings on this case were similar to the first sib. N. Almadani1, R. Kariminejad1, V. Hadavi1, F. Afroozan1, M. H. Kariminejad1, C. The fetus was sent for karyotyping and complete postmortem study . Oberkanins2, H. Najmabadi1; Extra findings in autopsy were: both lungs composed of two lobes 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, (this is a new finding in this syndrome). Esophagus was narrow in its Islamic Republic of Iran, 2ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria. proximal part . Bilateral renal agenesis, small and hypo plastic bladder, Gaucher’s disease is one of the most prevalent lysosomal storage and agenesis of internal genitalia were detected . disorders and a rare genetic disease. Partial deficiency of acid β- The blood and skin biopsy samples were sent for mutation analysis glucosidase is associated with parenchymal disease of the liver, spleen, on FRAS I and FREM II genes . Now, we are waiting for the result of and bone marrow with concomitant anemia and thrombocytopenia in molecular analysis which is underway . non-neuronopathic, type 1 GD. Severe deficiency caused by severe conclusion: We should consider this rare syndrome in any fetus mutations is additionally associated with neurological manifestations with IUFD and stillborn babies with these complex anomalies . High in the less common type 2 and type 3 GD subtypes . resolution ultrasound is a very efficient tool for detection of affected Amongst the mutations characterized in patients presenting with GD, fetuses . only three have a high frequency . The mutations c . 1226A>G (N370S), c .1448T>C (L444P), and 84insG (84G>GG) account for 55, 20, and P0120. Fragile X syndrome-two complicated familal cases. 8% of cases, of the alleles evidenced in GD, respectively . R. Zordania1, T. Kahre2,3, U. Õim1, R. Rein4, K. Joost1, E. Raukas5; A family who had history of two affected sons with type 3 B GD were 1Tallinn` Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Molecular Diagnostics Centre referred to our center for prenatal diagnosis . The disease emerges in United Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics Tartu, Estonia, 3Children’s Clinic early childhood, with predominantly visceral manifestations and severity of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 4Children’s of central nervous system lesions, progressing rapidly and resulting in Clinic of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu University Clinics, Estonia, 5Molecular death at 18 months of age and 2 .5 years old respectively, due to the Diagnostics Centre United Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia. complications of portal or pulmonary hypertension . The neurological Fragile X syndrome is the most common cause of inherited mental involvement was essentially restricted to horizontal supranuclear gaze retardation caused by expansion of CGG repeats in FMR1 gene- in full palsy . After genetic counseling, direct DNA sequencing was performed mutation number of repeats exceeds 200 . Fragile X permutations (55- for the couple who were second cousins . The results indicate that 200 CGG repeats) occur more frequently in women having premature both parents are heterozygous for L444P mutation . Prenatal diagnosis ovarian failure (POF) . showed that the fetus was also heterozygous for this mutation and not We present data of two complicated familial fragile X syndrome affected with GD . cases . It appears that c .1448T>C (L444P) mutation is one of the common Molecular studies were performed using fluoresence PCR and the mutations which could be noticeable for molecular diagnosis of GD in CGG repeats lengths were measured by ABI PRISM 377 and/or ABI Iranian population . 310 . Family i. 7-years old boy was consulted and investigated due to mental P0123. Novel missense mutation in M1S1 gene in iranian retardation and behavioural problems . Family history was complicated Gelatinous Drop-Like corneal Dystrophy (GDLD) patients with POF and mental retardation . As patient’s mother had the history A. Alavi1, M. Javadi2, N. Rafati2, B. Bayat3, M. Banoei3, E. Elahi1; of POF, in vitro fertilization was performed, in which her sister’s ovum 1University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Ophthalmic Research was used . Molecular diagnostics of the patient revealed a full mutation Center, University of Shahid Beheshti, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Na- (300 CGG repeats) . Mother carried premutation with CGG repeats in tional Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic one allele 77-79 . Other family members were not investigated . Republic of Iran. Family ii. 3-years old boy was counselled due to mental retardation M1S1 (membrane component, chromosome 1, surface marker 1) has and autism . DNA diagnostics revealed that the patient had an unstable been identified as a gene responsible for GDLD in a study on Japanese allele in premutation range (114 repeats) and the full mutation range patients . The M1S1 protein is a membrane cell surface glycoprotein (500-700 repeats) . The patient’s mother had normal allele (30 repeats) expressed in the cornea, multistratified epithelia, trophoblasts and and other allele with CGG repeats in the premutation (83-134 triplets) most carcinomas . The physiological function of M1S1 is not well and the full mutation range (400-550 triplets) . understood, but it be involved in the establishment of intercellular Conclusion . Detection of CGG repeats in FMR1 among the women of connections . Not all GDLD patients carry mutations in M1S1 . Disease reproductive age and in mentally retarded boys with a positive family causing mutations found in M1S1 are usually nonsense or frameshift history has a critical value in genetic counselling and prognosis in the mutations, and missense mutations are relatively rare . M1S1 (NT_ family . 032977) was screened in the proband of three Iranian familial cases of GDLD . The patients were offsprings of consanguineous marriages P0121. mutation Detection of GALt gene in iranian Galactosemia and from three distinct region of Iran . A novel homozygous putative Patients disease causing missense mutation, N .679G>A (p .E227K) was R. Mirfakhraie1, F. Nabati2, N. Naghibzadeh Tabatabaei3, E. Talachian4, H. identified by sequencing. The mutated alleles were also homozygous Kianifar5, M. Houshmand3, F. Mirzajani3; for two polymorphisms, suggesting identity by decent . The mutated 1Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic nucleotide was not found by RFLP among 60 ethnically matched Republic of Iran, 2Khatam university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National control individuals . The proband of the two additional Iranian families were also found to carry the same mutation in the homozygous state . Clinical genetics 1 We are now establishing whether the chromosomes of all the patients variabilty in the severity of the condition has been noted, especially share the same SNP haplotype . with respect to the susceptibility to fractures and alternations in stature . It has been suggested that Gerodermia osteodysplastica and Wrinkly P0124. A new case of geleophysic dwarphism - clinical Skin syndrome could represent variable manifestations of the same presentation disorder . The presence of intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation E. Braha, M. Volosciuc, G. Russu, M. Covic; in Wrinkly Skin syndrome and the presence of osteoporosis and University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. other radiological findings in Gerodermia osteodysplastica is helpful We presente the case of KR patient, 1 year 4 months old . She is was in differential diagnosis . In conclucion, Gerodermia osteodysplastica the first child of unrelated, healthy and young parents. The pregnancy should be considered in a patient with cutis laxa accompanied by has a normal evolution . visually prominent veins, osteoporosis and joint laxity . She was born at term by normal delivery, weighing 2100 g . At the clinical examination we can observe a disproportionate short P0127. A novel microdeletion in p34.2p34.3 of chromosome 1 stature with short limbs, typical dysmorphic face with “happy” facial involving the SLCA1 (GLUT1) gene in a boy with severe mental appearance (round face, thin lips, micro-retrognatia) cardiac anomalies retardation. with atrial septal defect, left hepatic lobe enlargement without signs of S. Vermeer1, D. A. Koolen1, G. Visser2, H. J. L. Brackel3, I. van der Burgt1, N. storage disease, mild developmental delay . Based on the clinical exam de Leeuw1, M. A. A. P. Willemsen4, E. A. Sistermans1, R. Pfundt1, B. B. A. de we establish the diagnosis of geleophysic dwarphism . Vries1; Geleophysic dwarphism is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder with 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical disproportionate short stature, characteristic facial appearance which Centre, The Netherlands, 2Department of Metabolic Pediatrics, Wilhelmina is described as “happy” and survival to adulthood . In our case the Children’s Hospital, UMC, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatrics, diagnosis was not establish until the patient was 1 year and 4 months Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatric old . Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, The Netherlands. A de novo 4.1 Mb microdeletion of chromosome 1p34.2p34.3 identified P0125. AZF deletions, mtHFR c677t genepolymorphism and by genome wide array-based comparative genomic hybridisation OctN2 mutation analysis in male infertility (array-CGH) is reported in a boy with severe mental retardation, J. Szabo1, J. Szöllősi1, A. Pal1, K. Komlósi2, J. Bene2, V. Havasi2, G. Talián2, G. microcephaly, pronounced hypotonia and facial dysmorphism . The Talián2, B. Melegh2, Z. László1; deleted region encompasses 48 genes among which the Glucose 1University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 2University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. transporter 1 (SLC2A1 or GLUT1) gene . The deletion of the GLUT1 Objectives Microdeletions of azoospermia factor AZF a, b, c region gene was in line with the abnormal cerebrospinal fluid/blood glucose and MTHFR C677T polymorphism can be responsible for male ratio indicative of GLUT1 deficiency syndrome (MIM 606777). In infertility . Despite decreased carnitine level in azoospermic seminal addition the deletion was confirmed by region specific Multiplex Ligation- fluid, the role of carnitine tarnsporter function has not been studied. dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA). GLUT1 deficiency syndrome Aim: To study the frequency of AZF deletions, MTHFR C677T is clinically characterised by intractable seizures, developmental delay, genepolymorphism and OCTN2 mutations in Hungarian infertile acquired microcephaly, and a complex motor disorder . A ketogenic diet males . is a rational and highly effective treatment, especially with regard to materials and methods Y chromosome microdeletion screening of seizure control . This report illustrates that identifying a microdeletion most frequently deleted regions such as sY 254, 86, 127, 84, 134, and as the cause of mental retardation is not only important for genetic 255 was studied by multiplex PCR after isolation of genomic DNA from counseling but also may lead to therapeutic intervention . 280 azoo- or oligozoospermic males . MTHFR C677T mutation was determined by PCR . The ten exons of the SLC22A4 gene encoding P0128. simultaneous detection of copy number changes and the OCTN1 carnitine transporter were sequenced by intron based cpG methylation of the differentially imprinted GNAs complex primers in 20 azoospermic patients . locus using Methylation-specific MLPA Results AZF microdeletions were found in 2 of 280 patients . The A. O. H. Nygren1,2, S. Clausmeyer3, R. Borschloo2, J. P. Schouten2, E. Schul- prevalence of C/C, C/T and T/T polymorphism was 43 .1%, 39 .5% and ze3; 17 .3% in the infertility group and 38 .4%, 53% and 8 .6% in the control 1Department of Clinical and Human Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, population, respectively . No pathology associated mutations in the 2MRC-Holland BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Molekulargenetisches Labor SLC22A4 gene could be detected . . Prof. Raue, Heidelberg, Germany. conclusions The low prevalence (0 .7%) of AZF deletions is surprising . GNAS is a complex gene with multiple imprinted promoters located on The MTHFR polymorphism might have a role in the pathogenesis of chromosome 20q13 . Epigenetic defects in the imprinted GNAS cluster male infertility . No evidence was found that the abnormalities of the are associated with pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1b (PHP1b) . OCTN2 can have role in azoospermia . The downstream promoter for the stimulatory G protein α-subunit is unmethylated in all tissues apart for the renal proximal tubules . The P0126. Gerodermia osteodysplastica: report of three boys in a first and most upstream GNAS Differentially Methylated Region (DMR) family generates the NESP55 transcript and is paternally methylated, the B. Tüysüz, K. Barut, E. Yılmaz; second DMR is maternally methylated and generates the XLαs and the İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genet- NESP Antisense (AS) transcript . Finally, the third DMR generates the ics, İstanbul, Turkey. 1A transcript and is also maternally methylated . Here we describe a Three boys (3 yr, 2 yr and 8 mo) who were second cousins with each novel application of Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent other were referred to our department because of atypical facies Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA) which can detect changes in both CpG and delayed motor development . Gerodermia osteodysplastica was methylation of all GNAS DMRs as well as the copy number of the whole diagnosed in these cases who had the distinct facial apperance region . A quantitative methylation and copy number analysis has the with sagging cheecks, thin hair, large fontanelles, wrinkled and lax advantage of detecting all of the major classes of molecular defects skin on the dorsum on the hands and feet, visually prominent veins involved in PHP1b (deletions, uniparental disomy, and imprinting and hypermobility in the metacarpophalangeal joints . Radiological mutations) without the need for parental DNA . We successfully used investigations showed generalised mild osteoporosis, vertebral MS-MLPA to detect copy number and methylation status of the genes compression, numerous wormian bones in the lambdoid sutures . in the chromosome 20q13 in 30 mutation negative DNA samples of Mandibular prognathism was described in case 1 and 2 , unilateral hip patients referred to the clinic with a possible GNAS defect . dislocation was described in case 1 and inguinal hernia was described in case 3 . Gerodermia osteodysplastica is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by wrinkled and lax skin with reduced elasticity mainly on the dorsum of the hands and feet, aged appearence, hyperextensible joints and osteoporosis . Intra and interfamilial Clinical genetics 1 P0129. Goldenhar syndrome: clinical manifestations in Greek coexisted with testicular remnants and were completely removed . The patients karyotype of the gonadal fibroblasts was also 46, XY (10 metaphases). V. Touliatou, H. Frysira, A. Mavrou, E. Kanavakis, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli; FISH-analysis with a sex chromosome specific probe (CEP 18/X/Y) Medical Genetics Laboratory, University of Athens, Choremio Research Labora- showed an XY-genotype in 64 of 65 metaphases and 453 of 460 tory, Athens, Greece. interphases . Histological examination of the gonads showed atypical Goldenhar (GS) syndrome is a well-recognised developmental disorder immature testicular structures, fallopian tubes and a gonadoblastoma . involving first and second branchial arches and characterized by Reviewing the literature, 46,XY individuals with partial or mixed considerable phenotypic variability . The present study presents clinical gonadal dysgenesis are at a much higher risk for malignancy than data on the morphologic features, hearing, ophthalmologic, orthopaedic, individuals with numerical sex chromosome aberrations and / or neurological, cardiovascular, genitourinary and gastrointestinal individuals with pure gonadal dysgenesis . Our case illustrates that evaluation of 17 Greek patients (one pair of monozygotic twins) aged gonadoblastomas occur in asymptomatic individuals with gonadal 20 days to 23 years with the clinical diagnosis of GS and with a normal dysgenesis emphazising the need for surgical removal of the gonads karyotype. The most consistent findings were auricular defects (94%), as soon as possible . followed by facial (76%) and ocular anomalies (65%), 70% unilateral, mainly right-sided . In the majority of our patients (90%) mandibular P0132. Gorlin syndrome - first DNA analysis in Czech republic. hypoplasia was ipsilateral to the dysplastic ear or the most severely clinical features and DNA analysis of seven patients. affected ear in bilateral cases . Hearing loss, mainly conductive, was A. Santava1, A. Krepelova2, J. Pazdera1, J. Santavy1; noted in 76% of our patients . Skeletal defects were evident in 23%, while 1Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Charles University, Prague, cardiovascular, genitourinary and gastrointestinal in 18%, 23% and Czech Republic. 12% respectively . The most frequent neurological manifestation was Gorlin syndrome - NBSSC is a rare, autosomal dominantly inherited facial nerve paralysis (12%), while the incidence of mental retardation pre-cancer syndrome affecting several body systems . was higher (23%) than shown in the literature, presumably attributed to The main features are odontogenic keratocysts and multiple basal cell the severe hearing and vision loss . In the pair of monozygotic twins of neavi, which have malignant potential . our study was noted discordance of clinical findings. Precise evaluation Characteristic feature of the syndrome is a high predisposition to of GS patients and multidisciplinary care management is necessary to cancerous growth, mainly development of basal cell carcinomas and avoid possible complications of many systems and to offer appropriate higher incidence of congenital birth defects . genetic counselling to the family . Clinical diagnosis requires presence of at least two major signs such as odontogenic keratocysts, basal cell carcinomas, palmar pits and P0130. 31 cases with Goldenhar syndrome: clinical, familial occurrence . The gene associated with the condition is a audiological, cytogenetic and MR findings. tumor supresor gene (PTCH), which maps to the 9q22,3-q31 region . Ö. Engiz, S. Balcı; The tumors associated with Gorlin syndrome are fibrosarcoma, Department of Clinical Genetics, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, rhabdomyosarcoma, meningioma, and meduloblastoma . Ankara, Turkey. We present seven patients (six men and one woman) with clinical The oculoauriculovertebral complex is phenotypically variable due to features of NBSSC syndrome, ascertained because of odontogenic heterogenous causes . In this study 15 boys and 16 girls, totally 31 cysts manifesting before 20 years of age . Five of these patients patients with Goldenhar syndrome who were followed at Hacettepe represent new mutations; mother and her proband daughter represent University Department of Clinical Genetics between 1968 and 2004 one familial case . were reviewed. Characteristic findings which were preauricular skintag Mutation analysis of the coding region of the PTCH gene was performed were found in 93% ; microtia in 60%, hemifasial microsomia in 70%; in four unrelated patients and mutations were detected in all of them . epibulbar dermoid in 39% and vertebral anomalies in 71% of patients . All exons and exon-intron boundaries were amplified with PCR and Cardiac malformations were evaluated in 29 cases . 11 cases of 29 had both forward and reverse strand were sequenced with appropriate congenital heart disease . MR studies were performed in 19 cases . 9 PCR-primers. The following mutations were identified: of 19 cases were diagnosed with CNS malformations such as Arnold- 1 . c .585-3C>G Chiari type II, corpus callosum hypoplasia, etc . Audiologic evaluation was performed in 23 patients. 69 % of patients had hearing deficiency. 2 . c .[915delC (+)3583A>T], p .[Ala306fs Interestingly 3 patients were born from ICSI pregnancies . (+)Thr1195Ser] Peripheral chromosome analyses were performed in 29 patients and only 1 of them had 47,XX,+der(22)t(11;22)(q23;q11). Interestingly this 3 . c .1348-1G>A case had maternal balanced t(11;22) in four members of her family. This translocation was proven by FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) 4 . c .2179delT, p .Cys727fs analysis . Additionally CATCH 22 deletion analysis was performed in 13 of 31 patients . All of them were CATCH 22 deletion negative . All patients are followed up by dermatologists, dentists In conclusion chromosomal studies should be performed in every case and oncologists and no malignancies were observed . with Goldenhar syndrome for a possibility of chromosomal anomaly . The knowledge of the gene mutation enables us to offer prenatal diagnosis to the patients of fertile age . Supported by Grant No. MZO 00064203. P0131. Gonadoblastoma in a 46,XY young woman with primary amenorrhea U. Siebers-Renelt1, R. Exeler1, I. Kennerknecht1, J. H. Brämswig2, J. Horst1; P0133. two Novel mutations in iranian Haemophilia B Patients 1Institut für Humangenetik der Universität, Muenster, Germany, 2Klinik für Kin- E. Kamali Dolatabadi; der- und Jugendmedizin der Universität, Muenster, Germany. Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. A 16-year old young woman presented with primary amenorrhea . Background: Hemophilia B or Christmas disease is an inherited Clinically, she had normal female external genitalia, no hirsutism and recessive X-linked bleeding disorder which results from deficiency or a height of 175 cm . Tanner stages were B3 and PH4 with elevated defect of procoagulant factor IX (FIX) . The factor IX gene spans 35kb LH- and FSH-levels documenting hypergonadotropic hypogonadism . of DNA and comprises 8 exons, designated a-h (1-8) . Factor IX mRNA Chromosome analysis on peripheral blood cells showed a 46,XY is 2 .8kb and encodes a mature protein of 415 amino acids . karyotype (20 metaphases, GTG-banding, 500 bands, 2 independent methods: Genomic DNA of 31 patients referred from Imam Khomeini samples) with typical fluorescence of the Y-chromosome in Q-banding. and Omid hospitals were extracted according to standard protocols . FISH-analysis using a wcp (Y)-probe resulted in whole chromosome PCR amplification and SSCP on nondenaturing polyacrylamid gel, were painting of the Y-chromosome . The presence of the SRY-region performed on each sample for eight exons separately . The result of (Yp11.2) was proven by FISH. Moreover, the Y-specific loci ZFY, SRY, SSCP for each sample was compared to normal ones and sequencings AZFa, AZFb and AZFc were detectable by multiplex-PCR in 2 formats . were performed for those with different migration patterns . Sequencing of the coding region of the androgen receptor gene did Results and conclusion: The sequencing results showed 70 .8% not detect a pathogenic mutation . On laparascopy, ovarian structures missense mutation, 16 .7% deletion, 8 .3% nonsense mutation and Clinical genetics 1 4 .2% insertion . This was similar to reports haemophilia B mutation Introduction: Hearing loss (HL) is the most prevalent sensorineural database . In this study SSCP had 77 .5% sensitivity . Failure of PCR defect in humans . Mild to severe and profound HL occurs in about l .0 amplification of a patient led us to recognize a large deletion (g & h per 1000 births . Many previous studies have shown that about 50% of exons) . In addition we found two novel mutations in two unrelated deafness is genetic and 50% is environmental or of unknown origin . patients . C 6364 T and A 17690 C changes were found in Hb004 and Materials and Methods: Questionaires were distributed in deaf schools, HB078 respectively . These represented R -4 W and N 92 T . These hearing loss centers and rehabilitation centers in Qom and Markazi novel mutations occurred in one of critical regions of CpG . Parallel to provinces and were collected after filling by the parents.The information our expectation these patients suffered from severe disease . such as age, sex, number of deaf individuals in families and their close relatives, the marriage type of the parents and etiology were extracted P0134. Role of mtDNA in iranian patients with Hypertrophic from questionnaires and were analysed by SPSS software . cardiomyopathy Result: 354 Questionaires containing complete information from M. Montazeri1, M. Houshmand1, E. Zaklyazminskaya2, F. Noohi3, N. Givtaj3; hearing loss families were collected . 59 .3% and 36 .7% of parents have 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic consanguineous and nonconsanguineous marriage ,respectively and Republic of Iran, 2Russian Research Center of Medical Genetics, Laboratory the marriage type of 4% were not determined. By assesing the filled of DNA Research, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Iran University of Medical questionnaires and pedigrees, the deafness aetiology in the studies Sciences Shaheed Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Re- population was categorized in genetic ( 70 .9 %), environment (9%) public of Iran. and unknown ( 20 .1%) . Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized by hypertrophy of Conclusion: Genetic factor with autosomal recessive inheritance ventricles and intrventricular septum . Patients could develop serious pattern was the most important cause of hearing loss due to the high complications including heart failure, arrhythmias and sudden death . prevalence of consanguineous marriage . This increased genetic factors The disorder has been estimated to occur in 0 .05%-0 .2 percentage to more than 50% . Large family sizes also increase the frequency of of population . Recently mitochondrial DNA mutations have been hearing loss in families that have deaf with genetical background of associated with cardiomyopathies . Mitochondria are the major site of this disorder . In this study, environmental and unknown factors were energy production in the cell . Thus, it is reasonable to assume that second cause of HL . We can interestingly reduce frequency of HL energy dependant tissues such as heart, affected by mitochondrial in Iran by discouraging consanguineous marriage, health education, dysfunction . Mitochondrial (mt) DNA mutations are hypothesized to be population regeneration control especially for high risk families . involved in the pathogenesis of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy, because the mtDNA encodes 13 polypeptides that are essential for oxidative P0137. A new syndrome of microtia with mixed tyoe hearing phosphorylation, upon which the heart relies for energy . In this study, loss, renal agenesis, and multiple skeletal anomalies 31 Iranian hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients for mitochondrial DNA H. Samli1, Y. Demir2, A. Yucel3, M. D. Yilmaz4, G. Maralcan5, M. Solak1; point mutations and deletions were screened . Results: some mutations 1Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Afyon, in G3338A (Val>Met), G9053A (Ser>Asn), G9055A (Ala>Thr), T3285C Turkey, 2Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Plastic and Re- in tRNA Leucine, were detected, and also26 polymorphism were found constructive Surgery, Afyon, Turkey, 3Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, that before were reported, 15 polymorphism that were not reported . Department of Radiology, Afyon, Turkey, 4Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Three different deletions were found in seven patients (13 .46%) . Three Department of Otolaryngology, Afyon, Turkey, 5Kocatepe University, Medical patients (5 .76%) showed 8 .6 kb deletion . Three patients (5 .76%) had a Faculty, Department of Orthopaedics, Afyon, Turkey. 7 .4 kb deletion . One patient (1 .92%) had 4977 bp “common deletion We report on a 17-year man presented with unreported combinations of right sided microtia and preauricular skin tag with conductive type P0135. Genetic etiology and spectrum of mutations in GJB2 hearing loss, unilateral renal agenesis, partial syndactyly of 4th and gene in 111 families investigated in our hereditary hearing 5th metacarpals, multiple tarsal coalitions, absent toe, and hypoplastic impairment clinic tibia and fibula. Radiological and clinical findings did not match D. Raskova, P. Seeman, E. Hlavova, M. Putzova, D. Stejskal; with the previously described syndromes with respect to the type of Institute of Medical Genetics GENNET, Prague 7, Czech Republic. anomalies seen in the case . Chromosomal analysis from peripheral Hereditary hearing impairment clinic was established at our institute in blood samples and skin from the index case was performed . Five October 2003 . Until the present 111 families have been investigated . hundred fifty banding was applied to metaphases cultured from both Genetic etiology of hearing impairment was found at 71 .2 % of the skin and peripheral blood samples and all family members showed families - 11 .7 % with autosomal dominant inheritance, 40 .6% with a normal karyotype . Sequence analysis was performed for exon 2 of autosomal recessive inheritance and 8 .1% with genetic syndromes or SALL1, but mutations could not be detected . We propose that this is another genetic disease with deafness . At 10 .8 % families the mode a new syndrome . of inheritance could not be determined . The rest (28 .8%) were families with idiopathic hearing loss . P0138. A rare manifestation of hereditary haemochromatosis in The mutations in the GJB2 gene (Cx26) were investigated at 139 association with anaemia in two young women patients from 78 families by sequencing of entire coding region of M. Kreile, I. Micule, J. Keish, A. Krumina; GJB2 . In patients carrying only one pathogenic mutation the IVS 1+1 Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. G to A mutation in the non-coding region was further tested . We found Hereditary haemochromatosis (HH) is a frequently inherited AR 3 mutations not reported before (Ala149Thr, Ile140Ser, c .683+3 C to metabolic disorder in the European population . HH causes iron A) . At least one pathogenic mutation was found at 70 (50 .4%) patients . accumulation in patients liver, pancreas, and other internal organs . HH Both pathogenic mutations were detected at 29 (20 .9%) patients . No in young women is rearly reported, because of regular loss of stored pathogenic GJB2 mutation was detected at 53 (38 .1%) patients and iron by menstrual blood . Here we report two cases of HH manifestation 16 (11 .5%) patients are carriers of various polymorphisms (Met34Thr, in young women . Val153Ile, Arg127His, Phe83Leu etc .) . The mutation 35delG accounts Case 1: age 24, referred to hepathologist because of icterus . All for 80 .8% of detected disease mutations . Mutations 313del14 and IVS viral markers were negative, liver biopsy showed cirrhosis, in blood 1+1 G to A (-3170 G to A) in the non-coding region account each for biochemistry high serum ferritin (SF) was noted (1225 μg/l). Her DNA 7 .1% of detected disease mutations . was checked for mutations in HFE gene . The genotype revealed was C282Y/H63D . Unfortunately the phlebotomy treatment is not possible P0136. Accessing genetical and environmental factors of because she has anaemia (Hb 106 g/l) . Nevertheless SF decreased hearing loss in 354 families in iran (Qom and markazi provinces) spontaneously to 835 μg/l, but later increased to 1300 μg/l. A. Sadeghi1, F. Alasti2, M. Sanati2, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori3; Case 2: age 35, presented with chronic fatigue 8 months after 1Tarbiat Modarres University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Re- hysterectomy due to myomatosis . Investigation revealed anaemia (Hb search Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NRCGEB), Tehran, 109 g/l), elevated SF 403 μg/l, which rised suspection for the HH. The Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Cellular and Molecular Research Center of Medical HFE analysis showed genotype C282Y/C282Y . Because of her low University of Shahrekord, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. Hb, she initiated treatment with desferal, but that was poorly tolerated, Clinical genetics 10 because of side effects . P0141. Lobar Holoprosencephaly - positive diagnosis Although case 2 has explanation for iron overload (hysterectomy), the M. Boia, V. Botiu, E. Boia, M. Puiu, D. Iacob, A. Manea, D. Mihut; cause of anaemia has not been found, though both women consulted University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. a haemothologist . As there have been some reports of digenic Introduction: Holoprosencephaly appears between the 4-th to 8-th inheritance of HH, we have done sequencing analysis of juvenile week of pregnancy due to the lack of cleavage of the prosencephalus haemochromatosis gene HAMP and checked TFR2 mutation Y250, but in the telencephalus and diencephalus, . The attendance is 1 at 10 .000 no mutations were found . The explanation of such HH manifestation in live newborn,; 60 times higher at aborted human embryos. Depending young women still needs a further investigation . on the degree of differentiation and severity we can have 3 subtypes of holoprosencephaly: alobar . semilobar and lobar . P0139. mLPA-based screening for disease-causing copy number Material and Method: The authors present a study on 3 premature alterations in the hereditary spastic paraplegia genes SPGA newborns, with lobar holoprosencephaly, an extremely rare affection and SPG in the current medical practice . Two of the patients didn’t show any C. Beetz1, A. O. H. Nygren2, J. Schickel1, K. Stein1, S. I. Lens2, S. Klimpe3, M. symptoms until the age of two weeks when they presented generalized Auer-Grumbach4, F. Kreuz5, G. Heide6, T. Deufel1; tonic-clonic seizure . One of the newborns showed other associated 1Institut für Klinische Chemie und Laboratoriumsdiagnostik, Friedrich-Schiller- malformations: unilateral anophthalmia and congenital septal defect . Universität, Jena, Germany, 2MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Cerebral lesions were highlighted by cerebral imaging methods - head 3Neurologische Klinik, Johannes-Gutenberg-Universität, Mainz, Germany, ultrasonography, CT in one of the cases and NMR in 2 of the cases . 4Zentrum für Medizinische Forschung, Medizinische Universität, Graz, Austria, Those investigations showed specific lesions at the median line. The 5Institut für Klinische Genetik, Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany, 6Kli- karyotype was normal in 2 of the cases; one of the cases presented nik für Neurologie, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität, Jena, Germany. trisomy 13 . The evolution of the cases was severe, causing death in The hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are neuro-degenerative one of the cases and slowly evoluting with recurrent seizures and disorders associated with progressive spastic weakness of the lower motor- and psychic retardation in two of the cases . limbs . Despite 30 different disease loci reported to date, mutations in Conclusions: Lobar holoprosencephaly is a rare affection, without either SPG3A or SPG4 are found in 35-50% of cases by conventional specific clinical expression and its diagnosis can be easily missed sequencing . Additional pedigrees, linking to one of these loci but in the neonatal period . Cerebral imaging was the primary method in apparently being mutation negative, may inherit larger genomic the setting of the diagnosis: head ultrasonography tracked down the aberrations . We have developed a multiplex ligation-dependent probe lesions and CT and NMR established their extension . amplification (MLPA) assay allowing simultaneous standardised copy- number screening of almost every SPG3A and SPG4 exon . In a cohort P0142. siX3, Zic2 and sHH mutations in a series of of 18 HSP families, we identified 3 aberrant MLPA profiles segregating holoprosencephaly patients. with the disease and exclusively affecting SPG4-specific probes. Long- J. Herbergs, D. Tserpelis, S. Spierts, H. Smeets; range PCR followed by sequencing revealed two novel multi-exonic Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. deletions and a previously reported 3bp deletion as underlying these Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a common severe malformation of MLPA results. Breakpoint analysis suggested specific but differing the brain that involves abnormal formation and septation of the mutational events as having resulted in the deletions . Investigation at developing central nervous system . The prevalence is 1:250 during the cDNA level showed that certain deletions may negatively influence early embryogenesis, but the live born prevalence is only 1:16000 . stability of the transcript from the mutated SPG4 allele . According to The etiology of HPE is extremely heterogeneous and can include both these preliminary results, partial gene deletions in SPG4 seem to be a a teratogenic and/or genetic basis . We studied four genes known to rather frequent, but private, mutation type causing HSP . To obtain more be involved in HPE, namely SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF by sequence solid data on their prevalence, we are currently investigating a larger analysis . A series of in total 47 sporadic and familial HPE cases with series of index cases . The MLPA kit described here may, eventually, a variable clinical spectrum has been analysed . We detected 10 become a useful tool in the molecular diagnosis of HSP . pathogenic mutations (21%), 5 out of 40 sporadic cases (13%) and Supported by the Tom Wahlig Stiftung . 5 out of 7 familial cases (71%) . One of the familial cases was caused by a mutation in parental germ cells . Four mutations were detected P0140. Heterotaxy in a family with autosomal dominant in the SIX3 gene, four mutations in the ZIC2 gene and two mutations inheritance. in the SHH gene . The familial mutations displayed great phenotypic C. Lundin1, A. Nikkilä2, H. Lilljebjörn1, A. Thulin-Welinder3, G. Björkhem4, I. heterogeneity of the disease, which makes it difficult to establish Panagopoulos1, M. Soller1; genotype-phenotype correlations . This phenotypic variability may be 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology, due both to environmental factors and to potential modifier genes. Lund, Sweden, 3Dept of Clinical Physiology, Lund, Sweden, 4Dept of Pediatric HPE development is probably a multihit process , which implicates Cardiology, Lund, Sweden. more genes. This illustrates the importance of further identification of Familial heterotaxy is genetically heterogeneous and may be inherited new genes . as an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive or an X-linked trait . The nomenclature of situs abnormalities is somewhat confusing, but P0143. two cases with progressive movement disorder: most authors define heterotaxy as any deviation from the normal from undiagnosed condition to confirming juvenile form of situs solitus . The phenotype within a family with heterotaxy has Huntington‘s disease been reported to vary . The present study comprises a family with A. Utkus1, K. Konciute1, B. J. Tuleviciene2, V. Kučinskas1; four affected individuals in two generations, including male to male 1Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius University Children Hospital, Vil- transition . Three brothers all had various degrees of heterotaxy, nius, Lithuania. including complete situs inversus, transposition, and situs ambiguus, Huntington disease (HD) is a fatal autosomal dominant respectively . The fourth brother is phenotypically normal . One of the neurodegenerative disorder caused by high instability and extension affected brothers and his wife terminated a pregnancy revealing a of CAG sequences within the coding region of IT-15 gene . Juvenile- male fetus with L-transposition . Autosomal dominant inheritance with onset HD before the age 20 years occurs in about 5% of HD cases, reduced penetrance is suggested as are the parents have no clinical and is associated with very large (more than 60) CAG repeat signs of left-right malformations . expansions . Juvenile HD manifested mostly as an ataxic syndrome To date, relatively few genes have been implicated in situs disorders, with bradykinesia, rigidity, epileptic seizures, and dystonia whereas including CFC1 (CRYPTIC), ZIC3, LEFTYA, ACVR2B, CRELD1 and adult onset is more a prominent involuntary movement disorder with NKX2.5 . To investigate whether mutations in any of these genes could personality changes, and dementia . be detected in the present family, DNA was extracted from blood We present clinical features and results of DNA analysis in 2 patients . from the patient with situs inversus totalis . Sequencing of CFC1, Patient 1 was a 13-year-old girl presented with a 6 year history of ZIC3, LEFTYA, CRELD1 and NKX2.5 revealed no mutations . Further declining school performance, loss of coordination, rigidity, impaired analysis of ACVR2B is ongoing . speech . This patient had cleft lip and clinical diagnosis of myotonic Clinical genetics 11 dystrophy until she was referred to the Medical Genetics Centre (MGC) . P0146. congenital hydrocephaly-ultrasound diagnosis Molecular genetic analysis of genomic DNA revealed that patient had V. Botiu, M. Boia, E. Boia, C. Ilie, M. Puiu, D. Iacob, A. Manea, D. Mihut; one normal-sized allele and one abnormally expanded allele with 90 University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. CAG repeats . Diagnostical framing of the echography find out disease, correlation Patient 2 was a 13-year-old boy . His developmental milestones were between the imaging and clinical marks, setting of the evolutional abnormal and at age 11 years diagnosed autism . By 12 years of age stage and therapeutical indication . he started having difficulty speech impairment, loss of coordination, Material and Method: The study contained 34 cases of ventriculomegaly, rigidity . He had been diagnosed with Wilson disease by clinical selected by clinical and imaging criteria from the premature newborn features . Molecular genetic analysis in MGC revealed that patient had hospitalized in the Clinic of Neonatology . Head ultrasonography was one normal-sized allele and one abnormally expanded allele with 85 used as method of diagnosis and prognosis evaluation . CAG repeats . Both patients had a positive paternal family history of Results: Hydrocephaly was associated with: meningomyelocele in 8 HD . of the cases, meningoencephalocele in 3 of the cases, Dandy-Walker Conclusion: juvenile HD should be considered in children suffering malformation in 4 of the cases, agenesis of the corpus callosus in 5 of from a progressive movement disorder . the cases, malformation of the Galen’s vein in 2 of the cases, arachnoid kyst in 4 of the cases, lobar holoprosencephaly in 3 of the cases . In 4 P0144. molecular testing for Huntington disease in Poland: 10 of the cause couldn’t be found at they didn’t present any associated years of experience malformations . 5 of the cases from those with cranio-vertebral W. Krysa1, A. Sulek-Piatkowska1, E. Zdzienicka1, D. Hoffman-Zacharska2, E. dysraphism presented Arnold/Chiari II malformations associated with Fidzianska1, M. Rakowicz1, J. Kulczycki1, J. Zaremba1; meningomyelocele and 3 of those cases presented Arnold/Chiari III 1Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Mother and malformation associated with meningoencephalocele . The clinical Child, Warsaw, Poland. manifestations were those of the classic hydrocephaly associated Huntington disease (HD) belongs to neurodegenerative disorders with: recurring seizures, paresis, paralysis of the inferior limbs in 4 resulting from polyglutamine coding CAG repeat expansion in the IT15 cases, apnea crisis, acrocyanosis . Cerebral imaging was used to locus on chromosome 4p . It is an autosomal dominant, progressive and appreciate the ventricular enlargement and the degree of compression late onset, disorder characterised by involuntary choreatic movements, of the cerebral tissue . The evolution of the cases showed a high rate cognition and emotion abnormalities . The anticipation phenomenon of decease- 51,4 % .Conclusions: The fast evoluting hydrocephaly was and strong negative correlation between age at onset and CAG repeats the primary cause of death at the cases with associated malformations . number is observed like in other polyglutaminopathies . The most frequently met malformation types were: cranio- cerebral Molecular diagnostics of HD has been carried on in the Department dysraphism and agenesis of the corpus callosum . of Genetics in the Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology since 1995 . During 10 years we have performed molecular analysis in 1450 patients P0147. mutation spectra of ABCC gene in spanish patients with suspected of HD . Genetic analyses - symptomatic and predictive Hyperinsulinism of infancy (Hi) testing - confirmed dynamic mutation in locus IT15 in 830 individuals . A. Fernández-Marmiesse1, S. Antonio2, A. Vega1, J. Fernández-Lorenzo3, J. Among those subjects 670 were manifesting symptoms of HD and 165 Barreiro3, A. Carracedo1; were in preclinical stage of the disease; in seven cases prenatal tests 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular FPGMX, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, were performed . Affected subjects were grouped in 600 pedigrees . 22Unidad de Genética, Instituto de Medicina Legal, Facultad de Medicina, San- Moreover, in two pedigrees, we documented two de novo mutations tiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Clínico Universita- during paternal transmission . Our genetic tests revealed also 106 rio de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. individuals with more than 50 CAG repeats . Among them there were 39 Hyperinsulinism of Infancy (HI; OMIM: 256450) is a clinical disorder juvenile cases of the age at onset below 20 years (range 2-19) . As for characterized by deregulation of insulin secretion that leads to alleles of incomplete penetrance (36-39 (CAG)) we have detected 27 profound hypoglycemia . Mutations in genes encoding the ATP- n cases; we came across one contraction phenomenon which occurred regulated potassium channels of the pancreatic ß-cell, namely ABCC8 during maternal transmission . (SUR1) and KCNJ11 (Kir6 .2), are the major genetic known cause of the disease . To elucidate the genetic etiology of HI in the uncharacterized P0145. Vitamin D dependent Rickets type ii; Report of two Spanish population, we conducted extensive sequencing analysis of Affected siblings in a consanguineous iranian family and the ABCC8 (83 .5Kb) and KCNJ11 (1 .7Kb) genes in 34 Spanish HI Review of the Literature patients . Mutations in ABCC8 were detected for both alleles in 13 N. Momenin, Y. Shafeghati, G. Vakili; patients, while ten patients carried only one mutation in one of the Genetics Research Center, University of Welfare Sciences and Rehabilitation, ABCC8 alleles . We have detected 22 novel and seven previously Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. described mutations in ABCC8, ~60% of them lead to a premature Hereditary vitamin D resistant rickets is a genetically determined and termination signal, which would result in truncated SUR1 proteins . No rare autosomal recessive disorder, most often caused by mutations in mutations were found in the KCNJ11 gene . In addition, we report for the VitD receptor gene . It usually presents with rachitic changes not the first time a 3914bp macrodeletion associated with the HI disorder. responsive to VitD . Circulating levels of 1,25(OH)2VitD3 is elevated, The potential pathogenicity of several additional variants is discussed . thus differentiating it from VitD dependent rickets type I . Alopecia of the The spatial pattern of three pathological mutations suggests possible scalp or whole body is seen in some families with type II variant . This geographical founder effects. This work reveals for first time the is usually associated with a more sever phenotype . involvement of KATP channels in the pathogenesis of an important In this report, we present our findings on a family exhibited the typical proportion (~68%) of Spanish HI patients . The spectrum of mutations clinical features of HVDRR in two siblings . The proband is now an 18- in Spanish HI patients provides an important tool for diagnosis and month-old boy . He is the third offspring of a healthy couple . At the end prognosis of HI patients in the Spanish population, as well as for of the first month of his life alopecia occurred and progressed to total genetic counseling of HI families . loss of his scalp hair, along with refractory rickets . Cardinal findings in our case were: alopecia totalis, renal tubular P0148. molecular-genetic study PTS gene and QDPR gene of acidosis, mild generalized aminoaciduria, refractory rickets, high Russian PKU patients. alkaline phosphatase, and hyperparathyroidism . Skin biopsy performed A. A. Stepanova1, L. Kuznetsova2, N. Kanonenko3, I. Vasilkova4, T. Golihina5, and the result was alopecia areata . Investigation for detection of T. Osipova6, S. Tverskaya1, A. Polyakov1; molecular abnormality is underway . 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2City The older child of the family was a boy which had similar disease and children’s psychiatric hospital N6, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Medical ge- died because of its complications at the age of 32 month . The 2nd child netics consultation Kursk, Kursk, Russian Federation, 4Medical genetics con- is a healthy 5-year-old girl . Parents are relatives . We should be aware sultation St.-Petersburg, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5Medical genetics of this very rare disease, whenever we see a patient is suffering from consultation Krasnodar, Krasnodar, Russian Federation, 6Medical genetics refractory rickets with alopecia . consultation Izhevsk, Izhevsk, Russian Federation.Clinical genetics 1 Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) may be caused by deficiency of Mutations of the T-cap gene have been recently reported in autosomal phenylalanine hydroxylase or tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), the essential dominant HCM and DCM without myopathy . cofactor for the aromatic amino acid hydroxylases . The most We aimed at determining the prevalence of T-cap gene mutations in frequent form of this cofactor deficiency is due to lack of 6-pyruvoyl- a consecutive series of 200 patients clinically diagnosed with familial tetrahydropterin synthase (PTPS) activity and dihydropteridine and sporadic DCM (n = 100), and HCM (n = 100) . reductase (DHPR) activity . The series includes 200 index patients diagnosed with HCM and DCM We report the molecular genetic study pyruvoyltetrahydropterin using WHO criteria that accepted to enter our clinical and genetic synthase (PTS) gene and dihydropteridine reductase (QDPR) gene program on familial cardiomyopathies . The local Ethical Committee in the group of 12 PKU-patients from different Russian regions without has formally approved the project . T-cap gene has been screened by mutations in PAH gene . We have found that one patient from this DHPLC and bidirectional sequencing of heteroduplex amplicons . group have novel mutation p .Ala135Asp in homozygous in the QDPR We identified five heterozygous T-cap gene mutations (5 of 200 gene . Her mother has this mutation in heterozygous but father are patients, 2 .5%), four in familial HCM [R106C in two unrelated probands, inaccessible for investigation . Two known mutations (p .Asn72Lys and and 637_640 Del2G in further two unrelated probands] (4%) and one p .Thr106Met) were determined in compound heterozygosity in two [R63C] in one familial DCM (1%) . The mutations were absent in a unrelated patients from different Russian regions . Four new mutations series of 100 healthy controls . were found in the PTS gene . One patient was compound heterozygosity Telethonin encoding T-cap gene mutations are associated to inherited with two missense mutations: p .Ser32Gly and p .Val59Gly . Another DCM and HCM: the prevalence is higher in HCM than in DCM . This patient showed new mutation IVS5-1g>a in heterozygous state in study provides the genetic epidemiology basis for progressing with compound with unidentified mutation. The substitution g.7068G>A in further investigations on the role of telethonin in myocardial diseases 9 bp after stop codon was determined in one patient in heterozygous and definition of precise clinical phenotype associated with these state but none of 60 population donors reviled this alteration . mutations . All patients have psychomotor system delay in spite of low phenylalanine serum level at low- phenylalanine diet therapy . P0151. investigation of “malignant mutations” MYH gene in Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in iranian patients P0149. Novel myosin Binding Protein c founder mutations may M. Montazeri1, M. Ghani Kakhki1, G. Estahbanati2, A. Paydar1, F. Nouhi2, M. confer severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Peyghambari3, N. Givtaj3, E. Zaklyazminskaya4, M. Houshmand1; Y. M. Hoedemaekers1, F. J. ten Cate2, W. Deelen1, R. van der Graaf1, M. J. M. 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Kofflard2, E. Biagini2, D. J. J. Halley1, D. F. Majoor - Krakauer1, D. Dooijes1; Republic of Iran, 2. Iran University of Medical Sciences Shaheed Rajaie Car- 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Nether- diovascular Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Iran University lands, 2Thoraxcenter Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. of Medical Sciences Shaheed Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical Center, Tehran, Background Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is caused Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Russian Research Center of Medical Genetics, Labo- by mutations in more than 11 genes, mostly encoding sarcomeric ratory of DNA Research, Moscow, Russian Federation. proteins. Most HCM mutations arise independently; founder effects Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by hypertrophy are rarely observed . Mutations in the sarcomeric Myosin-Binding- of ventricles and intrventricular septum . Patients could develop serious Protein-C-gene (MYBPC3) are associated with late onset HCM and complications including heart failure, arrhythmias and sudden death . a relatively benign clinical expression. Previously we identified the HCM has autosomal dominant inheritance . Methods In this study MYBPC3 2373insG mutation as an important Dutch HCM founder we focused on exons 13-15 and 19-21 of MYH7 gene and introns mutation . The MYBPC3 gene was sequenced in 208 Dutch HCM located between them, which contain hotspots for so called “malignant probands to establish the prevalence of MYBPC3 associated HCM in mutations” that increase sudden cardiac death risk . Methods: Fifty the Dutch population . unrelated Iranian patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were Results A pathogenic MYBPC3-gene mutation was identified in selected sequentially and informed written consent was obtained 95/208 (46%) probands . In addition to the 2373insG mutation, found from them. We find mutation V411I in exon 13, one of them, A10419C in 19% (38/208), we identified the R943X and 2864delCT mutations (N444T) in exon 14 may be a novel mutation, and also some mutation in 8% (16/208) and 7% (15/208) respectively . Subsequent extended in intronic region such as IE14 T10630A, IE14 C10663T, E19 R703R, haplotype analysis demonstrated the R943X and 2864delCT mutations I19 A13573G, I20 C13879G, and I20 C13978A .We are investigating to be additional HCM founder mutations in the Dutch population . on others exons of this gene . Cardiological parameters were analysed in 16 families (23 carriers) with the R943X mutation and in 12 families (20 carriers) with the P0152. severe hypodontia in siblings 2864delCT mutation . Sudden death was observed in 56% (9/16) and E. Severin, C. Albu, D. F. Albu; 58% (7/12) of the respective families . “Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. HCM prognosis was considered malignant in 38% (5/13) of the R943X Background: Isolated severe hypodontia is a rare developmental tooth families and in 56% (5/9) of the 2864delCT families . anomaly and involves the absence of six or more permanent teeth, conclusion The R943X and 2864delCT mutations are additional excluding the third molars . Twin, sibling and familial studies are used to MYBPC3 founder mutations in the Dutch population . Intrafamilial offer more information about genetic and/or environmental determinants variability in age at onset and in severity of clinical symptoms was of hypodontia . Objectives: To analyze the congenital hypodontia pattern observed . In contrast to earlier studies reporting MYBPC3 mutations to in sibs; to find evidence that intrafamilial variation of hypodontia is caused be relatively benign, both HCM mutations are associated with severe by mutations in the Pax9 gene . Patients and methods: 58 families heart failure symptoms and possible malignant prognosis . with hypodontia in two or three successive generations were evaluated clinically and radiographically and three unrelated patients were selected P0150. Prevalence of telethonin encoding t-cap gene in a based on their severe phenotype . Their DNA blood samples were consecutive series of 200 patients diagnosed with Hypertrophic analyzed by PCR . Inclusion criteria: patients with severe hypodontia (Hcm) and Dilated cardiomyopathy (Dcm) and their siblings who expressed at least one missing permanent tooth; A. Pilotto1, A. Brega2, M. Tagliani1, M. Grasso1, N. Marziliano1, M. Pasotti3, C. affected biological parents were included too . Exclusion criteria: patients Lucchelli1, E. Disabella1, E. Porcu1, E. Arbustini1; and their siblings with missing teeth due to decay or gum disease . 1Center for Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases-IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Results: the probands and their siblings did not share similar pattern of Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Università degli hypodontia with regard to the tooth class, region, symmetry and number Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 3Cardiology Department-IRCCS Policlinico San of teeth involved . In all the cases, hypodontia followed a similar pattern Matteo, Pavia, Italy. of inheritance: autosomal-dominant with incomplete expression and Telethonin is a sarcomeric protein of 19 kDa possibly localized to the reduce penetrance on the side affected jaw . The association between the Z-disc of adult striated skeletal and cardiac muscles, where it interacts presence of a certain mutation and the resulting pattern of hypodontia with the protein titin . Mutations in the T-cap gene encoding telethonin was not yet confirmed. conclusions: Severe hypodontia phenotype is cause LGMD2G, a relatively mild form of autosomal recessive LGMD . caused by a large number of different possible mutations .Clinical genetics 1 P0153. Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in a girl with a 9;X P0155. Polymorphisms of Estrogen Receptor Beta Gene Are insertion and completely skewed X chromosome inactivation Associated with Hypospadias K. Ørstavik1,2, G. S. Knudsen2, H. Nordgarden3, E. Ormerod4, P. Strømme5, T. A. Beleza-Meireles1, I. Kockum1, L. Frisén1, A. Nordenskjöld1,2; E. Prescott1, G. Houge6; 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Astrid Lindgren Children Hospital, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet University Hospital, Oslo, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Norway, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty Division Rikshospitalet, Introduction: Hypospadias is a common congenital male urethral University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 3Resource Centre for Oral Health in Rare malformation, defined as the displacement of the urethral meatus Medical Conditions, Lovisenberg Diakonale Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Depart- ventrally from the tip of the glans penis . The importance of androgen ment of Medical Genetics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Depart- receptor (AR) in male external genitalia development has been well ment of Pediatrics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 6Center for Medi- recognized . Recently, the presence of active estrogen receptors (ESR) cal Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, in the developing male genitalia has been demonstrated . There are Norway. two isoforms of the human estrogen receptor, ESR1 and ESR2 . The X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED) is due to a detrimental effects of environmental toxicants with estrogenic activity mutation in the ED1 gene located just proximal to the X inactivation are mediated, in mice models, by ESR1, leading to feminization of centre . The disorder affects males primarily but carrier females may male external genitalia . Besides, it has been shown that individuals have mild manifestations . We report a 2-year old girl with severe with relatively short CA repeat polymorphism in ESR2 displayed higher manifestations of XLHED . androgen levels than those with longer CA repeats . We hypothesized case report: The presenting complaint was sore eyes and photophobia . that modifications in these nuclear receptors’ genes could lead to Her hair was sparse and thin . She had eyelashes but virtually no hypospadias . eyebrows . Her skin was fair with a tendency to wrinkling under the eyes . Patients & Methods: We have genotyped the CA repeat polymorphism She had a single erupted conical maxillary incisor . Three more conical in ESR2 and the TA repeat polymorphism in ESR1 in sixty boys with teeth in the same region were evident radiologically . Psychomotor hypospadias and in a control population . development was normal . Parents were healthy and unrelated . Results: The CA repeat polymorphism in ESR2 is prolonged in Laboratory investigations: Routine chromosome analysis was hypospadias patients than in controls (P<0,05) . normal . X chromosome inactivation was completely skewed with the Discussion: Variations in the ESR2 seem to influence risk to paternal X preferentially active . FISH paint X showed an insertion of hypospadias . Longer CA repeat polymorphisms might increas X material into chromosome 9 . Further analyses using BAC probes susceptibility to hypospadias due to lower levels of androgens . As towards ED1 and XIST confirmed that a fragment of at least 4Mb ESR2 is likely to be involved in the prenatal sexual differentiation, it containing XIST was inserted into 9p13 in conjunction with a de novo is possible that the effects observed are due to early organizational pericentric inversion of chromosome 9. The final karyotype was 46,X effects of this receptor . Acute effects of these receptors on the hormonal X,ins(9;X)(p13;q13q21)inv(9)(p13q13). BAC FISH confirmed that the production in the adrenal glands may be an explanation . proximal breakpoint was in the ED1 gene . The distal breakpoint was distal to the XIST locus but was not further mapped . Both parents had P0156. A particular case of syndromatic ichthyosis normal chromosomes, and the mother had a random X inactivation C. Skrypnyk1, O. Bartsch2, M. Bembea1, V. Filip3, I. I. Vancsik4; pattern . 1University of Oradea, Genetics Department, Oradea, Romania, 2Institute of conclusion: Since XIST was lacking on the X chromosome with a Human Genetics, Mainz, Germany, 3University of Oradea, Pediatrics Depart- disrupted ED1 gene, the normal X chromosome was inactivated ment, Oradea, Romania, 4University of Oradea, Dentristry Department, Oradea, resulting in a severe phenotype of XLHED in this girl . Romania. Congenital ichthyoses represent a vast and markedly heterogeneous P0154. Hypomelanosis of ito and camptodactyly: A case Report group of diseases characterized by severe keratinization with intense N. O. Dávalos1,2, R. E. Vega1, M. González3, I. J. García-González1, M. G. scaling of the whole integument, often associated with erythema .We López-Cardona1; present a particular case diagnosed at birth with lamelar erythroderma 1Instituto de Genética Humana, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara, Gua- ichthyosis . Our patient is a 10 years old girl, the tenth child of an unrelated dalajara, Mexico, 2Genetica, Hospital Regional “Dr. Valentin Gomez Farias” and apparently normal couple, delivered at 36 weeks of gestation, (Wt ISSSTE, Guadalajara, Mexico, 3Neuropediatria, HR, VGRF, ISSSTE, Guadala- 2550 gr, Apgar score 6) . The patient had a brother and a sister which jara, Mexico. died in the first days of their life with congenital ichtyosis. Postnatal Ibtroduction: Hypomelanosis of Ito (HI) is a disorder characterized by development was delayed, with short stature and severe mental unilateral or bilateral macular hypopigmented whorls, streaks, and retardation . The patient evaluation revealed that ichthyosis is associate patches . Abnormalities of eyes, musculo-skeletal system and of the with craniofacial dysmophism ( microphthalmia, anteverted nares, central nervous system may also occur . Other associated anomalies in macrostomia, micrognathia, dental caries and enamel abnormalities, hands are clinodactyly, syndactyly, and polydactyly and few cases with ears annomalies), limbs annomalies (arachnodactyly, fingers and HI and camptodactyly have been reported . Case report: 22 months-old toes join contractures, congenital dislocation of hip, bilateral with female with delayed psychomotor development and short stature . At femoral hypoplasia) . The association between ichthyosis, craniofacial physical examination her weight wa 6,500 g (-3pc); heigth of 75 cm dysmorphology, hip dislocation and mental retardation allows us to (-3pc), CFO 47.5 (80-90); thin hair with alopecia in temporal regions, believe that this case is about a syndromatic ichthyosis . The karyotype facial dysmorphy characterized by triangular face, wide and prominent was normal and excluded a chromosomal etiology . FISH evaluation forehead, hypertelorism, down-slant9ing palpebral fisures, depressed for Conradi-Hunermann syndrome and for Kallmann syndrome shown bridge of the nose, short philtrum, thin lips, low-set and dysmorphic no deletion of the EBP gene on Xp11 .23, respectiv the STS gene on ears; hypopigmented whorls, streaks, and patchy skin lesions that Xp22 .32 . There is the posibility of a dominant ichthyosis caused by follow the lines of Blaschko on all body . The hands showed fusiform a germinal mosaicism of a molecular mutation or a severe form of a fingers, bilateral camptodactyly in 2-4th fingers, thenar and hypothenar recesive ichthyosis caused by a mutation in one of the involved genes . hypoplasia . In the lower extremities there was shortening of the The molecular evaluation can elucidate the case . tibia and hallux valgus in the right foot . Discussion: The HI (OMIM 300337) is an entity, with a wide clinical spectrum, and the principal P0157. clinical outcome of 8-year-old icsi children and differential diagnosis in this case is the Terminal Osseous Dysplasia spontaneously conceived children and Pigmentary Defects Syndrome that is characterized by abnormal F. M. P. M. Belva; and delayed ossification of bones in the hands and feet, brachydactyly, Centre for Medical Genetics, AZ-VUB, Brussels, Belgium. camptodactyly, and clinodactyly, severe limb deformities, joint Background: Although thousands of children are born worldwide after contractures and pigmentary skin lesions . The others skeletal and skin ICSI, there is still a major concern about its safety and the potential abnormalities could be explained as part of the variable expressivity in risks for the health and future fertility of the offspring . HI . As long as the molecular basis remains unknown, clinical criteria Methods: The medical outcome of 150 8-year-old children born will be the only support for HI diagnosis and classification through ICSI was compared with 147 singletons of the same age born Clinical genetics 1 after spontaneous conception (SC) . A full clinical examination was P0159. the interleukin-10 -627c/A promoter polymorphism is performed with special attention to congenital anomalies and pubertal associated with essential hypertension in tatars from Russia development . Information about their general health was obtained Y. R. Timasheva1, T. R. Nasibullin1, A. N. Zakirova2, O. E. Mustafina1; from the parents by means of a questionnaire . 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir Results: No significant medical or neurological problem was State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. documented in the two studied groups . Physical examination did not Aims . Interleukin-10 is an immunoregulatory cytokine with various reveal important differences between ICSI and SC children . Weight, actions . Experiments on knockout and transgenic mice showed that it heigth, head circumference and Body Mass Index did not differ had possible atheroprotective effect . Essential hypertension is thought between the two groups . 15/150 (10%) ICSI children experienced a to be a multifactorial disorder involved in endothelial dysfunction and major congenital malformation compared to 5/147 (3 .3%) SC children atherosclerosis . Previously it was reported that -627 C/A promoter (RR 2.94; 95% CI 1.09-7.89). Minor malformations were found in polymorphism was associated with decreased interleukin-10 plasma 35/145 (24 .1%) ICSI children compared to 25/145 (17 .2%) in SC level . The aim of the present study was to evaluate the association children (RR 1.40; 95% CI 0.88-2.21). Pubertal staging was similar between the interleukin-10 gene -627 C/A promoter polymorphism and in both groups . Genital examination, nearly in all children performed, genetic susceptibility to essential hypertension . showed comparable numbers of abnormalities in boys (ICSI 4%, SC materials and methods: We carried out genotyping of 274 men with 6 .6%) and girls (all normal) . essential hypertension and 99 healthy subjects from Tatar ethnic group Conclusion: Physical examination including a thorough neurological from Bashkortostan, Russia, by polymerase chain reaction restriction examination revealed reassuring findings. Major congenital fragment length polymorphism method . Statistical analysis was malformations appeared to be more frequent in the ICSI group . Overall performed using Fisher’s exact test, P-value of <0 .05 was taken as general health of the children born after ICSI seems satisfactory . statistically significant. Further monitoring of these children regarding further puberty and Results: The frequencies of IL-10 -627C/A genotypes were the future fertility is mandatory . following: CC 71 .72%, CA 27 .27% and AA 1 .01% in control group, CC 51 .81 %, CA 39 .8% and AA 8 .39% in hypertensive patients Thus, in P0158. The Frequency of IL-2, IL-6 and Interferon γ- genes Tatar ethnic group AA genotype was associated with increased risk of polymorphisms in Hepatitis B patients in iran essential hypertension (OR=8 .98, P=0,006) . L. Najafi, L. Najafi, Z. Hajebrahimi, L. Alidoust, M. Somi, M. Firoozi, M. Zali; conclusion: Our results suggest an important role for interleukin-10 in Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases -Shaheed Beheshti the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease . University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Background: Cytokines play an important role in the defense against P0160. two cases with interstitial deletion of chromosome 2p viral infection, both indirectly, through determination of the predominant L. Letica, R. Lasan, S. Huljev, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, K. Crkvenac Gornik, D. pattern of the host response, and directly, through inhibition of viral Begovic; replication. Several pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-2, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University interferon-gamma and tumor necrosis factor-alpha have been identified Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. as participating in the viral clearance and the host immune response Structural deletions of the short arm of the chromosome 2 are rare . We to HBV . The aim of the present study was to investigate whether the report two cases of interstitial deletion of chromosome 2p . IL-6 (-174), IL-2 (-330), IFN-g (-874) promoter polymorphisms was First patient - physical evaluation at the age of three showed mild associated with outcomes of HBV infection in Iranian patients . dysmorfic feature, low set protruding ears with mongoloid palpebral methods: In a case-control study, we examined 96 unrelated patients fissures. He was treated because of bilateral vesicouretheral reflux. His with Chronic Hepatitis B and 96 spontaneously recovered, were referred speech was poorly developed, with other signs of mild psychomotoric to Taleghani hospital . The healthy control group consisted of 96 people retardation . Chromosome analysis of blood cells with G-banding who all had been matched by age and sex . The polymorphisms were showed an interstitial deletion of chromosome 2p . Parental karyotypes detected by PCR-RFLP . were normal . Patients karyotype was 46, xy, del (2) (p12p10) de Results: The IL-2, IL-6 and IFN-g genotype distribution and allele novo . frequency in patients and controls are shown in Table 1 . Second patient, the two years old boy with several dismorphic features: Our results show that there is no association between each prominent forehead, mongoloid palpebral fissures, epicanthic folds, polymorphisms and chronic hepatitis B patients over spontaneously broad nasal bridge, short, well formed philtrum, low set protruding ears recovered (p>0 .05) . and bilateral simian crease . He showed signs of mild psychomotoric conclusion: These findings are in contrast with other studied developmental delay with poorly developed speech . Conventional population (Black, Hispanic and Asian), therefore distribution of these banding cytogenetics showed an interstitial deletion of chromosome polymorphisms are strongly ethnic dependent . Determination of 2p . Karyotyping of the parents revealed that the father carried small these genotypes is probably not a suitable genetic marker for the risk ring shaped supernumerary marker chromosome, in addition to the assessment of HBV in our subject . interstitial deletion 2p . The karyotypes of the child’s grandparents were table 1- Distribution of polymorphisms and alleles frequency normal. FISH identified the marker which consisted of the proximal region of the p-arm of chromosome 2 including a part of its centromere . Healthy spontaneous chronic polymorphisms The final karyotype was described as 47,xy,del(2)(p11.2p10),+ mar de controls recovered HBV HB novo . ish der (2)(wcp 2+, D2Z1 +) (ISCN 1995) . The rare example shows that our marker chromosome is a part of a balanced karyotype . T/T The father in our case may produce unbalanced offspring and prenatal 27 .4% 27 .1% 24% IL-(- G/T or G/G diagnosis must be recommended . 72 .6% 72 .9% 76% 0) Allele G=.% G=.% G=% P0161. Prevalence of AHI1 and NPHP1 mutations and genotype- Frequency phenotype correlations in a cohort of 25 Dutch patients with Joubert syndrome. G/G 47 .4% 58 .2% 53 .6% H. Y. Kroes1, P. H. A. van Zon1, D. Lindhout1, M. Geelen1, D. E. Fransen van de IL-6 C/G or C/C Putte1, R. A. J. Nievelstein2, R. S. Sinke1; 52 .6% 41 .8% 46 .4% (-1) Allele 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Nether- C=.% C=6.% C=% Frequency lands, 2Dept. of Pediatric Radiology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands. T/T Joubert syndrome (JBS) is an mental retardation syndrome with 6.1% .% 1.% IFN-g(- A/T or A/A hypotonia, ataxia, vermis hypoplasia, oculomotor abnormalities, and .% 6.% .% ) Allele a characteristic breathing pattern . Associated anomalies include renal A=60% A=% A=% and retinal disease . JBS shows autosomal recessive inheritance, FrequencyClinical genetics 1 and is genetically heterogeneous . Mutations in the AHI1-gene or (ASD, VSD, dextroposition) were recorded in 71,74% of the cases . Half homozygous deletions of the NPHP1-gene have been found in a of the patients associated also short nose and increased susceptibility subset of patients, and linkage to loci on chromosome 9 and 11 has to infections . Rare defects recorded in our cases were: cleft/ high- been described . arched palate, dental abnormalities, brachydactyly, irregular toes In a cohort of 25 Dutch patients with JBS we performed DNA-analysis of implantation, joint hyperextensibility and genitourinary abnormalities . AHI1, NPHP1, and the candidate gene CCND1 . Sequence analysis of Some particularities (e .g . heart dextroposition, shawl scrotum and renal AHI1 revealed DNA-alterations in seven patients . Three patients were failure) will be presented . The severity of the disorder will be analyzed compound heterozygous for truncating mutations . All but one were according to the presence/ absence of some factors . A comprehensive novel mutations not reported before . Two patients were homozygous differential diagnosis will complete the presentation . for two presumably pathogenic missense mutations . In two patients In conclusion we did a clinical study of 7 cases with Kabuki make-up one possibly pathogenic missense mutation was identified. syndrome and found in all of them ocular and auricular abnormalities, Homozygous deletions of NPHP1 were not detected in any of the fetal pads and mental retardation . Other frequent features are postnatal patients . Sequence-analysis of CCND1 revealed no mutations . growth retardation with microcephaly, micrognathia, heart defects and AHI1 mutations account for 20% of JBS patients in our study population . increased susceptibility to infections . Patient’s prognosis depends on The five patients that were homozygous or compound heterozygous the presence/ absence of cardiac defects, renal failure, and severity of for AHI1 mutations all had classical neurological features of JBS and mental retardation . retinal dystrophy . Renal disease or other JBS associated features were not present . The two patients with a heterozygous missense mutation P0164. Kallmann syndrome can be caused by mutations in CHD both had retinal colobomas and renal disease . Colobomas have only M. C. J. Jongmans1, K. P. van der Donk1, M. M. van Bers1, N. Sato2, T. Ogata2, been described in JBS families that show linkage to chromosome 11 . H. G. Brunner1, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij1, L. H. Hoefsloot1; This could mean that the phenotypic spectrum of AHI1 mutations may 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, be broader than currently assumed . 2National Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. The combination of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with anosmia P0162. Psychiatric and cognitive difficulties - onset of juvenile due to olfactory bulb a/dysplasia, is known as Kallmann syndrome (KS) . Huntington disease? study of 29 patients Associated features can be bimanual synkinesia, renal agenesis, cleft P. Ribai1, K. Nguyen2, V. Hahn-Barma2, I. Gourfinkel-An2, M. Vidailhet3, A. lip/palate, dental agenesis and hearing loss . Two genes, responsible Legout4, C. Dodé5, A. Brice1, A. Durr1; for KS in approximately 20% of all cases, have been identified: KAL1, 1Department of genetic, Cytogenetic and Embryology, Paris, France, involved in the X-linked form (KAL1, OMIM #308700) and FGFR1, 2Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 3Salpêtrière Hospital, Saint-Antoine Hos- causing the autosomal dominant form (KAL2, OMIM #147950) . pital, Paris, France, 4Centre Hospitalier du Mans, Le Mans, France, 5Institut CHARGE syndrome (OMIM #214800) is characterized by a variety Cochin, Paris, France. of congenital anomalies, including renal agenesis, cleft lip/palate and BACKGROUND: Juvenile Huntington’s disease (JHD) is a rare clinical hearing loss . CHD7 on chromosome 8q12 .1 was discovered as the entity characterized by an age at onset before 20 . Patients usually major gene involved in CHARGE syndrome . Recent studies showed have an expansion of more than 60 CAG repeats in the HD gene that anosmia and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism are consistent and paternal transmission is the rule . PATIENTS AND METHODS: findings in CHARGE syndrome as well. Therefore, we investigated We retrospectively reviewed clinical and genetic data of JHD patients whether mutations in CHD7 can also cause KS . (n=29) seen at the Referral center for HD of the Salpêtrière hospital, Patients with a clinical diagnosis of KS, without mutations in KAL1 or Paris, France, between 1990 and 2005 . RESULTS: The mean delay FGFR1 were screened for CHD7 mutations. None of the patients fulfilled before diagnosis was 9±6 years (0-21) . The most remarkable signs the diagnostic criteria for CHARGE syndrome . Sequencing of CHD7 at onset were severe psychiatric and cognitive disturbances (19/29, has been performed in six patients so far . This revealed a nonsense 65 .5%), whereas rigidity was absent . Unusual signs at onset included mutation in one KS patient with perceptive deafness and hypodontia, myoclonic head tremor in 3 patients, severe isolated drug or alcohol and a missense mutation in two KS patients without associated addiction in 2, psychotic disorder in 1 and difficulty writing in 1. During features . These mutations have not been described in CHARGE the course of the disease, psychiatric disturbances were severe syndrome previously, nor have they been marked as polymorphisms . with at least one suicide attempt in 7/29 patients . Transmission was These preliminary data (more patients are to be sequenced and maternal in 25% . Forty-six percent of JHD patients had less than 60 testing of the parents will reveal whether these mutations are de novo) CAG repeats, six of whom inherited the disease from their father . suggest that the spectrum associated with CHD7 mutations includes Anticipation (18±9 versus 25±11, p=0 .27) and age at onset (17 .14±2 .2 (variant) Kallman syndrome . versus 13 .29±5 .5 years, p=0 .086) were similar in patients with maternal compared to paternal transmission . CONCLUSION: Most JHD patients P0165. A familial case of Kartagener’s syndrome revealed by started the disease with psychiatric and cognitive difficulties. This azoospermia in an infertile man lead to misdiagnosis or diagnosis delay, especially in cases without N. B. Abdelmoula1, A. B. Sallemi1, I. Yangui2, R. Rekik3, M. M. Cherif4, A. familial history of HD . Maternal transmissions and expansions of less Amouri5, T. Rebai1; than 60 CAG repeats were unexpectedly frequent and should not be 1Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Hopital Hedi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Gy- considered exceptional . necologist, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Laboratory of Genetics, Tunis, Tunisia, 5Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia. P0163. Kabuki make - up syndrome - clinical study of seven Primary ciliary dyskinesia is a rare etiology of infertility in man . It is cases an autosomal recessive disease characterized by defective cilial R. Popescu1, C. Rusu2, M. Volosciuc2, M. Covic2; ultrastructure in ciliated cells and affects about 1 in 20000 newborns . 1Children’s Hospital Iasi - Medical Genetics Center, Iasi, Romania, 2University Regarded as a subgroup of primary ciliary dyskinesia, Kartagener‘s of Medicine and Pharmacy- Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, Romania. syndrome is characterized by the simultaneous presence of chronic Kabuki make-up syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by distinctive bronchorrhea with bronchiectasis, chronic sinusitis and situs inversus . facial features, dermatoglyphic abnormalities, short stature and Infertility, occasionally described in males, is caused by ultrastructural mental retardation . Some cases associate cleft palate, cardiovascular defects of sperm tails with always total asthenozoospermia . and genitourinary defects and recurrent infections . Most cases are We report a consanguineous family with two siblings, a male and a sporadic . The underlying genetic mechanism remains unknown . female, who have a typical Kartagener‘s syndrome and another dead We have analyzed the clinical picture and investigations in 7 children brother who seems to be affected . The diagnosis was established on diagnosed with Kabuki syndrome (two girls and five boys). All the the basis of clinical grounds and familial history of a 33-year old man cases associated ocular and auricular defects (long palpebral fissures, who was referred for cytogenetic exploration because of 11 months eversion of lower lateral eyelid, arched eyebrows, long eyelashes and history of male infertility with azoospermia in semen analysis . Clinical large/ prominent ears, fetal pads and mental retardation . Postnatal history and physical examination revealed presence of situs inversus growth retardation with microcephaly, micrognathia and heart defects totalis, chronic bronchorrhea and bronchiectasis, chronic nasal Clinical genetics 16 symptoms, sinusitis and infertility . Serum FSH, LH and testosterone of the risk for refractory seizures . However, follow up of the child were normal and the patient had a normal 46,XY karyotype . The showed satisfactory growth velocity and spontaneous appearance of patient‘s sister was also affected and had similar features with the pubertal signs . Favorable outcome of the height without a hormonal same respiratory symptoms and situs inversus totalis . After some replacement therapy is due to the tendency towards higher growth in difficulties to conceive, she gave birth to a healthy female child and a persons with KS . male stillborn with multiple congenital abnormalities . Their third sister According to our knowledge, this case represents a rare association had also history of foetal congenital abnormalities . The infertile patient between Klinefelter syndrome, growth hormone deficiency, and who sought an ICSI treatment underwent genetic counselling in which refractory seizures . Since additional abnormalities of the brain, he was informed about all possible risks . especially hypophyseal region were not discovered, the reason for this association remains undiscovered . Concomitant presence of other P0166. Recurrent and novel mutations in human matrix Gla condition associated with seizures and IGHD with KS is possible . protein in Keutel syndrome. B. Xavier1,2, L. Mittaz-Crettol1, S. Unger3, N. Quercia4, K. Y. Zwarts5, A. J. P0168. Klinefelter syndrome associated with a prolactin- van Essen5, F. G. Dikkers6, L. A. Rödiger7, N. Elcioglu8, A. Superti-Furga9, L. secreting adenoma Bonafé1; A. Maaroufi1, R. Braham1, H. Elghezal2, S. Trimeche1, K. Ach1, M. Chaieb1, A. 1Division of Molecular Pediatrics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Saad2, L. Chaieb1; Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Instituto de Medicina Molecular, GenoMed, Lisboa, 1Endocrinology department. Farhat Hached university teaching hospital, Portugal, 3Department of Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany, 4Medical Genet- sousse, Tunisia, 2Cytogenetics and reproductive biology department. Farhat ics, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Department of Clinical Hached university teaching hospital, sousse, Tunisia. Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, Klinefelter syndrome is the most common form of male hypogonadism . 6Department of Otorhinolaryngology , University Medical Center Groningen, It is a genetically determined primary gonadal defect characterized Groningen, The Netherlands, 7Department of Radiology, University Medical by the XXY karyotype . Pituitary changes in patients with Klinefelter Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 8Department of Pediatric Ge- syndrome have not been evaluated in detail . In fact, protracted netics, Marmara University Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 9Centre for Pediatrics and stimulation of gonadotrophs due to lack of androgen feedback might Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg University Hospital, Freiburg, Germany. have been a factor in the formation of the gonadotroph adenoma or Keutel syndrome (KS; MIM 245150) is an autosomal recessive disorder in the development of gonadotroph hyperplasia . Clinically silent GH with abnormal calcification of cartilage (airways and ears), short distal microadenoma was also described . At our knowledge, only one case of phalanges, and facultative peripheral pulmonic stenosis . Four different association between Klinefelter and prolactin (PRL)-secreting adenoma mutations in MGP, the gene coding for Matrix-associated GLA protein, was reported . We report here a new case of this association . have been identified to date. A 16-year-old patient who consulted for gynaecomastia . Laboratory We have sequenced the MGP gene in 7 individuals with tracheobronchial findings showed hypogonadism with high concentrations of FSH and cartilage calcifications and brachytelephalangy, and found mutations in LH ( FSH=96 mUI/l and LH=38 mUI/l) and the diagnosis of Klinefelter 4 of them . Two girls of Turkish origin were homozygous for IVS1-2A>G, syndrome was confirmed by cytogenetic testing. However, the level previously observed in another Turkish family . One male patient, also of serum prolactin was high (PRL= 1030µUI/l) and the MR imaging born from Turkish parents, was homozygous for a novel IVS1+1G>A pituitary showed a non-invasive macroadenoma with enlarged sella mutation, located in the donor splice site at the exon1-intron1 junction . turcica The fourth patient, a female of Arab origin, was homozygous for Y29X, In conclusion, clinical features in Klinefelter syndrome are commonly previously found in a Belgian family . Unlike MGP-negative patients, all caused by peripheral hypogonadism . However, an association with families with MGP mutations were consanguineous . All patients had hyperprolactinemia must be researched . normal stature and none had neurological symptoms . We conclude that: 1) the association between MGP mutations and P0169. Kyphomelic dysplasia in a female infant with a de novo the KS phenotype is confirmed; 2) all MGP mutations predict a terminal Xp22.33-p22.22 deletion and skewed X-inactivation non functional protein, consistent with the known dose-dependent J. Kárteszi1, M. Czakó2, J. Weisenbach3, K. Adamovich3, G. Kosztolányi1, O. modulation of bone morphogenetic protein by MGP; 3) unlike most Bartsch4, É. Morava5; other disorders with excessive calcification, notably chondrodysplasia 1University of Pécs, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics and Child punctata in its variants, short stature is not a feature of KS; 4) the Development, Pécs, Hungary, 2MTA-PTE Clinical Genetics Research Group, paucity of reported cases, the frequency of parental consanguinity, Pécs, Hungary, 3University of Pécs, Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, and the presence of a recurrent mutation in Turkish families all seem Pécs, Hungary, 4Institute for Human Genetics, Mainz University School of Medi- to indicate that KS is significantly rarer than other disorders with cine, Mainz, Germany, 5UMC Nijmegen, Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen, abnormal cartilage calcification, although it may be comparatively less The Netherlands. rare in Turkey . We report on a female infant with kyphomelic dysplasia and a de novo deletion of the short arm of the paternal chromosome X . The patient had P0167. Klinefelter syndrome associated with moderate mental skewed inactivation of the X chromosome carrying the deletion . None retardation, seizures and isolated growth hormone deficiency - a of the clinical features of the syndromes located in the deleted region case report were present . The systemic skeletal disorder showed rhysomelic and E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Kocova, M. Krstevska-Konstantinova, G. Ilieva; mezomelic limb shortening, flaired ribs and skin dimples over the bony Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. prominences . Although the child had muscle hypotonia, no episodes Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is the most common cause of hypogonadism . of apnoe, feeding difficulties or temperature instability were observed. The boys usually have borderline intelligence, behavioral problems, Kyphomelic dysplasia is genetically heterogeneous, and has been tendency towards tall and disproportionate habitus . Associations previously suggested to have an autosomal recessive inheritence . between KS and other conditions are described . According to earlier reports 14 out of 19 reported cases with the typical A boy of 12 years has been referred to our clinic due to statural radiological finding were males. Our findings support a possible X- deficiency, hypogonadism and small testes. From the age of two years linked inheritance of this rare condition . he had seizures refractory to several combinations of anticonvulsant drugs . Dysmorphic features on his face included high forehead, P0170. clinical spectrum of late-onset cobalamin c disease deep-set eyes, broad and long nose, pointed chin . His height was 3 including three new cases and follow-up of two previously SDS below the mean, long arms and legs in accordance to the body described cases with a review of the literature height . His IQ was 40 and he had speech impairment and behavioral E. Roze1, G. Couvreur2, M. Horellou3, D. Ranoux4, S. Giraudier5, J. Desgres6, T. problems such as insecurity and shyness . Karyotype was 47, XXY . Moreau2, M. Giroud2, H. Ogier de Baulny7, D. Rosenblatt8, L. Faivre9, C. Thau- Because of short stature, hormonal tests for growth hormone have vin-Robinet9; been performed; all with the values below 2 ng/ml. MRI of the brain was 1Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Saint Antoine, Paris, France, 2Service de normal . Hormonal replacement therapy was not performed because Neurologie, Hôpital Général, CHU, Dijon, France, 3Service d’Hématologie Bio-Clinical genetics 1 logique, Hôpital de l’Hôtel-Dieu, Paris, France, 4Service de Neurologie, Centre Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Hospitalier Sainte-Anne, Paris, France, 5Service d’Hématologie-Biologique, University Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Medi- Hôpital Henri Mondor, Paris, France, 6Laboratoire de Biochimie spécialisée, cal Genetic, Şişli Etfal Research Laboratory, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Special Molecu- Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU, Dijon, France, 7Service de Neuropédiatrie, Maladies lar Genetic Diagnosis and Research Laboratory, Istanbul, Turkey. Métaboliques, Hôpital Robert-Debré, Paris, France, 8Division of Medical Ge- Leigh Syndrome is an inherited, progressive neurodegenerative netics, MUHC, Montreal General Hospital, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 9centre de disorder of infancy and childhood . Mutations in the nuclear SURF-1 génétique, Dijon, France. gene are specifically associated with cytochrome c oxidase deficient Cobalamin C disease (Cbl-C) is the most common of the inborn errors Leigh syndrome of cobalamin metabolism with recessive autosomal mode of inheritance Here, we describe two patients with similar facial features . One of and MMACHC gene mutations . Clinical features occur usually in the them was 2 and a half year-old boy and the other was three year- old first year of life including failure to thrive, microcephaly, poor feeding, boy with a mutation in SURF-1 gene and facial dysmorphism included vomiting, hypotonia, mild to moderate developmental delay, speech frontal bossing, brachycephaly, hypertrichosis, lateral displacement delay, and seizures . Some patients also present with macrocytic or of inner cani, esotrophia, maxillar hypoplasia, hypertrophic gums, microcytic anemia, hypersegmented neutrophils, thrombocytopenia, irregularly placed teeth, upturned nostril, low set big ears and and microthrombotic disease . Besides to the neonatal form, an adult retrognathi. First patient at 15 month-old his first MRI showed mild onset have been described with 10 cases reported in the literature to symmetric T2 prolongation involving the subthalamic nuclei .His second date . Here, we report on three new late-onset cases, the follow-up MRI at 2 years old revealed a symmetric T2 prolongation involving the of two previously reported cases and reviewed the literature . Clinical subthalamic nuclei, substansia nigra and medulla lesions . In second features include predominant neurological disturbances (12/13 cases) child at the age of 2; his first MRI showed heavy brain stem and with myelopathy, encephalopathy and psychiatric disturbances, subthalamic nuclei involvement . A second MRI was performed when thromboembolic disease (8/13 cases), visual complications (9/10 he was 3 years old and showed diffuse involvement of substansia cases) including optic pallor and renal involvement (5/13 cases) . nigra and hyperintense lesions of central tegmental tract in addition Neuroradiological investigations were not always contributive (6/11 to previous lesions. Facial dysmorphism and MRI findings noticed in cases), white matter abnormalities being the more prevalent features these cases, can be specific findings in Leigh Syndrome patients with (4/6 cases) . None of the patients had abnormal hematological signs cytochrome c oxidase deficiency. SURF-1 gene mutations must be and serum vitamin B12 levels . The hydroxycobalamin therapy particularly reviewed in such patients . frequently led to a neurological improvement (11/13 cases) . Four patients died of vascular complications, two being treated and two P0173. molecular evidence against a role of the NF1 gene untreated . Because of easy diagnosis by amino acid chromatographies mutations in LEOPARD syndrome and favorable neurological and vascular outcome with simple A. Sarkozy1,2, A. Schirinzi1,2, F. Lepri1,2, I. Bottillo1,2, G. Esposito1,2, B. Marino3, therapy by hydroxycobalamin, Cbl-C deficiency should be included M. C. Digilio4, B. Dallapiccola1,2; in the differential diagnosis of patients with progressive neurological 1CSS Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, deterioration, psychiatric disturbances and recurrent thromboembolic Rome, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University complications . “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 3Section of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 4Medical Genetics, Bambino P0171. triallelism in Leber congenital Amaurosis: a clinical case Gesu’ Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy. E. Vallespin, D. Cantalapiedra, I. Tapias, M. Garcia-Hoyos, R. Riveiro-Alvarez, LEOPARD syndrome (LS) is a rare autosomal dominant condition, J. Aguirre-Lamban, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas, C. Villaverde, B. Garcia-Sandoval, C. mainly characterised by facial dysmorphisms, congenital heart defect, Ayuso; in particular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, multiple lentigines and Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. cafè-au-lait spots (CLS) . Up to 90% of LS patients present missense INTRODUCTION:Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is the most mutation in PTPN11 gene, encoding for the SRC homology 2 (SH2) severe inherited retinopathy with the earliest age of onset . Non domain-containing PTPase (SHP-2) . Several clinical manifestations syndromic LCA has been associated with mutations in eight genes: overlap those of Noonan syndrome (NS), which is due to different AIPL1, CRB1, CRX, GUCY2D, MERTK, LRAT, RPE65 and RPGRIP1 . PTPN11 mutations . In paediatric LS patients, CLS and/or lentigines These genes are involved in different physiologic pathways in the pose difficult differential diagnosis mostly with Neurofibromatosis type retina . 1 (NF1) and NF/NS, largely caused by NF1 gene mutations . To date, MATERIAL AND METHODS:We report a mutational analysis of a no other gene mutation has been concretely related to LS, even if a Retinal Dystrophy family with two affected generations (four affected mutation in NF1 gene was reported in a patient supposed to be affected members) with differnt phenotypic severity: one LCA affected patient by LS. Increasing evidence suggests that SHP-2 and neurofibromin, in the youngest generation and three early onset RP affected patients the NF1 gene product, play their modulatory role through a common en two sibship of the oldest generation . They were studied with a pathway . This evidence prompted us to screen the NF1 gene in 4 genotyping microarray (disease chip) for LCA (www .asperbio .com) full-blown LS individuals, in which PTPN11 gene mutations had been and have been further refined with the use of additional polymorphic excluded by DHPLC and sequence analysis of the entire coding region . markers (STRs) and direct sequencing . The NF1 gene analysis was carried out by DHPLC and sequencing . RESULTS:The patient affected with LCA presents three mutated alleles; No pathogenic mutation was detected in our LS individuals . This result two mutations in CRB1 gene (C896X, found by LCA chip and E1330N, indicates that NF1 gene mutations are not related to LS, thus implying newly found by direct sequencing) and the third one in RPGRIP1 gene that the clinical overlap between LS and NF1-NFNS is not paralleled (Q589H, found with LCA microarray) . The other affected members of by a unique molecular event . the family present E1330N (CRB1) mutation as well as the RPGRIP1 mutation . P0174. Linkage Analysis of some of the DFNB loci in Non- Haplotype analyses are compatible with CRB1 segregation in this syndromic Autosomal Recessive Hearing Loss in two provinces family and with the existence of a second CRB1 mutated allele in the of iran three affected RP patients . A. Sadeghi1, M. Sanati2, F. Alasti2; CONCLUSION:In this family the presence of two CRB1 mutated alleles 1Tarbiat Modarres University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Re- and RPGRIP1 mutation in every case is associated with a severe but search Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NRCGEB), Tehran, variable RP phenotyope . Islamic Republic of Iran. We propose that the RPGRIP1 mutation could affect the course of the Congenital deafness is a frequent disorder that affects 1 in 1000 disease but it does not explain the variability in this family . neonates with about 50% hereditary form . Almost 60 autosomal recessive hearing loss loci has been reported sofar . The main idea of P0172. Facial dysmorphism in Leigh syndrome with sURF-1 this study is to find the contribution of some of the DFNB loci and the mutation and Cytochrome C Oxidase deficiency connexin-26 gene mutations (exon2) on the Iranian hearing loss in the A. Yüksel1, G. Yesil2, M. Seven2, Ü. Cetincelik3, V. Köksal4; Markazi and Qom provinces . 1Department of Medical Genetics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Cerrahpasa Forty families, included nearly 450 samples, with autosomal Clinical genetics 1 recessive congenital hearing loss with at least 3 affected individuals the genotype, with an area under the curve of 0,848 . Sensitivity and and consanguineous marriage were selected . DNA samples were specificity measured at QTc duration ≥ 430 ms are 71% and 86% amplified by using the specific primers for coding region of connexin- respectively . The rate of false positives increases when heart rate 26 gene (exon2) and the specific primers for at least 2 STR markers for exceeds 75/min or CL < 800 ms . each locus that were exceeded to 4 markers in the linked families . The conclusions: The Schwartz score has low sensitivity in identifying PCR products of the connexin-26 gene were quality controlled on the carriers of an aberrant gene in families with an established disease- Agarose gel and sequenced . The PCR products of the STR markers causing mutation. Analysis of QTc duration alone (QTc ≥ 430 ms) has were analysed by Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis .Six families a sensitivity of 71% and a specificity of 86% in predicting mutation were homozygous or compound heterozygous for the Connexin-26 carriership (AUC 0 .848) . An important cause of false positive results gene coding region and were excluded from linkage analysis . The using this method is a relatively fast heart rate; the specificity of this 34 remained families were genotyped for STR markers from DFNB2, method increases to 93% when relatives with a heart rate above 75 DFNB3, DFNB4 and DFNB21 loci to find the role of these loci. We bpm (CL < 800 ms) are excluded . found linkage in 5 families: One to DFNB2, two families to DFNB3 and two others to DFNB4 loci, while none of the studied families showed P0177. the natural history of the Long Qt syndrome type 1 and linkage to DFNB21 locus . Hopefully some novel mutations will be Long Qt syndrome type 3: family tree mortality ratio method. found in the linked families by direct sequencing the important genes E. A. Nannenberg1, E. J. G. Sijbrands2, I. M. van Langen1, J. G. P. Tijssen1, L. for deafness into those regions . M. Dijksman1, A. A. M. Wilde1; 1Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical P0175. sixteen years experience of biochemical analysis and Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. prenatal diagnosis of Lipid storage disease in iran PURPOSE: To estimate all cause mortality (‘natural history’) with the F. Afroozan1, R. Kariminejad1, V. Hadavi1, Y. Shafeghati1, H. Najmabadi1, N. established Family Tree Mortality Ratio Method in untreated patients Almadani1, J. Huijmans2, W. J. Kleijer2, O. van Diggelen2, M. H. Kariminejad1; with inherited arrhythmia syndromes in times when the disease, 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, therapy nor the genetic basis was yet recognised, in order to assess Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Enzyme Laboratory, Department Clinical Genetics, whether screening strategies and prophylactic treatment are needed Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands in these patients . Antilles. METHOD: One large pedigree with carriers of the G189R mutation Lipid storage diseases are a group of inherited metabolic disorders in in the KCNQ1 gene was obtained (55 persons) . Another large which harmful amounts of fatty materials (called lipids) accumulate in pedigree with carriers of the 1795insD mutation in the SCN5A gene some of the body’s cells and tissues . Over time, this excessive storage was obtained (179 persons) . All persons in the pedigree had a 100 of fats can cause permanent cellular and tissue damage, particularly in % or 50% probability of carrying the mutation . All cause mortality was the brain, peripheral nervous system, liver, spleen, and bone marrow . compared to the general Dutch population in similar time intervals . Lipid storage diseases are inherited from one or both parents who MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Standardized Mortality Ratio (SMR), carry a defective gene . Neurological complications of the lipid storage the ratio between observed and expected mortality . diseases may include ataxia, eye paralysis, brain degeneration, RESULTS: For LQTS1 patients; there was significant excess mortality seizures, learning problems, spasticity, feeding and swallowing in males (SMR 1 .9,CI 1 .2-2 .9), especially in the age categories 0-1 difficulties, slurred speech, loss of muscle tone, hypersensitivity to (SMR 3 .5,CI 1 .3-7 .6) and 1-10 years old (SMR 3 .4,CI 1 .3-7 .4) . touch, burning pain in the arms and legs, and clouding of the cornea . For LQTS3 patients; there was significant excess mortality in the As an oldest reference laboratory, from Aug . 1989 to Aug . 2005 we pedigree (SMR 1 .4, CI 1 .03-1 .87), especially in the age categories 10- study 82 families with 114 members affected with LSD . Lipid storage 20 (SMR 3 .8, CI 1 .1-8 .2), 20-30 (SMR 6 .1, CI 2 .9-11 .2) and 30-50 diseases which were analyzed were Metachromatic leukodystrophy, (SMR 2 .7, CI 1 .2-5 .3) years old . Niemann-Pick disease, Gaucher disease, Mucolipidisis, Canavan, CONCLUSIONS: In this study on the natural course of two types of Long Alexander, GM1-Gangliosidoses, GM2- Gangliosidoses (include QT syndrome, significant excess mortality was observed in different Tay-Sachs disease and Sandhoff), Fabry disease, Krabbe disease, age categories . The observed age distributions are consistent with Fucosidosis, Wolman’s disease, Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, Sea the literature . Based on these results, continuation of active cascade blue histiocytosis, Lipidosis . We performed a total of 36 prenatal screening, starting at young age, in LQTS families is justified. diagnoses from 77 couples at risk for LSD . Biochemical assays were applied for all cases . Twenty-three fetuses (%64) were found P0178. Genotype-phenotype effect in patients with LRP to be normal, 12 fetuses (%33 .4) were affected and result of one mutations of the samples is not ready yet . Our data supports the functionality A. Saarinen1, A. E. Lehesjoki1, O. Mäkitie2; of biochemical analysis and for these diseases of course when the 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Department of Medical Genetics, Univer- families with affected alive child referred to the diagnostic centers sity of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Metabolic Bone Clinic, The Hospital for Chil- before loose of their affected child . dren and Adolescents, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. Mutations in LRP5, coding for the low density lipoprotein receptor- P0176. Diagnostic criteria for congenital Long Qt syndrome related protein 5, have been shown to cause a variety of skeletal (LQts); Re-appraisal of the schwartz’ criteria disorders including autosomal recessive Osteoporosis-pseudoglioma N. Hofman1, H. L. Tan1, S. Kaab2, I. M. van Langen1, M. M. A. M. Mannens1, A. syndrome (OPPG) and autosomal dominant High Bone Mass (HBM) A. M. Wilde1; disorder . While homozygous LRP5 mutations result in OPPG, 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Klinikum Grosshad- characterized by severe osteoporosis and blindness, heterozygous ern, Munchen, Germany. LRP5 mutations may result in milder osteoporosis . In this study we introduction: LQTS is a primary inherited cardiac arrhythmia syndrome have assessed skeletal phenotypes and LRP5 mutations in a large which may cause sudden death in young individuals . Because the Finnish OPPG-family . clinical diagnosis is not always obvious, a set of diagnostic criteria was DNA samples were collected from 37 individuals, two of whom formulated in 1993, the “Schwartz criteria” (SC) . had OPPG . The exons and exon-intron boundaries of LRP5 were Purpose : Evaluation of the predictive value of the SC in relatives of sequenced . Skeletal phenotype was assessed by fracture history, probands who carry a LQTS gene mutation, using molecular genetic bone mineral density (BMD) and spinal radiographs . Two different testing as gold standard . missense mutations were identified. R570W was found in seven methods and Results: Since 1996 we identified 96 probands with a individuals and R1036Q in four individuals . The two patients with disease causing mutation . 517 genotyped relatives were included in OPPG were homozygous for R570W, one individual was a compound this study . heterozygote for both mutations, four were heterozygous for R570W In relatives with a positive genetic test 40/212 had a SC ≥ 4 (sensitivity and three heterozygous for R1036Q . 19%, specificity 99%). Measuring QTc duration alone in 517 relatives The two patients homozygous for R570W were blind and had severe revealed a QTc duration ≥ 430 ms as the optimal cut-off point to predict osteoporosis and multiple compression fractures . The compound Clinical genetics 1 heterozygote individual had severe osteoporosis but normal vision . All common in association with nuclear DNA mutations . Hypertrichosis heterozygous carriers had normal vision but their BMD was notably was present in a high percentage of the cases, especially in those decreased and several had spinal compression fractures . with Leigh syndrome (ATP6 and SURF1 mutation) . In both patients In conclusion, the skeletal and ocular phenotypes vary depending diagnosed with congenital malformations a second mutation was on the type and combination of LRP5 mutations . Even heterozygous discovered (LIFR and ELN) giving explanation for the complex clinical mutation carriers may develop severe skeletal complications and picture . should be assessed for osteoporosis . P0181. maternal uniparental heterodisomy of chromosome 14 in P0179. macrocephaly-cutis marmorata telangiectatica a young woman with psychiatric manifestations. congenita: A Review of 14 Patients With Attention to clinical M. Tallot1, C. Colas1, L. Cuisset2, D. Cohen3, A. Urtizberea1, D. Héron1; Features and management 1Département de Génétique, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Service R. L. Conway1, M. G. Butler2, B. Crandall3, P. C. Dorostkar4, H. E. Hoyme5, J. M. de Biochimie, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 3Service de Psychiatrie de l’enfant Milunsky6, J. Shieh5, E. Zackai7, A. B. Zinn8, J. M. Graham1; et de l’adolescent, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France. 1Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2Children’s Uniparental disomy (UPD) is defined as the presence of both Mercy Hospitals and Clinics, University of Missouri, Kansas City, MO, United homologs of a chromosome pair inherited exclusively from one States, 3University of California, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Case West- parent . UPD of chromosomes containing imprinting regions leads to ern Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States, 5Stanford University clinically recognizable syndromes and maternal UPD of chromosome Medical Center, Stanford, CA, United States, 6Center for Human Genetics, 14 is one that causes a distinct disorder . It presents with congenital Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States, 7Children’s hypotonia, pre and postnatal growth retardation, precocious puberty, Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 8Center for Human scoliosis . . . No psychiatric manifestations have been reported so far in Genetics, Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleve- this disease . land, OH, United States. Here, we report the case of a young woman with psychiatric Macrocephaly-Cutis Marmorata Telangiectatica Congenita (M-CMTC) manifestations . Her personal history and physical examination is a rare overgrowth syndrome with a distinctive pattern of clinical revealed a maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 14 confirmed findings. In recent years, the understanding of medical concerns by molecular biology despite a normal karyotype .Psychiatric associated with this syndrome has expanded . We present clinical manifestations have never been described in any cases of maternal findings from 14 unpublished patients with M-CMTC and compare UPD of chromosome 14 but most cases in the literature concerned them to cases already in the literature . Our series illustrates the pattern young children and such episodes may likely appear later . It is not of characteristic findings while underscoring the unique issues in known if this clinical finding is related or coincidental to the uniparental individual patients . Seven of our patients had a Chiari I malformation, disomy but we encourage clinicians to pay attention to behavioural and four underwent surgical foramenectomy for concern of symptomatic disorders or psychiatric manifestations during clinical follow up of brain stem compression . In some, cerebellar tonsillar ectopia recurred maternal UPD of chromosome 14 patients to precise whether they are despite surgical intervention, possibly due to ongoing brain overgrowth . part or not of this syndrome . These findings support the recent observations made by Garavelli et al (2005) that Chiari I was previously underappreciated in this syndrome . P0182. maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome [mUPD(14)] It is widely suspected that M-CMTC carries a tumor risk for affected in a boy with rob(13;14)mat. patients but the incidence and type of tumor predisposition is not well M. G. Rocha1, J. Pinto-Basto1, E. Garcia2, M. Reis Lima1, M. Pinto1, A. For- understood, thereby complicating anticipatory care recommendations . tuna1; One of our patients developed a cerebral mass with radiographic 1Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2GDPN - Genética Médica e appearance of a meningioma at age five years. Another unexpectedly Diagnóstico Pré-natal, Prof. Dr. Sérgio Castedo, Porto, Portugal. developed multifocal atrial tachycardia, a rare arrhythmia, with mUPD(14) is associated with a distinct phenotype, although by no secondary cardiomyopathy . Similar cardiac complications were means pathognomonic . A clinical overlap is seen with Prader-Willi previously reported by Yano and Watanabe (2001) . Based on literature syndrome . reports, M-CMTC apparently carries a risk of sudden demise due to The most characteristic features of mUPD(14) are IUGR, hypotonia, a variety of causes . Cardiac arrhythmia, neurologic sequelae, and short stature, short hands and feet, early puberty, and motor respiratory failure are known concerns . Determining which patients developmental delay . Early puberty is the most consistent feature of are at risk is difficult. We propose care management guidelines for this this syndrome appearing in 24 of 25 cases reported to date . syndrome based on available clinical data and observed complications A 11 year old boy was referred to our clinic because of developmental in reported patients . delay . He was the third son of young, healthy, unrelated parents . Clinical evaluation: proportionate short stature, postnatal microcephaly, P0180. congenital anomalies and dysmorphic features in short hands and feet, early puberty and hypertrichosis . patients with oxydative phosphorylation disorders GTG banding karyotype revealed a rob(13;14); one brother, mother, E. Morava1, L. van den Heuvel1, F. Hol1, M. Hogeveen1, M. De Vries1, F. Loup- two maternal uncles and maternal grandmother were also carriers of atty2, B. Hamel1, J. Smeitink1; this translocation . 1UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2AMC Amsterdam, Amsterdam, DNA study with 14q-specific polymorphic markers demonstrated The Netherlands. absence of paternal contribution for the regions studied, thereby Congenital anomalies and dysmorphyc features are seldom reported establishing the diagnosis of mUPD(14) . in oxidative pshophorylation disorders . We performed a prospective For most markers a pattern consistent with maternal heterodisomy study in 30 children diagnosed with a dysfunction of the oxidative was observed, whereas for the remaining markers the homozygous phosphorylation and a known mitochondrial or nuclear DNA mutation pattern observed in the patient indicated isodisomy . This pattern (22 and 8 children, respectively) to assess the occurrence of associated (coexistence of segmental isodisomy and segmental heterodisomy) malformations and minor anomalies . All patients underwent a standard can be explained by meiotic crossing-over . organ screening protocol already in the primary diagnostic phase prior In this case the clinical pattern observed is consistent with previously to the muscle biopsy . A skeletal survey was performed additionally in reported cases of mUPD(14) . five cases. After the elucidation of the underlying genetic etiology, the This case illustrates the importance of checking for UPD whenever same physician reevaluated the children . Congenital malformations a robertsonian translocation involving a chromosome with known were detected in 2 males; one had a skeletal dysplasia, the other had imprinted genes (e .g . 14 or 15) is found in prenatal diagnosis or a pulmonary stenosis . Dysmorphic facial features were observed in postnatally in a patient with phenotypic alterations . three females with a SURF1 mutation presenting with Leigh syndrome, one male with Barth syndrome (TAZ mutation), one male with POLG mutation and Alpers syndrome and one male with ND7 gene mutation (mitochondrial myopathy) . Apparently dysmorphic features were more Clinical genetics 10 P0183. the prevalence of the mEFV gene mutations in mutations in the mitochondrial DNA . The classical A3243G mutation Armenians in the MTTL1 (tRNA for leucine (UUR)) gene is most common . We H. Hayrapetyan1, G. Shahsuvaryan1, M. Moradyan2, T. Sarkisyan1; present the clinical features and molecular findings in five families 1Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia, 2PRIMEX clinical laboratory, with a mtDNA A3243G mutation . The clinical phenotype in families Los-Angeles, CA, United States. A, B and C was characterized by proximal muscle weakness, ptosis, The main aim of clinical and laboratory investigations relates to the external ophthalmoplegia, retinitis pigmentosa, hearing loss and registration and distribution of structure and frequency of genetic diabetes mellitus . One patient died of heart failure (cardiomyopathy) pathology in Armenian population . Genetic testing is used for and one had tachycardia in early adulthood . Family D presented many genetic disorders, including birth defects, autoinflammatory, with maternally inherited diabetes mellitus. The first sign in family neurological disorders, cancer, etc . Spectrum of diseases detected E was severe hypotonia, developmental delay, muscle weakness, by DNA techniques is specified in aspect of more importance and poor growth and elevated lactate in early childhood accompanied actuality . by external ophthalmoplegia . Investigation of the A3243G mutation We carry out the complete clinical and molecular genetic analysis of the in blood, muscle, hair roots and urine sediment was necessary for pathogenesis in advanced to understanding inflammation processes diagnosis in patients with nearly no complains . There was no strong and its regulation . Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), is a recessively correlation between the clinical picture and proportion of mutated transmitted disorder restricted to Mediterranean populations . 12 mtDNA in these families . Clinical manifestations in MELAS usually MEFV gene mutations are identified in 6000 Armenian patients. We become evident when a threshold percentage of mtDNA is mutated, have determined symptoms associated with MEFV mutations in 317 but is not simply a direct consequence of the relative abundance of heterozygotes, compared with affected 414 homozygotes and 980 mutated mtDNA . Other factors such as nuclear background might compound heterozygotes . Results of screening of MEFV mutations contribute to the phenotype . Although ethical considerations are being in FMF patients in comparison with healthy individuals have revealed made, preimplantation genetic diagnosis could be an option for few the most frequent mutations and genotypes, and give the information patients with low mutation load in blood and muscle . of mutation carriers and genotype - phenotype correlation . These correlations are of great importance since they take into account each P0186. Gene expression changes in skeletal muscle from clinically significant symptom and different combination of them, which mELAs patients cover almost all of the reported cases . In heterozygote patients the R. G. E. van Eijsden1,2, L. M. T. Eijssen1, C. M. M. van den Burg1,2, P. J. Lind- most prevalent and severe cases are caused by the presence of a sey1, W. Sluiter3, K. Schoonderwoerd3, H. R. Scholte3, I. F. M. de Coo4, M. E. single M694V mutation, which is associated with main symptoms . We Rubio-Gozalbo5, H. J. M. Smeets1,2; suggest that MEFV heterozygotes suffer from a milder FMF . 1Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Genome Centre, Maastricht Uni- We found that on average, in almost 90% of the cases, Colchicine is versity, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Research Institute GROW, Maastricht effective to keep the inflammation under control. University, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3Department of Biochemistry, Eras- mus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Neurology, Erasmus P0184. megalencephalic leucoencephalopathy with subcortical MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 5Department of Paediatrics and Laboratory cysts: phenotype of two patients with new mLc1 mutations. Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Maastricht University Hospital, Maastricht, The L. Burglen1, F. Tinsa2, M. Bourgeois3, D. Doummar4, A. Afenjar1, A. legall1, G. Netherlands. Ponsot4, L. Hertz-Pannier5, T. Billette de villemeur4, D. Rodriguez4; Mitochondrial encephalomyopathies are genetically and clinically 1Department of genetics, hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 2Department of heterogeneous disorders . Mutations in different genes can lead pediatrics, hôpital d’Enfants, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Department of neurosurgery, hôpi- to similar syndromes; in contrast, one single mutation can result in tal Necker, Paris, France, 4Department of neuropediatrics, hôpital Trousseau, a variable clinical manifestation . The most frequent cause (80%) Paris, France, 5Department of radiology, hôpital Necker, Paris, France. of Mitochondrial Myopathy, Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis and Megalencephalic leucoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts is an Stroke-like episodes (MELAS) is the m .3243A>G point mutation in autosomal recessive leukodystrophy characterized by progressive the mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) gene . Other clinical manifestations macrocephaly and slowly progressive deterioration of motor functions . of this mutation are diabetes, deafness, renal tubulopathy and Cognitive decline is moderate and late . MLC1 gene is the major gene cardiomyopathy . To explain the differences in pathology observed of MLC . More than 40 different mutations were reported without any in carriers of the m .3243A>G mutation, we applied global gene hot-spot . Here we described two non related patients with MLC1 expression profiling on muscle biopsies from affected and unaffected mutations (1 male, age 2 4/12 years; 1 female 2 9/12 years) . Both were mutation carriers with different levels of the mutation and controls . born from consanguineous parents . OFC was normal at birth (36 cm) Protein turnover and reactive oxygen species (ROS) defence were with progressive macrocephaly in the fist year (+5sd, +4sd). In one significantly up-regulated pathways and changes were more prominent patient first symptom was non febrile convulsion at age 1 year but in the unaffected group with lower mutation levels than in the affected diagnosis was suspected only at 2 years when a status epilepticus group . Increased production of ROS between m .3243A>G mutation occurred . Walking was achieved at 18 months and was ataxic . In the carriers and controls was further demonstrated by dihydroethidium second patient disease was revealed by coma and motor regression (DHE) staining of superoxide radicals in muscle . We hypothesise that after head traumatism in association with leucodystrophy on CT-scan . the accumulation of oxidative protein damage due to excessive ROS Retrospectively psychomotor delay was present before the traumatism . production stimulates protein turnover . Apparently, this process is more Recovery of motor functions was slow and incomplete . In both patients effective at lower mutation levels where the increased ROS production MRI showed typical diffuse leucodystrophy with temporal cysts . MLC1 can be dealt with by increasing the expression of genes involved in sequence analysis revealed 2 new homozygous mutations . protein breakdown and protein synthesis, preventing severe symptoms from occurring . If mutation levels get too high, compensation is no P0185. melas in families longer possible and severe symptoms become manifest . S. G. M. Frints1,2, C. E. de Die-Smulders1,2, C. G. Faber3, J. W. Weber3, A. C. Kruseman4, G. M. de Wert5, H. J. M. Smeets6,2; P0187. mental retardation in childhood: etiological and clinical 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Maastricht, The Nether- profile lands, 2GROW, University of Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3Department of Neu- I. M. Bradinova, E. Simeonov; rology, University Hospital Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4Department of Internal Department of Pediatrics - Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. Medicine, University Hospital Maastricht, The Netherlands, 5Department of Mental retardation (MR) is a lifelong disorder of cognitive and adaptive Ethics and Phylosophy, University of Maastricht, The Netherlands, 6Department functions . It is present in 2-3% of the general population and results of Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Maastricht, The Netherlands. from genetic factors, environmental events or both of them . Aim of Mitochondrial Myopathy, Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis, and Stroke- the present study was to investigate the etiological factors of MR like episodes (MELAS/OMIM #540000) syndrome is a relatively in children attending a pediatric clinical genetic department and to frequent mitochondrial disorder . It is a multisystemic disorder with an analyze the clinical signs in each etiologic group . The information of extremely variable clinical phenotype and can be caused by different 309 consecutively hospitalized children with MR was analyzed and Clinical genetics 11 overviewed . Etiological diagnosis was established in 144 (46,6%) been identified in ~400 MR cases, pointing to a rather frequent of the patients . In 78 (25%) a chromosomal disorder was found (40 microdeletion/duplication . The overlap in clinical features between the of them with Down syndrome) . Diagnosis of a monogenic disorder two microdeletion patients points to a new MR syndrome which needs was made in 46 patients (14,9%) (34 with monogenic dysmorphic to be further defined. syndromes and 12 with metabolic diseases) . Isolated brain anomalies European Human Genetics Conference 2006, Amsterdam (multifactorial MR) were found in 5 patients (1,6%) . Environmental acquired MR was ascertained in 15 patients (4,9%) . In 165 patients P0190. mental retardation and stiff thumbs: A further family with (53,4%) the diagnosis remained unclear despite the broad spectrum three sibs affected of diagnostic tests carried out (idiopathic MR) . Nearly 100% of the F. Forzano1, V. Viassolo1, C. Marciano2, A. Ferrari3, F. Faravelli1; diagnosed patients had syndromic MR . The diagnostic yield did not 1Human Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Human Genetics,Galliera correlate with the severity of MR . Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3Neurology Department, San Paolo Hospital, Savona, Italy. P0188. Risk factors of mental retardation in referral patients In 1983, Piussan et al described a family wherein females in 3 to medical Genetic counseling center in iranian province of generations showed stiff thumbs, brachydactyly type A1 and mental Hormozgan (2000-2005) retardation . Barber et al (1990) reported an isolated case of stiff P. Nikuei, M. Saberi, A. Nazemi queshmi, F. Hajizadeh, G. Tabasi; thumbs and developmental delay which they thought represented the Social Welfare Organization, Bandarabbas, Islamic Republic of Iran. same disorder as that reported by Piussan . No further case had been This abstract includes a retrograde review of 187 medical files of mental reported in literature so far . retarded patients that were referred to Medical Genetic Counseling Here we describe a family with three affected male sibs . They all had Center in Hormozgan province in south part of Iran that lies in north of uneventful pregnancy and delivery, regular height and weight growth, Persian Gulf from year 2000-2005 . good general health . The eldest sib suffers from epilepsy by the age of Results are as fallows: 20 years . They show stiff thumbs, thenar hypoplasia, limited forearm -From 1523 cases that came to our center for genetic counseling,187 pronosupination, short arched clavicle, plantar hyperkeratosis . We cases (%12 .3) had mental retardation in their children .%53 of mothers propose this family represents a further case of Piussan syndrome . and %39 of fathers were uneducated . Possible inheritance models will be discussed . -%51.8 of parents had consanguinity marriage that among them first REFERENCES cousin marriage were commonest (%70) .In the 95 cases (%50 .8) the 1. Barber, N. D.; Carpenter, N. J.; Say, B. : Bilateral ankylosed thumbs families had more than 3 children .Among mental retarded paitents 107 and mental retardation . (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 36: 367 only, cases 1990 . (%57 .2) were male and 80 cases (%42 .8) were female . 2. Piussan, C.; Lenaerts, C.; Mathieu, M.; Boudailliez, B. : Dominance -In 29 cases (%15 .5) maternal age in pregnancy was more than 35 reguliere d’une ankylose des pouces avec retard mental se transmettant years . sur trois generations . J. Genet. Hum. 31: 107-114, 1983 . -In 81 cases (%43 .3) there was positive family history of mental retardation . P0191. Genetic causes of developmental delay and mental -In 26 cases (%13 .9)there was an affected sibling .%46 .6 of mothers retardation had prenatal care in pregnancy and %53 .4 had no prenatal care .In M. A. Ramos-Arroyo, A. Bengoa, M. Artigas, B. Hernandez-Charro, A. Perez- %57 .7 delivery had done in hospital and in %42 .3 delivery had done Juana, A. Alonso; in home without presence of physician .In %27 .8 there was a history of Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain. neonatal seizure .In %25 .5 of cases there was history of birth asphyxia . Developmental Delay (DD)/Mental Retardation (MR) are frequently In%11 .7 there was history of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia . occurring disorders . Most studies that investigated the usefulness of -%3 .7 of patients were born preterm . diagnostic tests in patients with MR are performed in institutionalized -The commonest diagnosis among the mental retarded patients was patients with severe MR . This study examines the frequency and types Down syndrome (%17 .1) . of genetic defects among individuals undergoing neuropediatric and genetic evaluation because of DD and/or MR . P0189. Recurrent submicroscopic copy number changes in Cases were ascertained through the population-based Congenital 2q23.1q23.2 in mentally retarded patients Anomalies Registry of Navarra that monitors children with a birth defect, D. A. Koolen, E. A. Sistermans, R. Pfundt, N. de Leeuw, M. Kets, W. M. including DD/MR, whose mother lived in the province of Navarra at Nillesen, J. A. Veltman, B. B. A. de Vries; the time of diagnosis . All cases (248 males and 187 females) were Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. evaluated on at least one occasion by a neupediatrician and/or a Routinely applied microarray-based genomic profiling technologies such clinical geneticist . Conventional karyotype was performed on 390 as array CGH are identifying increasing numbers of submicroscopic (90%) cases; a total of 102 (23%) children were screening for fragile-X copy number alterations in mental retardation (MR) . Interestingly, a syndrome and 137 (31%) for subtelomeric rearrangements . diagnostic analysis of approximately 200 MR cases onto our tiling A specific genetic cause of DD/MR was found in 201 (46%) cases. resolution BAC arrays detected two partially overlapping de novo Numerical aneuploidies were found in 121 (28%) children: 100 cases microdeletions and one de novo microduplication in 2q23 .1q23 .2 . had Down syndrome, 14 were trisomy 18 and 7 showed a sexual Severe MR, postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, coarse chromosome aberration . Subtelomeric rearrangements were detected facies and epilepsy were noted in both microdeletion patients . The in 10 (2 .3%) cases, 5 of whom had also other structural congenital microduplication was detected in a severely mentally retarded boy with defects . Eight children (1 .8%) had a microdeletion syndrome and 8 marked hypotonia . (1 .8%) carried other structural chromosomal anomaly . Single gene The minimally affected region of 317 Kb encompasses two known defects were observed in 47 individuals (10,8%), including seven genes: methyl-CpG binding domain protein 5 (MBD5), and enhancer cases (1,6%) with fragile-X-syndrome . of polycomb homolog 2 (EPC2) . MBD5 is an autosomal homologue of This study shows that subtelomeric rearrangements are the third most methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2), implicated in Rett syndrome . frequent cause of a DD/MR, especially if it is associated with structural Remarkably, some clinical overlap with Rett syndrome could be noted defects . in our patients . In addition, duplication of MeCP2 causes severe MR and progressive neurological symptoms, as was observed in our P0192. molecular-genetic cause of recessive congenital microduplication patient . Therefore, we performed mutation analysis methemoglobinemia type i in Yakutia as well as copy number analysis of MBD5 and EPC2 in 47 patients N. Galeeva1, L. Nazarenko2, S. Nazarenko2, S. Tverskaya1, A. Polyakov1; referred to our centre for MeCP2 analysis, together with a 2q23 copy 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute number analysis of 200 additional MR patients . No additional genetic of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. alterations were detected . Recessive congenital methemoglobinemia (RCM) type I is a deficiency In conclusion, 3 submicroscopic alterations at the 2q23 region have of nicotin amide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)-cytochrome b5 Clinical genetics 1 reductase (b5R) . In Russia this disease widely distributed in Yakutia, P0195. mutations in the ND5 subunit of complex i of the mtDNA where its frequency amount 1:5677 . Our propose was to determine are a frequent cause of OXPHOs disease molecular-genetic cause of RCM type I in Yakutia and devise a simple M. J. Blok1, L. Spruijt2,3, R. F. M. de Coo4, K. Schoonderwoerd5, A. Hendrickx1, method of diagnostics . We have considered that this disease had H. J. Smeets1,2; widely distribution in Yakutia due to local founder effect and chose 4 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, polymorphic markers flanking the human b5R gene (DIA1, 22q13 .31) The Netherlands, 2Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, University of to check this idea . Most of affected probands were homozygous for all Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3Research Institute Growth & Devel- markers and have identical haplotype . All their healthy parents were opment, University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4Department of heterozygous carriers for this haplotype; any other healthy relatives Child Neurology, Erasmus Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Nether- weren’t homozygous for this haplotype . We suggested DIA1 gene lands, 5Department of Biochemistry, Erasmus Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rot- as candidate gene for RCM in Yakutia and sequencing all of 9 exons terdam, The Netherlands. in one of our patients. We found out novel mutation CCG→CTG in Objective: To determine the frequency of mutations in the mitochondrial homozygote, which led to amino acid substitution at position 269 (MT)-ND5 gene in patients with OXPHOS disease . Background: (Pro269Leu) and created site for Alu1 ferment . After that we devised a Mutation detection in the mitochondrial genome is usually limited to method for simple detection of this mutation by RFLP-analysis which common mutations and the tRNA genes . However, mutations in the allowed detected this mutation in patients and their relatives, and ND subunits of complex I can be an important cause of OXPHOS reasonable for population investigation . Conclusion: We determined disease . Methods: mutation screening of the mtDNA was performed molecular-genetic cause of RCM type I in Yakutia and devised simple by DHPLC-analysis of120 patients with a mitochondrial disorder . method for disease diagnostics in population . Heteroplasmy levels in different tissues were determined using PCR with fluorescently labelled primers and mutation specific restriction P0193. increased risk of migraine in marfan syndrome? enzymes . Results: We found a MT-ND5 mutation in 3,3% of the patients . S. Knudsen1, M. B. Russell2,3; Two mutations were new and two have been previously reported . The 1Department of Neurophysiology, Glostrup University Hospital, Glostrup, Co- 13513G>A mutation, associated with MELAS and MELAS/Leigh/ penhagen, Denmark, 2Head and neck research group, Akershus University Leber hereditary optic neuropathy overlap syndrome, was found in Hospital, Nordbyhagen, Oslo, Norway, 3Faculty division Akershus University a relative low percentage in two patients, one with a Leigh and one Hospital, University of Oslo, Nordbyhagen, Oslo, Norway. with a MELAS phenotype . The 13042G>A, once detected in a patient Objective. To study the prevalence of migraine in Marfan syndrome . with a MELAS/MERRF phenotype, was now found in a patient with Material and methods. The patients were recruited from a Leigh-like/NARP phenotype . A new mtDNA mutation (12622G>A) Landsforeningen for Marfan syndrome, a patient organization . A total was identified in three brothers, all with infantile encephalopathy of 46 persons were eligible for a validated semi-structured telephone (Leigh syndrome) fatal within the first 15 days of life and a novel point interview by a physician trained in headache diagnostics . Results. The mutation (13511A>T) occurred in a patient with a Leigh-like syndrome . prevalence of migraine without aura was 13% among men and 40% Conclusions: Mutation screening of the mitochondrial ND5 gene is among women . The prevalence of migraine with aura was 44% among advised for routine diagnostics of patients with OXPHOS disease, men and 37% among women . The overall prevalence of migraine was especially MELAS- and Leigh-like patients . 63% with an equal sex ratio . This corresponds with a 3 .6- and 2 .0- fold significant increased risk among men and women, respectively, P0196. Pathogenic mitochondrial mutations in Russian families compared with the general population . with Leber’s hereditary optic neurophany Conclusion. The high prevalence and equal sex ratio of migraine is N. Povalko, E. Zakharova, G. Rudenskaya; puzzling and likely to be secondary to Marfan syndrome . It might be Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. associated with dural ectasia, since the prevalence of the dural ectasia Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a neuroophthalmologic is similar to that of migraine in Marfan syndrome . disorder of mitochondrial origin that occurs all over the world . Three pathogenic, or primary, mtDNA mutations are responsible for over P0194. Hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion caused by 90% of cases . DNA diagnostics was performed in a group of families deoxyguanosine kinase (DGUOK) mutations with presumptive LHON . Primary mtDNA mutations were detected in P. Freisinger1,2, N. Fütterer1, E. Lankes1, H. Prokisch3,2, R. Horváth4,2; 50 members (40 patients and 10 healthy relatives) of 36 unrelated 1Metabolic Disease Center, Munich-Schwabing, Childrens Hospital and Institute families . Most of these families were Russians (26 families), the group of Medical Genetics, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Mito- included families of eight other ethnicities . The three mutations broke chondrial Medicine Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Technical University of Munich, down as follows: G11778A in 80,6% (29 families), G3460A in 13,9% Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 4Metabolic Disease Center (5 families), T14484C in 5,6% (2 families) . About 70% of cases are Munich-Schwabing, Institutes of Clinical Chemistry, Molecular Diagnostics and familial . The male/female ratio among 74 patients, genealogical data Mitochondrial Genetics, Academic Hospital Schwabing, Munich, Germany. included, is 4,69 . Three families are of particular interest: a G11778A Background: Autosomal recessive mutations in deoxyguanosine mutation family with atypically high penetrance in females; a T14484C kinase (DGUOK) were repeatedly described in the hepatocerebral mutation family with concomitant diabetes mellitus in the proband form of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion (MDS) . and with a novel A9016G mutation in the ATPase 6 gene probably Objectives: To describe the clinical spectrum of DGUOK-related MDS, increasing the severeness of the disease . Finally, a G3460A mutation we report 6 cases and summarize the literature . family occurred with homoplasmy in a young male proband and 40% Results: We identified pathogenic mutations in the DGUOK gene in 6 heteroplasmy in his affected mother in whom the disease was induced patients with the hepatocerebral form of mtDNA depletion . We describe by ethambutol and isoniazid . the clinical, neuroradiological, histological and genetic features in these children . All patients showed severe hepatopathy, while involvement P0197. A novel mitochondrial tRNAile point mutation associated of other organs (skeletal muscle, brain) was variable. We identified with chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia five novel mutations (one of them in two patients) and two previously A. Schaller1, D. Hahn2, J. Nuoffer2, S. Gallati1; described mutations . Three different mutations affected the initiation 1Division of Human Genetics, Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland, 2Institute of Clinical methionine, suggesting a mutational hot spot . One of our patients Chemistry, Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland. underwent liver transplantation and pathology revealed, in addition to Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) is a common diffuse hepatopathy, a hepatocellular carcinoma, implying a possible clinical presentation of mitochondrial myopathy, either alone or link between mtDNA depletion and tumorigenesis . associated with evidence of multiple system involvement, such as in Conclusions: We studied 12 cases with infantile hepatoencephalopathies Kearns-Sayre syndrome . Different mutations of mitochondrial DNA and mtDNA depletion, and found pathogenic DGUOK mutations in 6, (mtDNA) have been correlated with isolated CPEO, namely large- suggesting that this gene defect is a frequent but not exclusive cause scale rearrangements of mtDNA, either single or multiple deletions . of the hepatic form of mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome . These have usually been in sporadic forms or in cases with autosomal dominant or recessive inheritance . We report a sporadic case of Clinical genetics 1 CPEO associated with ragged red fibers. Molecular genetic analysis present patient is the first FXS patient with an associating aberration did not reveal any rearrangements of the mtDNA . However, analysis of autosomal chromosomes . He contributes to the current knowledge of all mitochondrial tRNAs revealed a G to A transition at nt 4308 in on monosomy 21 phenotype, having the dysmorphic facial findings the tRNAIle) gene . The mutation, involving a highly conserved base- despite the concurrent phenotypic expression of the associating FXS . pair in the T-stem, was detected to a high level (>50%) in muscle, As a last conclusion, cytogenetic analysis must be done to all mentally but not in blood . Furthermore, the mutation co-segregated with the retarded patients with minor dysmorphic features . phenotype, as the mutation was absent in blood and muscle form her healthy mother . The patient presented with enlarged mitochondria with P0200. investigation of Polymorphisms in Non-coding Region of deranged internal architecture and crystalline inclusions . Biochemical Human mitochondrial DNA in 31 Persian Hcm Patients studies revealed reduced activities of complex I, III and IV in skeletal M. Montazeri1, M. Houshmand1, E. Zaklyazminskaya2, F. Noohi3, N. Givtaj3, M. muscle . A possible link between CPEO with mtDNA deletions and Shafa Shariat Panahi1; CPEO with point mutations within the tRNA genes is the decrease 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic in mitochondrial protein synthesis, responsible for the multiple partial Republic of Iran, 2Laboratory of DNA Research, Russian Research Center of defects of the respiratory chain enzymes . Medical Genetics, Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Iran University of Medical Sciences Shaheed Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical Center, Tehran, P0198. MLPA analysis for specific syndromes reveals Islamic Republic of Iran. chromosomal imbalances in 5.4% of patients with dysmorphic The D-loop region is a hot spot for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) features, idiopathic mental retardation and normal conventional alterations, containing two HyperVariable Segments, HVS-I and karyotypes HVS-II . In order to identify polymorphic sites and potential genetic M. Kirchhoff, A. M. Bisgaard, T. Gerdes, T. Bryndorf; background accounting for Hypertrophic CardioMyopathy (HCM) Rigshospitalet, Chromosome Laboratory, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark. disease, the complete non-coding region of mtDNA from 31 unrelated 258 patients with dysmorphic features, mental retardation and HCM patients and 45 normal controls were sequenced . The sequences normal conventional karyotypes were investigated with syndrome were aligned upon the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence MLPA analysis (P064 probeset, MRC-Holland, for detection of (rCRS) and any incompatibilities were recorded as numerical changes (micro)deletions associated with 1p36-deletion-, Sotos-, Williams-, in homoPolymeric C Tract (PCT), single base substitutions (SBS), Prader Willi/Angelman-, Miller-Dieker-, Smith-Magenis-, and 22q11- insertions and deletions (Indels) . Nucleotide substitutions were found deletion syndromes), subtelomeric MLPA (P019, P020 and P036 to make up the majority of the mutations, rather than indels . We drew probesets, MRC-Holland), and HR-CGH . significantly high transition rate (81.8%) versus lower frequency of Syndrome MLPA analysis revealed chromosomal imbalances in 5 .4% transversions (18.2%). 12 polymorphisms were identified in this study of patients . The imbalances included deletions of 1p36, 5q35 (Sotos), which had not been published in the MitoMap database . PCT changes 7q11 .23 (Williams), 15q11 .1q12 (Prader Willi/Angelman), 17p11 .2 at positions 303-309 were detected in 83% of our samples . Our results (Smith-Magenis) and 22q11 . In addition duplications of 5q35 (NSD1 suggest that an increased level of HVS-I and HVS-II substitutions may gene), 7q11 .23, 17p13 .3, 17p11 .2 and 22q11 were detected . HR- be an indicator of mitochondrial DNA instability . Furthermore, mtDNA CGH and subtelomeric MLPA revealed chromosomal imbalances in mutations may play an important role in pathogenesis of cardiac arrest 11 .2% and 5 .4% of the patients respectively (Kirchhoff et al ., AJMG which has remained unexplained for long . 139A:232-233, 2005) . Apart from revealing microdeletions associated with the syndromes mentioned above, syndrome MLPA seems to be P0201. Investigation of possible influence of a very useful approach to test for the reciprocal microduplications . methyltetrahydrofolate reductase (mtHFR) polymorphisms on These microduplications may be largely undetected due to technical age at onset and severity of the Huntington disease difficulties in identifying them and to problems related to ascertainment F. Mahjoubi1, M. Montazeri2, S. Zare Karizi3; of patients . Although several imbalances were detected by more than 1Medical Genetic Laboratory of Akbary, Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran. AND Na- one analysis, syndrome MLPA, subtelomeric MLPA, and HR-CGH tional Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic were complementary (in total, chromosomal imbalances were detected Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, in 16 .3% of patients) . MLPA is a reliable and cost-effective method, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medical Genetic Laboratory of Akbary, Tale- which may be important when designing a clinical testing algorithm for ganee St, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. mental retardation . Huntington disease (HD) is a genetic disorder of the central nervous All MLPA data were analyzed by the use of normal reference data system with symptoms usually appearing in adults within the third or sets (details and free downloads of the software are available on www . fourth decade of life . Symptoms may include involuntary movements chromosomelab .dk) and loss of motor control . In addition, personality changes may occur, with loss of memory and decreased mental capacity . Huntington P0199. coexistent mosaic monosomy 21 and fragile X syndrome disease is inherited as an autosomal dominant condition . Increase in in a mentally retarded male patient the number of CAG repeat, presented on chromosome 4p, causes HD . G. E. Utine, D. Aktaş, K. Boduroğlu, M. Alikasifoglu, E. Tuncbilek; This sequence may be duplicated many times in individuals (up to 26 Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. times) in the general population . Individuals with HD may have from Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a well-recognized mental retardation 40 to over 100 repeated CAG segments .Since there is a hypothesis syndrome with characteristic facial features and behavioral phenotype . that the presence of some natural polymorphisms in some genes such Monosomy 21 is a rare cytogenetic aberration for which clinical features as MTHFR could affect the Huntington disease, now we are aiming were incompletely defined since full monosomy 21 is incompatible with to investigate the possible role of these SNP in those clinically and life . A 5-year-old male patient with FXS and low-grade mosaicism for genetically diagnosed affected patients . In addition we would like to full monosomy 21 (46,XY [96%] / 45,XY,-21 [4%]) is presented . He establish a real time PCR assay for the diagnosis of the Huntington had lack of speech with severely impaired social skills, hyperactivity, patients stereotypical hand movements, a special interest towards moving colorful items and a short attention span for other objects around . He P0202. Hereditary leiomyomatosis and FH mutations in Dutch had macrocephaly with a rather long face and a prominent occiput . families He had a prominent midface with a beaked nose and retrognathia . P. H. Axwijk1, L. H. Hoefsloot2, M. Visser3, M. H. Breuning4, F. H. Menko1; His palpebral fissures were down-slanting and he had hypertelorism. 1Department of Clinical Genetics and Human genetics, VU University Medical Associating features include a rather long and smooth philtrum with Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of DNA Diagnostics, UMC a thin upper lip, prominent, cup-shaped, posteriorly rotated and low- Radboud Hospital, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Department of Pathology, VU set ears . No major malformations were present . Full monosomy in University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Clini- the aberrant cell line was proven by FISH with whole chromosome cal Genetics and Human genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, paint . Association of FXS with sex chromosome aberrations was The Netherlands. reported several times, however, to the best of our knowledge, the Multiple cutaneous and uterine leiomyomatosis (MCUL, OMIM Clinical genetics 1 #150800) is a rare autosomal dominant condition, complicated by renal referred to our unit after birth for multiple faints . She presented with cell carcinoma in a subset of families (2-6%) (OMIM #605839) . 46 UK, daily recurrent episodes of severe desaturation with generalised 35 North American and 3 Finnish families have been reported . In 80- muscular contractures and loss of visual contact . Family history 100% of the families germline mutations in the fumarate hydratase was unremarkable . Clinical features included growth and weight (FH) gene on chromosome 1q42.3-43 have been identified. retardation, axial hypotonia with peripheral hypertonia, facial We here report the findings of the first two leiomyomatosis families dysmorphism with amimic facies and narrowed palpebral fissures, subjected to DNA analysis in the Netherlands . Two novel FH mutations and muscular hypertrophy . There was no clinical myotonia . X-rays were detected . In Family A, a missense FH mutation c .824G>A showed isolated hip dislocation . Electromyography revealed profuse (p .Gly275Glu) co-segregated with clinically affected family members . myotonic discharges . Muscle biopsy was normal . After excluding All four affected females had uterine leiomyomas, two underwent high resolution chromosomal and telomeric abnormalities, Steinert hysterectomy at ages 27 and 32 years, respectively . One male dystrophic myotonia, Schwartz-Jampel syndrome, and hyperekplexia, affected family member had an incidentaloma in the right adrenal DNA sequence analysis identified a de novo new heterozygous point gland . Cutaneous signs were highly variable . In Family B a pathogenic mutation N1297K in SCN4A gene . The mutation leads to amino acid c .1210G>T (p .Glu404X) FH mutation was found in the proband who substitution in a highly conserved position within the loop between presented with skin and uterine leiomyomas . As yet no renal cell the third and fourth domains frequently implicated in pathogenic cancer has been detected in either kindred . mutations . A link between cold temperature and myotonia was proved In summary, the clinical signs of MCUL are very variable . The condition by immersion in cold water . Treatment with low dose mexiletine was may be underdiagnosed in Dutch families . Early-onset severely moderately successful . In association with warm clothes, myotonic symptomatic uterine leiomyomatosis is indicative of the syndrome . episodes became less frequent (two per month) . This is the second report of a mutation in SCN4A gene in association with severe neonatal P0203. Association of transforming growth factor-β1 gene myotonia permanens . polymorphisms with myocardial infarction in patients with angiographically proven coronary heart disease P0205. sleep disorders in the childhood-onset form of myotonic W. Koch1, P. Hoppmann1, J. C. Mueller2, A. Schömig1, A. Kastrati1; dystrophy 1Deutsches Herzzentrum München, München, Germany, 2Institut für medizini- A. Jacquette1, M. Quera-Salva2, N. Angeard1, M. Blumen2, B. Eymard3, H. sche Statistik und Epidemiologie, Technische Universität München, München, Radvanyi4, D. Héron1; Germany. 1Département de génétique, hôpital de la Pitié-salpétrière, Paris, France, 2La- Objective: Transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) is a multifunctional boratoire du sommeil, Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, Garches, France, 3Institut de cytokine that exhibits vasculoprotective properties . Production and myologie, hôpital de la Pitié-salpétrière, Paris, France, 4Hôpital Ambroise Paré, plasma levels of TGF-β1 are influenced by polymorphisms in the TGF- Boulogne-Billancourt, France. β1 gene (TGFB1) . We investigated whether the -509C/T (rs1800469), Myotonic dystrophy type I (DM1) is an autosomal dominant trinucleotide 868T/C (rs1982073), 913G/C (rs1800471), and 11929C/T (rs1800472) repeat disorder that shows anticipation . Several forms exist which differ polymorphisms of TGFB1 are associated with myocardial infarction . in age of onset and severity . Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) Methods and Results: The study population consisted of 3657 patients is frequent and well documented in adults and it is also a prevalent with myocardial infarction (885 women and 2772 men) and 1211 complaint in the population of patients with congenital and childhood- control individuals (598 women and 613 men) with angiographically onset forms of DM1 but its objective assessment remains elusive . It normal coronary arteries and without signs or symptoms of myocardial could likely contribute to learning disabilities and if so, a treatment infarction . Polymorphism-related genotypes were determined with could be proposed . TaqMan assays and haplotypes were estimated from the genotype To assess more precisely the sleep disorders in these children, we data . The -509C/T polymorphism and -509C/868T/913G/11929C have led a prospective study in 21 children affected by a childhood- (CTGC) haplotype were associated with myocardial infarction in men, onset form (congenital form were excluded), from 6 to 19 years old . We independently from the potentially confounding factors age, arterial carried out, for all of them, a clinical examination, a sleep recording and hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, cigarette smoking, and diabetes multiple sleep latency tests (MSLT) . They also completed a sleepiness mellitus . Lower risks of myocardial infarction were observed among the self evaluation scale (Lecendreux scale) . carriers of the -509CC genotype (adjusted OR 0.49, 95% CI 0.27-0.87; We found sleep troubles in 66% of patients . 29% present a sleep apnea P=0 .014) and homozygous carriers of the CTGC haplotype (adjusted syndrome and 38% present a periodic limb movements syndrome OR 0.61, 95% CI 0.38-0.98; P=0 .042) than among the noncarriers (PLMS) . of this genotype or haplotype . None of the genotypes (P≥0.37) or To our knowledge, it is the first time that PLMS is reported in children haplotypes (P≥0.35) was associated with myocardial infarction in with DM1 . We haven’t found any correlation between the existence women . of sleep trouble and clinical or molecular criteria except for a higher Conclusions: Positive association findings in this study suggest that MDRS (Myotonic Disability Rating Scale) and a more frequently TGFB1 is a susceptibility locus for myocardial infarction . reported fatigue . This study shows the high frequency and the different origins of P0204. severe myotonia permanens revealed in neonatal period sleep troubles in children affected by DM1 and allows us to consider secondary to de novo new N1297K mutation in the skeletal specific treatment for each of its origins, that could help to improve the muscle voltage gated sodium channel gene (SCNA). management of these children . S. Gay1, D. Dupuis2, M. Colombani3, F. Huet3, J. Gouyon1, B. Hainque4, P. Soi- chot2, D. Sternberg4, L. Faivre3, C. Thauvin-Robinet3; P0206. Neonatal diabetes mellitus associated with duplication 1Service de Réanimation Pédiatrique et de Médecine Néonatale, Hôpital d‘En- (6)(q23.3q24.2) fants, CHU, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire d’Exploration du Système Nerveux, J. J. MacKenzie, S. Zhang, J. Begum-Hasan, K. Harrison; Service de neurologie, Hôpital Général, CHU, Dijon, France, 3centre de géné- Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada. tique, Dijon, France, 4Laboratoire de Biochimie B, UF de Cardiogénétique et We report a female who presented at 8 days of age with weight loss, Myogénétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Hôpital de La Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, dehydration and a glucose of 42 μmol/L. She was born at 36 weeks France. gestation with symmetric growth parameters at the 3rd percentile, minor Skeletal muscle channelopathies are disorders of muscle fibre dysmorphic features, and an umbilical hernia . At 4 months of age she membrane excitability and present clinically with varying combinations was weaned from insulin and has had no recurrence at one year, of periodic paralysis, myotonia, and paramyotonia . Mutations in the consistent with apparent remission. Cytogenetic analysis identified skeletal muscle voltage gated sodium channel gene (SCN4A) are a de novo duplication of chromosome 6 with a karyotype of 46, XX, associated with paramyotonia with a severe form called myotonia dup(6)(q23 .3q24 .2) .ish dup (6q)(wcp6+) . permanens, hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, and potassium- Neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM) is a rare condition with an estimated aggravated myotonia . The relation between genotype and phenotype incidence of 1 in 400,000 . NDM is divided into transient neonatal is not always consistent . Here, we report on a 11-month-old infant diabetes (TNDM) and permanent neonatal diabetes (PNDM) . TNDM Clinical genetics 1 accounts for 50-60% of cases and has a typical pattern of neonatal Italy, 8Department of Paediatrics, Division of Child Neurology, University La presentation with apparent remission, usually in the first six months Sapienza, Roma, Italy, 9Institute of Neurology,University of Magnia Graecia, of life, as well as a predisposition to later onset type 2 diabetes . Catanzaro, Italy. Paternal duplications involving 6q24, paternal uniparental isodisomy, Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant and methylation defects at a CpG island overlapping exon 1 of ZAC/ disorder in humans affecting 1 in 3500 individuals . In this work we HYMAI have all been implicated in the pathogenesis of transient review the mutational reports on Denaturing high performance liquid neonatal diabetes . A literature review revealed two other cases with chromatography (DHPLC) analysis of the NF1 gene published a cytogenetically visible duplication of chromosome 6 in association until now and the NF1 clinical and molecular findings in the Italian with TNDM . population by reporting our experience with multiple screening techniques in the analysis of the whole NF1 coding region in a panel of P0207. Genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of PANK mutations 468 consecutive NF1 patients from 8 Italian centres catering with NF1 . in patients with NBiA The study of 468 NF1 patients has been performed using multiple M. B. Hartig1,2, K. Hörtnagel1, B. Garavaglia3, G. Zorzi4, T. Kmiec5, T. Klop- screening techniques, viz . protein truncation test (PTT), heteroduplex stock6,2, K. Rostasy7, M. Svetel8, V. S. Kostic8, M. Schuelke9, E. Botz1, A. analysis (HA), fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), Southern Weindl10, I. Novakovic11, N. Nardocci12, H. Prokisch13,2, T. Meitinger1,2; blotting, cytogenetic analysis, and DHPLC . Particularly, our study 1National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of Human performed by DHPLC on 374 patients revealed 187 novel mutations Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Mitochondrial Medicine Munich, Munich, with a mutation detection rate (in the northern eastern Italian regions Germany, 3National Neurological Institute “Carlo Besta”, Molecular Neurogenet- and in Sicily) of 83% (i .e ., the highest so far reported) . Seventy-four ics, Milan, Italy, 4National Neurological Institute “Carlo Besta”, Department of of the 374 unrelated NF1 patients harboured 35 different recurrent Child Neurology, Milan, Italy, 5Memorial Children’s Health Institute, Department mutations . Genotype-phenotype analysis revealed a higher rate (75%) of Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 6Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Klinikum Gross- of missense mutations (vs . other mutations) in patients harbouring hadern, Department of Neurology, Munich, Germany, 7University of Goettingen, non-optic pathway cerebral gliomas and a higher degree of severity Department of Pedriatics and Pediatric Neurology, Goettingen, Germany, 8Uni- of pigmentation anomalies in the group of patients with missense versity of Belgrade, School of Medicine, Institute of Neurology, Clinical Center mutations (89%) . We also summarised the Italian NF1 microdeletion and Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia and Montene- spectrum (n = 18), which by refined FISH characterisation could be gro, 9Charité University Medical School, Department of Neuropediatrics, Berlin, classified as typical (n= 14) and atypical (n=4). This work confirms that Germany, 10Technical University of Munich, Department of Neurology, Munich, DHPLC analysis for routine molecular diagnosis in NF1 is a simple and Germany, 11University of Belgrade, School of Medicine, Clinical Center and efficient methodology with a high mutation detection rate. Institute of Biology and Human Genetics,, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 12National Neurological Institute “Carlo Besta”, Department of Child Neurology, P0209. clinical, molecular and immunohistochemistry Milan, Germany, 13Technical University of Munich, Institute of Human Genetics, investigations of Neuromuscular Disorders in iranian Munich, Germany. Populations Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a group K. Kahrizi1, M. Hasanzad1, E. Keyhani1, M. Azimian1, F. Layeghi1, J. A. Urtiz- of disorders characterized by MRI changes in basal ganglia . A brea2, D. Hantai2, H. Najmabadi1; distinguished group of NBIA patients show the typical eye-of-the-tiger 1Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2INSERM 582 sign in MRI . Both missense and nonsense mutations have been found Hopital Salpetriere, Paris, France. in such patients in a gene encoding the mitochondrial pantothenate Introduction: Neuromuscular disorders are the most common kinase (PANK2), which is predicted to catalyse the first step of CoA- progressive group of heterogeneous disorders and there are biosynthesis . considerable genetic heterogeneity in these group of disorders that We completed a mutation screen in 91 patients with the diagnosis over hundreds genes have been involved in neuromuscular disorders . NBIA based on clinical findings and radiological imaging. The entire The major symptoms of neuromuscular disorders are generalized coding region of the PANK2 gene (20p12 .3) was investigated for muscle weakness and wasting, muscular atrophy, extraocular point mutations and deletions . We uncovered both mutant alleles in ophthalmoplagia, respiratory, cardiac, and other smooth muscles 52 patients . Deletions accounted for 4% of mutated alleles . Patients involvement. These disorders classified as follow, myopathies with two loss-of-function alleles (n=13) displayed symptoms always at (muscular dystrophies); neuromuscular Junction disorders (congenital an early stage of live . In the presence of missense mutations (n=39) myasthenic syndromes); neuropathies (Charcot- Marie -Tooth); motor the age of onset correlated with residual activity of the pantothenate neuron disorder (Spinal Muscular Atrophy) .The aim of this study was kinase . Progression of disease measured by loss of ambulation was classification of neuromuscular disorders based on clinical, molecular variable in both groups . We did not observe a strict correlation between and immunohistochemistry (IHC) techniques in Iranian patients the eye-of-the-tiger sign and PANK2 mutations . No PANK2 mutation referred to Genetic Research Center during one year . was identified in 39 patients. Clinical features of both groups were Result: We found 82 patients with Myotonic Dystrophy, 19 Duchenne/ assessed and analyzed for similarities and discrepancies . Becker Muscular dystroophy (DMD/BMD), 21 Limb Girdle Muscular Conclusions: Deletion screening of PANK2 should be part of the Dystrophy (LGMD), 3 Fascioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy diagnostic spectrum . Other factors than enzymatic residual activity (FSHD), 2 Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes (CMS), 6 Congenital are determining the course of disease . There are strong arguments in Muscular Dystrophy (CMD), 10 Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) favour of locus heterogeneity . based on clinical examination, electromyography (EMG) and muscle enzymes . P0208. Molecular testing in Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1): Conclusion: Therefore we must investigate the rest of the patients mutational spectrum, patterns of recurrence and correlation with with DM diagnosis for DM2 and also the rest of patients with clinical clinical features in italy symptoms of LGMD that they had normal sarcoglycan and dysferlin A. L. Gabriele1, D. Grifa2, M. Ruggieri3, M. Carella2, L. Larizza4, M. Clementi5, proteins in IHC . We need more analysis by using multiplex western E. Bonioli6, A. De Luca7, P. Origone6, P. Riva4, T. Sprovieri1, A. Patitucci1, A. blot technique to detect calpain, dysferlin, and sarcoglycan proteins in Magariello1, M. Muglia1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. Conforti1, B. Augello2, P. Stanziale2, L. LGMD patients. More investigations are mandatory for finding of other Muscarella2, P. Iannetti8, M. P. Pascali8, S. Di Netta8, B. Dallapiccola7, A. Quat- types of neuromuscular disorders . trone9, L. Zelante2; 1Institute of Neurological Sciences-National Research Council, Cosenza, Italy, P0210. Identification of a novel mutation in the PTCH gene in a 2IRCCS, Opera Padre Pio, S. Giovanni Rotondo - Foggia, Italy, 3Institute of Korean family with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome Neurological Sciences-National Research Council, Catania, Italy, 4Institute of Y. Lee1, B. Roh2, C. Ki3, Y. Park1, H. Shin1, Y. Lee1, T. Choi2, K. Whang2; Genetics, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 5Institute of Epidemiology and Human 1Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital, Bucheon, Republic of Korea, Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, University, Padova, Italy, 6Department 2Soonchunhyang University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 3Samsung of Paediatrics and Molecular Genetics Unit, IRCCS Hospital Gaslini, Genova, Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Italy, 7Institute of Genetics, IRCCS Mendel, University La Sapienza, Roma, The Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the development of Clinical genetics 16 multiple jaw keratocysts, basal cell carcinomas, skeletal anomalies, other MCA/MR syndromes with hypoplastic cerebellum and genitalia ectopic calcification and palmoplatar pits. Mutations in the PTCH gene are known . However, our cases do differ with the existence of distinct on the chromosome band 9q22 .3, the homologue of the Drosophila facial features and agenesis of labioscrotal folds which is at the severe PATCHED gene, have been identified to be the underlying genetic end of the hypoplastic genitalia spectrum . defects of the syndrome . We found a Korean family with NBCCS and The clinical, cytogenetical, molecular cytogenetical and biochemical identified a novel mutation in the PTCH gene . The proband, a 14- findings of this previously unreported MCA/MR syndrome will be year-old girl, and her father, 42-year-old, were diagnosed as NBCCS presented . based on clinical diagnostic criteria. To confirm PTCH gene defects, we performed mutation analysis for PTCH gene on the proband and P0213. Nijmegen Brekage syndrome with myelodysplasia her family members after we had obtained informed consent . Genomic B. Lozic, S. Culic, V. Culic, V. Armanda, D. Kuljis, G. Mijaljica; DNA was isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes and all 23 coding University Hospital Split, Pediatrics Clinic, Split, Croatia. exons of the PTCH gene were amplified by PCR and cycle sequencing Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome (NBS) is an autosomal recessive was performed on the ABI 3100 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, chromosomal instability syndrome . The main characteristics of NBS Foster City, CA) . The proband was revealed to have a novel insertion include short stature, progressive microcephaly, mutation in exon 6 of the PTCH gene (c.817_818insT; Y273LfsX12), immunodeficiency and predisposition to malignant diseases and further analysis of her family members demonstrated that only (especially lymphomas), microcephaly, delayed development and her father had the same mutation. This is the first report of genetically characteristic facial features . Spontaneous chromosomal instability, confirmed case of NBCCS in Korea. cellular instability, and clonal occurrence of rearrangements involving chromosomes 7 and 14 are present . Mutations of the NBS1 gene are P0211. Nevus of Ota associated with multiple mongolian spots in detected in nearly all patients . infant - case report Case report: We described a 8 years old boy presented with low-set T. Marcovici1, I. Sabau1, I. Simedrea1, M. Puiu1, E. Gamaniuc2; ears, prominent nasal bridge, micrognathia and left skin syndactyly (III- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 22 „Louis Turcanu” IV toe), homozygous for the 5- bp deletion (657del 5) in exon 6 of the Children’s Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. NBS1 gene . In the described patient, standard GTG-banded peripheral Mongolian spot is a hereditary developmental condition caused by blood chromosomal analysis showed the 46, XY karyotype, with a high entrapment of melanocytes in the dermis during their migration from level of spontaneous chromosome breakage . Clinical examination the neural crest into the epidermis . A child may have one or several on showed continuing evidence of failure to thrive, extreme microcephaly, the lower back They are more common in dark-skinned infants and, hypogammaglobulinaemia, frequent respiratory infections, peripheral in some cases, involve unusual sites . Nevus of Ota is a permanent blood cytopenia . He developed progressive bone marrow failure and unilateral congenital/aquired blue/gray patch on the face and it may was transiently treated with substitution of immunoglobulines, different involve the ocular surface . antibiotics, G-CSF and erythropoetin . We present a five-months old dark-skinned female admitted in our clinic for pneumonia and seizures . She is the third child of an young healthy P0214. the NOGGiN mutation m190V leads to the phenotype of couple . The pregnancy was not followed up and she was delivered facio-audio-symphalangism syndrome in a family full term, with a weight of 3880 g and Apgar score 9 . Girl’s growth and K. Lehmann1, G. Leschik1, N. Benatar2, S. Mundlos1,3; development were normal . 1Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 2Klinik für Handchirurgie und By clinical examination we noticed multiple bluish spots involving large angeborene Handfehlbildungen, Krankenhaus Marienstift, Braunschweig, Ger- skin areas: the right side of the face, shoulders, back, presacral area and many, 3Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany. buttocks . Right eye’s bulbar conjunctiva was also involved . The patchs Heterozygous mutations in the NOGGIN gene are known to cause and eye hyperpigmentation are congenital and they have not changed different autosomal dominant inherited disorders such as isolated since birth. Ophtalmologic examination identified melanocytosis of the proximal symphalangism (OMIM #185800), tarsal-carpal coalition entire uveal tract and normal intraocular pressure . MRI of the brain syndrome (OMIM #186570), and multiple synostoses syndrome was normal . (OMIM #186500) whereas the facio-audio-symphalangism syndrome conclusions: There is a moderate case of nevus of Ota with is listed in the OMIM database as a synonyme for multiple synostosis ocular melanosis . Ophtalmologic and dermatologic follow-up care is syndrome . NOGGIN is secreted as a homodimer that binds to bone necessary . morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and acts in an antagonistic way to BMP signalling . Through this inhibiting effect on the BMP pathway, a P0212. New mcA/mR syndrome; Distinct facial features with proper development of bones and joints as well as frontonasal and cerebellar and genital hypoplasia ocular structures is getting disturbed demonstrated by different studies . A. D. Kocbas, H. Kayserili, B. Karaman, S. Basaran, M. Yuksel-Apak; We report on three affected family members with typical features Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, of facio-audio-symphalangism syndrome . To a variable degree, Istanbul, Turkey. the affected persons had a distinctive facies with a particular nose, We here report three children with mental/motor retardation, distinct conductive hearing loss due to stapes ankylosis, hyperopia, proximal facial dysmorphism and hypoplastic genitalia . Two are siblings, a nine symphalangism and stiffened or broad thumbs . In this family, a novel year old female and a four year old male, born to a first degree and the missense mutation M190V lying in a highly conserved C-terminal third, a ten year old male, born to a second degree cousin marriage . region of NOGGIN was identified. This mutation presumably disrupts All three have microcephaly, psychomotor retardation, distinct facial a cysteine-knot motif consisting of nine cystein residues located in features and hypoplastic genitalia . Dysmorphic facial features are this region being important for disulfide-bond formation of NOGGIN low frontal hairline, arched eyebrows with medial flare, down slanting homodimers. In addition, a specific genotype-phenotype correlation palpebral fissures, epicanthic folds, long eyelashes, and prominent of NOGGIN mutations is not predictable at present . Also recent nasal root . Hypoplastic genitalia is present with aplastic scrotum, reports show that the phenotypic spectrum of NOGGIN mutations is undescended testis and hypospadias in males and agenesis of presumably broader than expected in the recent years . labium majus/minus in the female . The ethiological work up revealed cerebellar hypoplasia in cranial MRI and EEG abnormalities in all . P0215. Proximal symphalangism - follow-up Karyotype analysis and metabolic screening were normal . L. Caba1, C. Rusu2, M. Volosciuc2, A. Vlad3, M. Covic4; Similar phenotype observed in the siblings and consanguinity in both 1Children’s Hospital Iasi-Medical Genetics Center, Iasi, Romania, 2University families are suggestive for autosomal recessive inheritance . The of Medicine and Pharmacy-Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, Romania, databases were screened in order to define a MCA/MR syndrome with 3Children’s Hospital Iasi-Radiology Department, Iasi, Romania, 4University of autosomal recessive inheritance that is compatible with the findings Medicine and Pharmacy- Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, Romania. of our patients . Although several features of MacDermot-Winter Proximal symphalangism is a rare AD disorder defined by fusion of the syndrome were overlapping with our patients’ findings; IUGR, feeding proximal interphalangeal joints, humeroradial fusion, tarsal and carpal difficulties and short life span were not observed in our cases. Many coalition, absence of interphalangeal folds and conductive hearing loss . Clinical genetics 1 It is produced by mutations in NOG gene encoding Noggin protein . neck, chest deformity, mild mental retardation, cryptorchidism, We describe a family in order to illustrate the clinical features, to feeding difficulties, bleeding diathesis, myeloproliferative disorders, present the evolution (8 years) of the clinical picture and to discuss and lymphatic dysplasias . This condition is relatively common, with a some particularities . The proband (8 years old girl) presents: bilateral prevalence at birth of 1:1000-2500 live births . Missense mutations in the elbow ankilosis and limited movement of proximal interphalangeal PTPN11 gene on chromosome 12 (12q24) account for approximately joints . Lower limbs: muscular hypotrophy, bilateral pes supinatus, 50% of NS cases . The gene encodes a non-receptor protein tyrosine irregular toe implantation, limited toe movements . Intellectual phosphatase (PTP) SHP-2, with NS mutations resulting in gain of development and hearing are normal . Her father and his sister present function. A significantly higher prevalence of mutations is described in the same features . Their mother is phenotypically normal . Radiologic familial cases than in sporadic ones . Genotype-phenotype correlations examination is similar for all of them: upper limbs- humeroradial fusion demonstrate that pulmonary stenosis is associated with PTPN11 with loss of articular space, carpal bones fusion, hypoplastic second mutations, whereas hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is associated to phalanx fused to proximal phalanx (fingers 2-5); lower limbs- tarsal mutation-negative cases . In this study, we have analysed 27 patients bones fusion, calcaneus fused to the tarsal block, fusion of phalanges with NS clinical phenotype. Molecular lesions have been identified in 4th toe (toes 3-5 in the aunt) . Differential diagnosis was done with: 8 of them, presenting typical clinical features associated to pulmonary Facio-audio-symphalangism syndrome, Humero-radial synostosis valve stenosis . A familial novel mutation, Leu261His, has been and Tarsal-carpal-coalition syndrome . Clinical features were constant identified in two sisters, and a Leu262Arg missense mutation has been in the father and his sister; in the daughter bone fusion and muscle observed in a sporadic case . hypotrophy were delayed with physical therapy . The particularity of this family is that the father and his sister probably represent the P0218. the recently reported rare A172G mutation of PtPN 11 consequence of gonadal mosaicism (they resulted from 2 different gene seems to provoke a mild Noonan syndrome phenotype marriages of a phenotypically normal woman) . In conclusion, we A. Papadopoulou1, C. Kanaka Gantenbein2, S. Kitsiou3, A. Fretzayas1, D. Das- present a family with proximal symphalangism in order to illustrate the kalopoulos2, E. Kanavakis3, P. Nikolaidou1; features, the evolution and particularities . 1Third Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2First Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 3Department of P0216. Rhabdomyosarcoma in a patient with Noonan syndrome Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece. phenotype Background: Noonan syndrome (NS) (OMIM 163950) is an autosomal S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, M. Moschovi2, V. Touliatou1, A. Mayakou3, A. Papadopoulou4, dominant developmental disorder characterized by typical facial P. Nikolaidou-Karpathiou4, F. Tzortzatou-Stathopoulou2; dysmorphism, growth retardation and variable congenital heart defects . 1Medical Genetics Laboratory, University of Athens,Choremio Research Labo- In unrelated individuals with sporadic or familial NS, heterozygous ratory, Athens, Greece, 2Hematology-Oncology Unit, 1st Department of Pediat- missense point mutations in the gene PTPN11 (OMIM 176876) have rics, University of Athens, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, been confirmed, with a clustering of mutations in exons 3 and 8, the 31st Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s mutation A 922 G (Asn 308 Asp) accounting for nearly 25% of cases . Hospital, Athens, Greece, 43rd Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens, Patient and methods: We report a 7 years old boy with short stature “Attiko” Hospital, Athens, Greece. and some other clinical features of Noonan syndrome, who has been An increased risk of malignancy has been reported in patients with investigated by molecular analysis for the presence of mutations in Noonan syndrome (NS), an autosomal dominant disorder with the PTPN11 gene . Results: The de novo mutation A 172 G in the exon variable expression and incomplete penetrance . The SH2 domain- 3 of the PTPN 11 gene, predicting an Asn58Asp substitution, has containing protein-tyrosine phosphatase (SHP2), encoded by the been found. To the best of our knowledge this specific mutation has responsible gene (PTPN11), is required for normal development only been described once before, but this is the first report of detailed and is an essential component of signaling pathways initiated by clinical data suggesting a mild phenotype . Conclusions: Detailed growth factors and cytokines, in many of which SHP2 possibly acts clinical phenotype in every patient with features of Noonan syndrome upstream of Ras oncogene and interferes in tumorigenesis . We report and molecular identification of PTPN11 gene mutation may permit a a patient with short stature, tall forehead, downslanting palpebral better phenotype-genotype correlation . fissures, hypertelorism, depressed nose root, webbed neck, pectus excavatum and developmental delay . He also had a history of P0219. Antenatal presentation of the Oculo-Auriculo-Vertebral surgical reconstruction of pulmonary stenosis along with hypertrophic spectrum (OAVs) cardiomyopathy and posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus after perinatal F. Brancati1,2, M. Castori1,2, R. Rinaldi3, L. Adami4, R. Mingarelli1, P. Gram- distress . It is mentioned that our proband did not present any of the matico3, B. Dallapiccola1,2; cardinal manifestations of Costello syndrome (papillomata, acanthosis 1IRCCS-C.S.S. San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, nigricans, loose skin, deep palmar creases), which shows phenotypic 2Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University “La Sapien- overlap with NS . At the age of 5 years he presented with recurrent za”, Rome, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, Department of Experimental Medicine and abdominal pain and constipation . Laboratory evaluation with U/S and Pathology, University “La Sapienza”, S. Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, CT-scan demonstrated the presence of an abdominal mass . A total 4Department of Radiology, S. Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy. resection of the mass and consequent histology revealed embryonal Oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum (OAVS or hemifacial microsomia) rhabdomyosarcoma . Rhabdomyosarcoma is a rare tumor in children is a relatively common disorder affecting ~1 in 5600 live birth and with NS and to the best of our knowledge only four cases have results from a defect of blastogenesis involving primarily aural, oral been reported so far, while in Costello syndrome, the frequency of and mandibular development . Clinically, OAVS ranges from microtia rhabdomyosarcoma is approximately 17% . The presentation underlines or auricular or preauricular abnormalities with or without mandibular the importance of frequent follow up of patients with NS phenotype, hypoplasia, to a complex phenotype with skeletal, cardiac, renal, since the incidence of various malignancies is small but existing . pulmonary, and CNS manifestations . Vertebral anomalies and epibulbar dermoids, when present, delineates the so-called Goldenhar P0217. two novel PtPN11 mutations in familial and sporadic syndrome . While diagnosis and management of OAVS are well Noonan syndrome established after birth, its antenatal pattern of malformations is still C. Rossi1, S. Ferrari1, A. Delmonaco2, E. Belligni2, G. Baldassarre2, M. Silengo2, poorly delineated . G. Romeo1, G. B. Ferrero2; We describe a fetus with abnormal ultrasound imaging at 20 weeks 1Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Cardioangiologia ed Epatologia, Università di showing hydrocephalus and radial aplasia . Post-mortem examination Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università di Torino, Torino, followed pregnancy termination and confirmed the diagnosis of Italy. OAVS . Noonan syndrome (NS, OMIM 163950) is an autosomal dominant To delineate the spectrum of prenatal features of OAVS, we review developmental disorder characterized by facial dysmorphisms, 20 published fetuses showing abnormal US/MRI imaging . Cephalic skeletal anomalies, cardiovascular abnormalities, and haematological abnormalities were found in 52 .4% (i .e . micro/anophthalmia, ear disorders . The phenotype is extremely variable and includes webbed anomalies, hemifacial microsomia and facial cleft) . CNS defects Clinical genetics 1 occurred in 47 .6% (i .e . hydrocephalus, occipital encephalocele, deleted sections of the genome are discussed in detail in this poster . cerebellar hemisphere/vermis hypoplasia and lipoma of the corpus callosum), together with abnormal amniotic fluid volume (AFV), either P0222. An autosomal recessive phenocopy of Otopalatodigital poly- or oligohydramnios . Nineteen percent had congenital heart syndrome type 2. disease. Additional findings included hydroureteronephrosis, radial A. van Haeringen1,2, H. Zonderland3, C. Longman4, H. Gill4, O. Boute5, S. Ma- aplasia, lung and kidney agenesis . nouvrier5, C. Platt6, D. Oepkes7, M. Breuning1, S. Robertson8; Prenatal features of OAVS are highly heterogeneous . Facial 1Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Nether- asymmetric lesions (i .e . hemifacial microsomia, ipsilateral micro/ lands, 2Department of Paediatrics, HAGA Teaching Hospital, Location Juliana anophthalmia, malformed ear) represent a recurrent pattern of Children’s Hospital, The Hague, The Netherlands, 3Department of Radiology, anomalies . The association of CNS (particularly hydrocephalus) and LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy’s Hos- AFV abnormalities is also common . Detection of heart, kidney, lung pital, London, United Kingdom, 5Clinical Genetics Service, Jeanne de Flandre and skeletal anomalies may further support the prenatal recognition Hospital, Lille, France, 6Department of Histopathology, Guy’s and St Thomas’ of OAVS . NHS Foundation, London, United Kingdom, 7Department of Obstetrics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 8Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Univer- P0220. Blepharophimosis-mental retardation (BmR) syndromes. sity of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. A proposed clinical classification of the so-called ohdo Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 (OPD2; OMIM 304120) is syndrome, and delineation of two new syndromes, one x-linked inherited as an X-linked condition and is characterised by a severe and one recessive osteodysplasia and multiple extraskeletal congenital anomalies in A. Verloes1, D. Bremond-Gignac2, A. David3, Y. Gillerot4, L. Van Maldergem5, affected males . OPD2 is allelic to OPD1 (OMIM 311300), Melnick- D. Héron6, D. Lacombe7, P. Bitoun8, H. Brunner9; Needles syndrome (OMIM 309350) and frontometaphyseal dysplasia 1Clinical Genetic Unit, Robert DEBRE Hospital, PARIS, France, 2Dept of Oph- (OMIM 305620), with clustered missense mutations found in the thalmology, Robert DEBRE Hospital, PARIS, France, 3Clinical Genetic Unit, gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein filamin A (FLNA; Xq28) in all Nantes University Hospital, France, 4Gentic dept, IMP, Loverval, Belgium, 5IMP, four conditions . We describe a total 5 patients (2 males, 3 females) Loverval, Belgium, 6Clinical Genetic Unit, La Pitié-Salpétrière Hospital, PARIS, from 3 consanguineous families with a phenotype very similar to that France, 7Genetic Dept, University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 8Clinical Genetic observed in male individuals with OPD2. The first family consisted of a Unit, Jean VERDIER Hospital, PARIS, France, 9Dept of Genetics, University sib pair with a severe phenotype including a severe skeletal dysplasia Hospital, Nijmeguen, The Netherlands. and encephalocele, born to first cousin parents. The other two families We report 11 patients from eight families with a blepharophimosis and are slightly less severely affected (2 sisters and a singleton male both mental retardation syndrome (BMRS) . Five sporadic patients have the born to parents who were first cousins). The FLNA gene was screened Gestalt of Ohdo syndrome, associated in two of them with congenital for mutations in all three instances but no mutations were identified. hypothyroidism (thus also compatible with a diagnosis of Young- The combination of a phenotype affecting both sexes to the same Simpson syndrome) . In two affected sibs, compensated hypothyroidism extent in the context of parental consanguinity and no mutation was demonstrated . In another family, an affected boy was born to identifiable in FLNA, strongly suggests an autosomal recessive trait. the unaffected sister of a previously reported patient . Finally, in the This observation is consistent with the previously reported failure to last sibship, two affected boys further had severe microcephaly and identify FLNA mutations in a minority of unrelated sporadic OPD2 neurological anomalies. A definite clinical and etiologic classification of cases. The identification of an AR form of OPD2 has major implications BMRS has still to be invented, but closer phenotypic analysis should for genetic counseling in all OPD2 cases of either sex who do not have lead to a more analytic appraisal of the BMRS phenotype . We suggest a FLNA mutation identified. A genome wide search for the causative to drop the term “Ohdo syndrome”, and to classify ,BMRS in at least five gene in these three families is currently underway . groups : 1) del(3p) syndrome, (possibly overlooked in older reports); 2) BMRS, Ohdo type, limited to the original patients of Ohdo; 3) BMRS P0223. Oro-Dental Abnormalities in Patients with mental SBBYS (Say-Barber/Biesecker/Young-Simpson) type, with distinctive Retardation dysmorphism and inconstant anomalies including heart defect, optic M. I. A. Ramzy; atrophy, deafness, hypoplastic teeth, cleft palate, joint limitations, National research Center -N.R.C-, CAIRO, Egypt. and hypothyroidism . BMRS type SBBYS probably is an etiologically The aim of our present work is to investigate the prevalence of oral heterogeneous phenotype, as AD and AR forms exist; 4) BMRS, new and dental abnormalities in patients with mental retardation . Also to probably XLR type (Maat-Kievit-Brunner type) with coarse, triangular delineate the most common patterns of presentation associated with face; 5) BMRS new probably recessive type (Verloes type) with severe oro-dental abnormalities . The present study included 132 cases with microcephaly, hypsarrhythmia, adducted thumbs, cleft palate and mental subnormality, who attended the human genetics clinic; National abnormal genitalia . Independent of nosological considerations, our research center (N .R .C) . A full history was taken for all the patients . paper illustrates probable AR and XLR inheritances in patients with Thorough oro-dental examination and IQ assessmentwere performed . Ohdo syndrome . Chromosomal studies and metabolic screening were done when needed . P0221. An oligoarray cGH analysis on a patient with multiple The studied cases were divided into four groups according to the congenital abnormalities etiology of mental retardation: chromosomal, single gene defect, K. Avela1, S. Knuutila2, S. Ala-Mello1; multifactorial and unclassified groups. The chromosomal group 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland, showed the highest percentage of oral region abnormalities (97%) and 2Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, mouth abnormalities (81%), followed by the single gene defect 89% Finland. and 78% and the multifactorial group 80% and 81% . An oligobased CGH microarray analysis was performed on a patient The chromosomal group showed tongue abnormalities in 62% with a growth retardation of prenatal onset, several congenital and palatal abnormalities in 63% . The single gene defect and the abnormalities, and normal mental capacity . The adult heigth of this multifactorial groups showed maxillary abnormalities in 19% . As most female patient is 144 .5 cm (- 3 SD) . She has a congenital heart defect cases with chromosomal abnormalities have severe to profound mental presenting as a prolapse of the mitral and tricusbidal valves . The retardation we concluded that oro-dental abnormalities are more patient has been operated for scoliosis three times, and she also has frequent in patients with severe and profound mental retardation, We joint laxity . She has a bilateral sensorineural hearing defect, and has recommend medical dental services and care for the affected cases been operated for bilateral strabismus . Her puberty has been delayed . since there is no national oral disease prevalence data with patients The karyotype of the patient is normal 46, XX . The arrayCGH analysis with mental retardation and developmental disability using Agilent 44 kb oligoarray revealed an amplification of one gene in chromosome 18q22.1, and a small deletion and a amplification in chromosome 21q21. A polymorphic amplification was seen in the X- chromosome. The symptoms of the patient and the amplificated and Clinical genetics 1 P0224. Diagnostic issues in patients with oro-facial clefts by general increased bone density . Early manifestation, progressing G. S. Doros, M. Gafencu, M. J. Puiu, B. S. Zoica, A. L. Oprisoni; clinical current and early lethality characterize OPTB1 . It is a rare Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, Ti- disease in the world but the disorder has unusually high frequency misoara, Romania. in Chuvash republic of Russia (1 : 3900 newborns) . All OPTB1 cases Aim . To present 4 infants with different oro-facial clefts in which several here is caused by single mutation c .807+5G>A in TCIRG1 gene diagnostic issues emerged after clinical examination and genetical encoding one of functional markers of osteoclasts . In the previous investigations . research we have shown that the mutation was diffusion here by material and method . 4 infants (3 boys and 1 girl) with oro-facial founder effect . In this work we have evaluated the gene frequency in clefts admitted in our clinic during January 2005-January 2006 were Chuvash and else in two populations of Volga-Ural region (Mari and assessed for other malformations: complete clinical examination, Udmurt) . Allelic frequency of the mutation appeared is equal 1 .7% in cardiac non-invasive explorations, abdominal ultrasonography, Chuvashiya (calculated frequency of disease 1 : 3500 newborns) and neurological examination, laboratory investigations and karyotype . 0 .8% in Mari (1 : 14 000 newborns) . The haplotype analysis has shown Results . Two of them presented palate cleft without other malformations that OPTB1 cases in Chuvashians and Marians originate from single and the other 2 lip and palate clefts with associated congenital heart mutational event . The mutation was not revealed in 396 Udmurts . Also defects: VSD - 1 case and Tetralogy of Fallot - 1 case . All 4 presented we have calculated date of diffusion of the mutation in Chuvashians . failure to thrive, mild developmental delay, facial dysmorphic features, For this purpose we used both the formula applied by other scientists hypotonia and varus equin . The patient with associated Fallot disease and the approach offered by us . Our approach appeared giving more also presented cryptorchidism and genital microsomia . Previous to exact estimation and has allowed to estimate dating of the mutation karyotype investigation the 2 patients with associated cardiac defects as approximately 480 years ago . The recent “bottle neck” of this were classified as velo-cardio-facial syndromes. The karyotype of the recessive mutation and its high current frequency suggest that the patient with Tetralogy of Fallot showed: unexpected 22 monosomy with Chuvash population descends from a limited group of founders with its unbalanced translocation t(15;22): 45, XY-22t (15,22)(q26.2;q12.2) subsequent rapid growth . 15q+ . This karyotype was inconsistent with Shprinzen syndrome diagnosis . The infant with associated VSD was admitted in January P0227. Oto-Facio-cervical syndrome and Branchio-Oto-Renal 2006 and the karyotype is currently pending . For this time however syndrome are variable clinical presentations of the same entity. he is considered as velo-cardio-facial syndrome, awaiting karyotype Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee1, H. Holscher2,3, P. Vos4,5, M. Smit5, A. van Haeringen1,5, M. confirmation. The 2 infants without cardiac defects presented normal Breuning1; karyotype and are classified as oro-facial clefts. 1Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Nether- conclusions. Patients with oro-facial clefts must undergo complex lands, 2Department of Radiology, HAGA Teaching Hospital, Location Juliana investigations in other to rule out other possible malformations and to Children’s Hospital, The Hague, The Netherlands, 3Department of Radiology, achieve an accurate diagnosis . Genetic tests are mandatory allowing LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Medical Centre Haaglanden, The Hague, proper classification of syndromes and sometimes discovering The Netherlands, 5Department of Paediatrics, HAGA Teaching Hospital, Loca- unexpected mutations . tion Juliana Children’s Hospital, The Hague, The Netherlands. Oto-Facio-Cervical syndrome (OFC, OMIM 166780) is characterised P0225. malignant osteopetrosis - a rare skeletal dysplasia by an elongated face, preauricular pits, conductive hearing loss, lateral mimicking progressive metabolic disease cervical fistulae, sloping shoulders, winged scapulae, and mild mental O. Rittinger1, J. Koch1, W. Sperl1, U. Kornak2; retardation . Branchio-Oto-Renal syndrome (BOR, OMIM 113650) is 1Universitätsklinik für Kinder- und Jugendheilkunde, PMU Salzburg, Salzburg, characterised by conductive and sensorineural hearing loss, external Austria, 2Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Charite Universitätsklinikum, Berlin, ear abnormalities, ear pits or tags, branchial cleft sinus or fistula, and Germany. variable renal abnormalities such as duplication of the collective system, Infantile osteopetrosis is a rare lethal condition estimated to occur in 1: and unilateral or bilateral renal aplasia . BOR is caused by mutations 200 .0000 birth . This disorder is characterised by the inability to resorb in the drosophila absent eyes (EYA1) gene on 8q13 .3 . Both conditions bone, leading to increased density of nearly all bones, early onset of are considered separate in the literature . Penni et al (1992) however bone marrow failure, visual and hearing loss, psychomotor retardation, comments on shoulder abnormalities in BOR, whereas Rickard et al seizures and death in the first few years related to recurrent infections. (2001) find an EYA1 abnormality in a patient with OFC. We describe a We report on two affected children of consanguineous parents from sporadic female patient with OFC syndrome and in addition unilateral Turkey. The older child presented in the first weeks of life with anemia, renal agenesis as in BOR . EYA1 mutation analysis was normal . A thrombopenia and hepatosplenomegaly, early visual impairment, second patient from a classical BOR family is described . In this family, severe hypotonia and nearly drug-resistant seizures, and died of an EYA1 mutation was found . This patient has small sloping shoulders persistent febrile infections at the age of 10 months . The development as in OFC . We conclude that our cases are further proof that OFC and of the second child has been highly reminiscent of the sisters’ BOR represent the same genetic entity . course so far . He also revealed transfusion-dependent anemia as a newborn, and later on a similar loss of nerval functions . Because of P0228. the outcome of ovarian cancer screening in a hepatosplenomegaly and the involvement of grey matter dysfunction, consecutive series of BRcA1/2 mutation carriers a progredient neurometabolic disturbance was suggested first, which B. Hermsen1, R. Olivier2, R. Verheijen1, J. de Hullu3, M. van Beurden2, C. Burg- was ruled out by exhaustive biochemical studies . Interestingly, CK- er4, C. Brekelmans4, M. Mourits5, G. de Bock5, K. Gaarenstroom6, T. Mooij2, H. BB isoenzyme was elevated 20fold over normal . Detailed differential van Boven2, M. Rookus2; diagnosis of the ineffective extramedullary hematopoesis established 1VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2The Nether- finally the diagnosis by the pathognomonic X-ray findings. The patient lands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3University Hospital Saint is now one year of age . Molecular studies are currently on the way to Radboud, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Erasmus University Medical Centre, identify the underlying mutation in the two most probable candidate Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 5University Hospital Groningen, Groningen, The genes TCIRG1 and CLCN7 . Both gene products are known to be Netherlands, 6Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands. involved in proton transport prerequisite for adequate lysosomal Introduction: BRCA1/2 mutation carriers have been offered degradation and bone resorption by osteoclasts . gynecological screening aiming to detect cancer at an early stage or prophylactic bilateral (salpingo-)oophorectomy aiming to reduce the P0226. Estimating the gene frequency of malignant autosomal incidence of ovarian cancer risk . The purpose of the study was to recessive osteopetrosis in Volga-Ural region populations of investigate efficacy of gynecological screening. Russia and dating the mutation in chuvashiya. Material and Methods: In this multi-center study we examined E. Bliznetz, R. Zinchenko, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov; 888 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers who started gynecological Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. screening (annually serum CA125 measurements and transvaginal Malignant autosomal recessive osteopetrosis (OPTB1) is included ultrasonography) between 1993-2005 . The Standardized Incidence in group of inherited sclerosing osteochondrodysplasias and defined Ratio (SIR) of detecting ovarian tumors during screening was calculated Clinical genetics 10 based on age-, mutation-specific incidence rates. LRRK2 gene (51 exons) were studied by genomic sequencing in 60 Results: At the first screening visit four stage III ovarian cancers were probands with ADPD (83% Italian) . RESULTS: Pathogenic mutations diagnosed . In the remaining 884 women six screen-detected (one stage were identified in six probands (10%): the heterozygous p.G2019S II, four stage III and one stage IV) and four interval ovarian cancers (one mutation in four (6 .6%), and the heterozygous p .R1441C mutation stage II, one stage III and two stage IV) were diagnosed during follow- in two (3 .4%) probands . A further proband carried the heterozygous up . The SIR of observed (10) versus expected (6 .6) ovarian cancers p .I1371V mutation, for which a pathogenic role could not be established was 1 .5 (95%CI: 0 .7-2 .8) . In total, 434 (87%) women were screened with certainty . Thirteen novel disease-unrelated variants and three according to well-defined guidelines, during 606 women-years. Among intronic changes of uncertain significance were also characterized. these women, five ovarian tumors were diagnosed (one stage II, two The phenotype associated with LRRK2 pathogenic mutations is the stage III and two stage IV) giving a SIR of 1 .7 (95%CI: 0 .6 - 4 .0) . one of typical PD, but with a broad range of onset ages (mean 55 .2, Conclusion: Screening resulted in, though not statistical significantly, range 38-68 years) and, in some cases, slow disease progression . more ovarian cancers diagnosed than could be expected . Given the CONCLUSION: On the basis of the comprehensive study in a large advanced stages at diagnosis, it remains to be investigated whether sample, we conclude that pathogenic LRRK2 mutations are frequent this will affect mortality from ovarian cancer in BRCA1/2 mutation in ADPD, and they cluster in the C-terminal half of the encoded protein . carriers . These data have implications both for understanding the molecular mechanisms of PD, and for directing the genetic screening in clinical P0229. Paget’s disease of bone in the French population: novel practice . SQSTM1 mutations and genotype phenotype correlation L. Michou1, C. Collet2, M. Audran3, P. Hilliquin4, I. Lemaire5, F. Cornelis6, J. P0231. The case of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency Laplanche7, P. Orcel1; with antenatal beginning 1Fédération de rhumatologie, Paris, France, 2Service de Biochimie, Paris, K. Joost1, R. Zordania1, L. Süvari1, L. Toome1, O. Kostina2, R. J. T. Roden- France, 3Service de rhumatologie, Angers, France, 4Service de rhumatologie, burg3, K. Õunap4,5; Corbeil-Essonnes, France, 5Laboratoire de biologie, Corbeil-Essonnes, France, 1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Institute of General and Molecular 6Unité de génétique clinique, Paris, France, 7Service de biochimie, Paris, Pathology, Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia, 3Nijemegen Center for Mitochondrial France. Disorders, Nijemegen, The Netherlands, 4Medical genetics Center, United Introduction: Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) is a frequent chronic Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 5Department of Pediatrics, disease of the skeleton . PDB often segregates with an autosomal University of Tartu, Estonia, Estonia. dominant pattern of inheritance and incomplete penetrance . Genetic Premature girl was consulted by clinical geneticist on the 2nd hour heterogeneity has been demonstrated . At the chromosome 5 locus, a of life due to the dysmorphic phenotype: palpebral fissures slant recurrent mutation (P392L) of the sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1) gene down, exophtalm, low-set dysmorphic ears, long philtrum, down- was identified and several other mutations of this gene were described turned corners of the mouth, micrognatia, and rocker-bottom feet . The in PDB patients . All these mutations affect the highly conserved pregnancy history was complicated: on the 33rd week of pregnancy ubiquitin-associated domain (UBA) of the p62 protein . This study aims hydrocephaly, hypotrophy and oligohydramnion were diagnosed . at evaluating the frequency of the SQSTM1 mutations in the French Child was born prematurely on the 35th gestational week. At first she PBD patients and to search for genotype phenotype correlations . was interpreted clinically as a patient with possible chromosomal Patients and methods: 94 unrelated French PDB patients underwent aberration or dysmorphic syndrome, but at the age of 4 days rapid genetic testing, relying on a sequencing of the 7 and 8 exon . For the disorientation occurred caused by increased lactic acid in serum genotype phenotype correlations study, an ANOVA analysis and chi- (maximum10.6 mmol/l) and in cerebrospinal fluid (13 mmol/l). GCMS square test were performed . analysis of the urine showed markedly increased secretion of lactate Results: Mutations of SQSTM1 gene were identified in 13% of the PDB and pyruvate . Serum pyruvate was also markedly increased with patients, with two novel missense SQSTM1 mutations identified, A381V normal lactate/pyruvate ratio 3 .5 . MRI of the brain showed severe and L413F . Two PDB patients carried a double SQSTM1 mutation . brain atrophy . The enzymatic studies for measurement the activity The mean age of PDB onset was younger in the PDB patients with of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDH) in the muscle showed SQSTM1 mutation (53 .0 ± 10 .5 years versus 60 .5 ± 12 .5 years, P= significantly reduced activity. The enzymatic analysis from fibroblasts 0 .05) . PDB was more extensive in patients who carried a SQSTM1 is still under investigation . The treatment according to the schedule mutation with an increased mean number of affected bones (4 .2 ± 3 PDH was initiated at the age of 6 days: thiamine 500 mg/die, biotin 1 versus 2 .1 ±1 .5, P=0 .0002) . mg/kg/die and coenzyme Q 10 mg/kg/die . Her diet is rich in fat and 10 Conclusion: Mutations of SQSTM1 are frequent in the French low in carbohydrates. This treatment lowered significantly the lactic population . The presence of at least one SQSTM1 is correlated with a acid level in serum and cerebrospinal fluid. younger age of onset and a more extensive PDB . Conclusion: this was one of the first diagnosed cases of PDH deficiency in Estonia . Lessons to learn: investigating dysmorphic child, metabolic P0230. comprehensive analysis of the LRRK gene in sixty diseases should be kept in mind, specially in case of unexpected families with Parkinson’s disease clinical course . A. Di Fonzo1, M. De Mari2, J. Ferreira3, C. Rohé1, A. Antonini4, R. Marconi5, L. Lopiano6, M. Guidi7, E. Simons1, G. Breedveld1, S. Goldwurm4, C. Sampaio3, E. P0232. Peroxyzomal Disorders in iran Barbosa8, E. Martignoni9, B. Oostra1, V. Bonifati1; Y. Shafeghati; 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, Uni- Genetics Research Center, University of Welfare Sciences and Rehabilitation, versity of Bari, Bari, Italy, 3Neurological Clinical Research Unit, Institute of Mo- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. lecular Medicine, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di Perfezi- Peroxyzomes are responsible for a number of very important metabolic onamento, Milan, Italy, 5Neurology Division, “Misericordia” Hospital, Grosseto, reactions, including synthesis of glycerol ethers, shortening VLCFAs Italy, 6Department of Neuroscience, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 7Neurology (C24:O and C26:O), and oxidation of the side chain of cholesterol Division, INRCA Institute, Ancona, Italy, 8Department of Neurology, University of needed for bile acid production . São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 9Department of Medical Sciences, “A. Avogadro” Peroxyzome biogenesis disorders (PBDs) are genetically and University, Novara, Italy. phenotypically related disorders that involve enzymatic activities of BACKGROUND: Mutations in the gene Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase peroxyzomes . They are rare mostly autosomal recessive diseases 2 (LRRK2) have been recently identified in families with Parkinson’s characterized by multi-systemic structural and functional abnormalities . disease . However, the prevalence and nature of LRRK2 mutations, A number of biochemical abnormalities have been described in PBD the polymorphism content of the gene, and the associated phenotypes patients including decreased levels of plasmalogen, and increased remain poorly understood .OBJECTIVE: We performed a comprehensive levels of VLCFA and cholestanoic acid derivatives . More than 25 study of this gene in a large sample of families with Parkinson’s different entities have been diagnosed in the last two decades . The disease compatible with autosomal dominant inheritance (ADPD) . diagnoses on suspected cases can now be confirmed precisely by METHODS: The full-length open reading frame and splice sites of the detailed biochemical evaluation in some metabolic centers .Clinical genetics 11 The most severe condition is the Zellweger syndrome, a condition P0235. compound heterozygosity for mutations in LMNA causes due to the absence of functional peroxyzomes . Affected patients are a progeria syndrome without prelamin A accumulation severely ill, and show multiple congenital anomalies and neurological V. L. R. M. Verstraeten1, J. L. V. Broers2, M. A. M. van Steensel1, S. Zinn- aberrations. There are specific biochemical tests for evaluating Justin3, F. C. S. Ramaekers2, P. M. Steijlen1, M. Kamps1, H. J. H. Kuijpers2, D. peroxyzomal functions . Accumulation of certain VLCFAs (C24:0, and Merckx4, H. J. M. Smeets4, R. C. M. Hennekam5, C. L. M. Marcelis6, A. van den C26:0); deficiency of plasmalogens, and elevation of phytanic acid are Wijngaard4; some of them . 1Department of Dermatology, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Department of Chondrodysplasia punctata is another example, they are genetically Molecular Cell Biology, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3Département d’Ingénierie heterogeneous group of dysplasias having stippling of the epiphyses et d’Etudes des Protéines, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, 4Department of Clinical Ge- in infancy as a common feature . Peroxyzomal abnormalities only netics, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 5Institute of Child Health, London, United found in the rhizomelic type . A few cases of Zellweger syndrome and Kingdom, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Chondrodysplasia punctata will be presented with a brief overview on LMNA-associated progeroid syndromes have been reported with both biochemical background, clinical evaluation, and diagnosis . recessive and dominant inheritance . We report a two-year-old boy with an apparently typical Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) P0233. Poland syndrome and paroxysmal supraventricular due to compound heterozygous missense mutations in LMNA resulting tachycardia: a sequence or just coincidental findings? in T528M and M540T . Both mutations affect a conserved region within B. Tumiene1, M. Jakutovic2, V. Cerniauskiene2, R. Janavicius1, A. Utkus1; the C-terminal globular domain of A-type lamins, shown to be affected 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius Uni- in other progeria-like patients . The nuclei of our patient showed no versity Children’s Hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania. prelamin A accumulation, nor did the dysmorphic nuclei reveal the Poland syndrome is a developmental disorder of as yet undetermined lobulation typical for HGPS . Instead, nuclear blebs with reduced/ etiology . Several causes have been proposed for this syndrome, which absent expression of B-type lamins as well as honeycomb figures include primary hypoplasia of the central brainstem nuclei, secondary could be detected . The healthy heterozygous parents showed similar brainstem nuclear degeneration, peripheral nerve involvement and nuclear changes, though in a smaller percentage of nuclei . Treatment mostly accepted sequence of prenatal subclavian artery disruption . with a farnesyltransferase inhibitor to block the prelamin A processing Most cases are sporadic . The most consistent pattern of defects is resulted in accumulation of prelamin A and improved the nuclear unilateral hypoplasia or aplasia of the pectoralis major muscle and phenotype. In conclusion, these findings suggest a critical role for the varying degrees of ipsilateral brachydactyly and syndactyly, less affected lamin A/C region in nuclear structure and support a major consistent features include hypoplasia of breast and/or nipple, other contribution of abnormal polymerisation to the progeroid phenotype . upper limb reduction defects, Sprengel anomaly, dextrocardia, rib and Prelamin A accumulation may not be the major determinant of the vertebrae anomalies . The syndrome is 3 times more common in males progeroid phenotype, in contrast to earlier suggestions . and 75% right-sided . The presented patient was diagnosed with Poland syndrome at birth P0236. A novel lamin A/c gene mutation in patient with (there were aplasia of the left pectoral major muscle, brachydactyly and progeroid phenotype syndactyly of ipsilateral hand) . Cardiac, abdomen ultrasonographic, D. Babovic-Vuksanovic, L. M. Lehwald, D. L. Renaud, N. G. Campeau; intracranial duplex sonoscopic findings and chest X-ray were normal. Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. The first paroxysm of supraventricular tachycardia was recorded at the Mutations in LMNA (lamin A/C) gene have been described in patients age of 11 months during acute viral respiratory infection . More such with several different clinical disorders, including Hutchinson-Gilford episodes accurred during the 10 months period . Cardiac arrhythmias progeria syndrome (HGPS), mandibuloacral dysplasia (MAD1), were treated with adenosine boluses, later amiodarone was added . Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD-2, EDMD-3), Charcot- Conclusion: only one case of Poland-Moebius syndrome in association Marie Tooth (CMT-2B1), Dunnigan-type familial partial lipodystrophy with cardiac arrhythmia was reported previously (Pierpont et al .) . It is (FPLD), Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD1B), atypical Werner’s not known if this association is a sequence of the same etiology, or just syndrome (aWRN), Seip syndrome and restrictive dermopathy (RD) . the two coincidental factors . Progeria is an autosomal dominant condition which presents in early childhood with symptoms of premature aging and early death . P0234. A de novo paternal microdeletion of 6q, including sim1, is Mandibuloacral dysplasia is an autosomal recessive disorder, not only associated with a Prader- Willi Like Phenotype (PWLP) characterized by mandibular hypoplasia, acroosteolysis, and progeroid but also with Basedow‘s disease and acanthosis nigricans facial appearance . These two diseases have been considered different D. Wand, C. Gläser, C. Höfers, I. Hansmann; clinical entities based on differences in phenotype and inheritance Institut f Humangenetik u. Med. Biologie, 06097 Halle/Saale, Germany. pattern . Three different classes of 6q deletions with shared phenotypic We are describing a patient with failure to thrive, developmental features have been described (Hopkins et al . 1997) . Rare cases delay, stroke, skin dyspigmentation, and facial dysmorphism . Brain with microdeletions indicate that within deletion group B (6q15q25) a magnetic resonance imaging with MR angiography revealed severe distinct subgroup of patients with PWLP may result from hemizygosity atheromatous disease and recruitment of collateral circulation . His of the small chromosome segment 6q16q21 including also the history, physical exam and radiology findings were not completely SIM1 gene (Faivre et al . 2005) . We report about a 16-year-old girl consistent with either progeria or MAD which presented a diagnostic with adipositas (BMI 30), severe mental retardation and other major dilemma . Molecular studies were conducted and revealed a novel, features of PWLP . Basedow´s disease and acanthosis nigricans were heterozygous (412 G>A) mutation in exon 2 of the lamin A/C gene . seen in addition to macrocephalus, dental anomalies, uvula bifida and Neither parent had a mutation . kyphosis . Cytogenetic and microsatellite analysis revealed a de novo HGPS and MAD are allelic and clinically overlapping conditions . paternal microdeletion including SIM1 at 6q16.3. Our study confirms Distinguishing between these diseases in a clinical setting has the assumption that 6q-microdeletions including SIM1 are associated implications in predicting prognosis for the individual child and with obesity and PWLP . Recently it has been assumed that hemizyosity greatly influences genetic family counseling. Given the lack of clinical and/or functional loss of SIM1 is associated with hyperphagic obesity distinction in progeroid disorders, DNA testing for patients is a useful via a disturbed regulation of MC4R expression in the paraventricular tool in evaluation . nuclei of hypothalamus (Holden et al . 2005) . Basedow´s disease and acanthosis nigricans have not been reported so far in the context of P0237. ‚Progeroid syndromes‘ in genetic counseling practice deletions including 6q16q21 . These additional clinical features of our - clinical characterization of 7 Belarusian patients patient would indicate that hemizygosity for that 6q segment including N. V. Rumyantseva, I. Naumchik; SIM1 has additional neuroendocrinological effects, e .g . such as on the Republican Medical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. level of TRH and MSH . Identification of disorder type among heterogeneous group of “progeroid syndromes” is important for genetic counseling due to similarity of main pattern of premature senility signs, but different inheritance influencing Clinical genetics 1 for prognoses . Pathogenesis of pre-aging processes is still unknown, vesicoureteral reflux and cardiac anomalies (ASD, PDA) in one patient. diagnosis is based on clinical findings and course. We have established the diagnosis of PBS based on the characteristic We present 7 sporadic cases (5 females with normal intelligence; 2 association of lack of abdominal muscles, cryptorchidism and urinary males), examined due to “progeroid” appearance . Parents were young, tract malformations . Differential diagnosis was done with other types of healthy, non-consanguineous . Clinical diagnoses were “Wiedemann- urinary tract anomalies (megacystis megaureter, urethral obstruction, Rautenstrauch syndrome” (girl aged 1 .5 years showed neonatal primary vesicourethral reflux, neurogenic bladder). The plan for the progeroid symptoms, failure to thrive, lypodystrophy; boy 9.5 years old management and the follow up of the patients will be presented . The presented short stature, cachexia, borderline mentality, progressive prognosis depends on the degree of renal function compromise and senility features, hepatosplenomegalia, lymphohystiocytoses), “Werner the presence of extra urinary anomalies, especially cardiac . A possible syndrome” (girl 17 years old, female 40 years old), “unclassified” forms case in a girl will be presented for discussion . In conclusion, we present (3 patients): onset of senility signs was in childhood with progressing a clinical study of PBS in order to illustrate this rare disorder, but also during follow-up examinations (8-18 years old) . 2 girls presented to discuss the importance of a complex medical specialist team for a similar picture: short stature, failure to thrive, hypotrichosis, “bird” face, correct diagnosis and management of the affected family . protruding eyes, beaked nose, subcutaneous tissue loss, atrophic, scleroderma-like changes of skin, thin limbs, prominent joints, P0240. Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum-like disorder with contractures, hyperkeratosis on soles, heart failure, large abdomen, generalized cutis laxa and clotting deficiency represents a novel hepatomegaly, diminished sexual development, diabetes mellitus (one genetic entity girl), deafness (another one) . Male showed progeroid appearance O. M. Vanakker1,2, L. Martin3, D. Gheduzzi4, B. P. Leroy1, B. Loeys1, P. C. from 13 years old, joints contractures, severe regress of mentality . Coucke1, I. Pasquali-Ronchetti4, A. De Paepe1; Laboratory data: chromosomal abnormalities, metabolic defects no 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, found. Decreased replicative life-span of cultured skin fibroblasts was 2Research assistant for the Fund for Scientific Research, Flanders, Belgium, revealed in patient with Werner syndrome . 3Department of Dermatology, Porte-Madeleine Hospital, Orléans, France, New cases of progeroid disorders must be collected for further 4Biomedical Sciences Department, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, delineation of phenotype and counseling improving . Differential Modena, Italy. diagnosis of 3 cases with unclassified “progeroid” condition (new A Caucasian female patient is presented who was diagnosed with “juvenil” form?) are discussed . Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum (PXE) because of peau d’orange skin lesions in the neck and limited angioid streaks in fundo . Skin biopsy P0238. molecular analysis of minisatellite sequence cGcGcG showed fragmentation and calcification of elastic fibres. After puberty, 4 4 in cstB gene in patients with progressive myoclonus epilepsy she developed an increasing number of excessive, leathery skin folds, (EPm1). initially confined to flexural areas but gradually spreading towards the A. Sulek-Piatkowska1, M. Jakubik1, Z. Kazibutowska2, E. Motta2, A. Bal2, A. abdomen and limbs . Visual acuity remained normal . Decreased levels Golba2; of the vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors were observed prior to 1Inst.of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Silesian Medical Academy, surgery for a cerebral aneurysm . Three similar additional patients are Neurology Clinic, Katowice, Poland. currently being studied in a Belgian-French-Italian collaboration . Progressive myoclonus epilepsy type 1 (EPM1; Unverricht - Lundborg The present phenotype shows clinical overlap with PXE because of i) disease) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations the initial skin manifestations mimicking the disorder, ii) the identical within the gene encoding cystatin B (CSTB) . Clinical symptoms occur light microscopical findings and iii) the angioid streaks in fundo. usually at age of 6 - 18 y . and embrace myoclonus, severe tonic- However, several differences allow us to discriminate from PXE or clonic epizodes, dementia, ataxia and dysarthria . The most common cutis laxa . First, the skin involvement is more severe than in PXE, and mutation is an expansion of a dodecamer repeat CGCGCG in 5” UTR not confined to the neck and flexural areas. Secondly, the retinopathy 4 4 of CSTB gene; the point mutations may occur as well. Normal alleles is mild and does not affect visual acuity . Thirdly, ultrastructural analysis contain 2 or 3 copies of the repeat, whereas mutant alleles contain showed mottled appearance of elastic fibres, with mineralization as more than 30 repeats . small electron dense precipitates, not observed in PXE . Fourthly, The polymorphism of CGCGCG in the Polish control group (300 analysis of the ABCC6 gene, responsible for PXE, failed to reveal any 4 4 alleles) and in the patients was analysed in this study . mutation. Finally, the presence of elastic fibre mineralization and the DNA samples were obtained from leukocytes of peripheral blood from retinopathy exclude known cutis laxa syndromes . the patients and their family members . Analysis of CGCGC repeats In conclusion, our data support the hypothesis that these four patients 4 4 in CSTB gene was performed by standard PCR reactions with specific suffer from a new disorder, the molecular background of which is under primers labelled fluorescently and electrophoresis of PCR products in investigation . polyacrylamide gels . The frequency of the 3-copy allele was 68% in the control group . In 5 P0241. complex rearrangements of chromosome 15 in two of 9 referred patients all expanded alleles contained over 60 repeats . patients with Prader Willi syndrome No case of the point mutations was found among our patients; all of K. Salavoura, A. Kolialexi, C. Sofocleous, M. Kalaitzidaki, A. Pampanos, S. them were homozygous . In 3 families the carrier status of both parents Kitsiou, A. Mavrou; was confirmed. Molecular studies confirmed clinical diagnoses and Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, Greece. occurrence of EPM1 in Poland . Maternal UPD as a result of rescued trisomy increases with maternal age and accounts for 30% of cases of PWS . Two cases of maternal P0239. Prune Belly syndrome: a clinical study UPD in two unrelated children with mild clinical features of PWS are A. Sireteanu, C. Rusu, M. Volosciuc, M. Covic; described. Methylation specific PCR showed one single band from Medical Genetics Center, Iasi, Romania. the maternal allele, thus confirming the clinical diagnosis of PWS. Prune Belly Syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by partial or FISH analysis with SNRPN probe in both patients revealed normal complete absence of the abdominal muscles, cryptorchidism and hybridization pattern . Microsatellite analysis in patient No 1 showed urinary tract malformations . PBS syndrome occurs almost exclusively a combination of maternal iso and hetero-disomy of chromosome in males, with less than 3% occurring in female patients . We have 15 while in patient No 2 the coexistence of heterodisomy or normal studied 3 male patients aged 0-11 years with PBS in order to appreciate biallelic inheritance along with isodisomy is noted . the frequency of different clinical features and to present some The coexistence of uniparental maternal iso- and heterodisomy could particularities. Physical examinations revealed deficiency of abdominal be explained by a recombination event before the 1st meiotic division wall muscles and cryptorchidism in all patients . Investigations (renal followed by non-disjunction during the 2nd division and loss of the ultrasound, CT, contrast voiding cystourethrogram, echocardiography) paternal homologue due to trisomy rescue . showed various abnormalities: hypoplastic right kidney in one patient, The influence of complex rearrangements of chromosome 15 on the bilateral hydronephrosis in 2 patients, dilated ureters in all patients, phenotype, when imprinted genes are included, is of great interest . large and thick-walled bladder in 2 patients, posterior urethral valve, Such cases are rare in the literature . The detection of a deletion by Clinical genetics 1 FISH and abnormal methylation pattern could be sufficient for the patient with cardinal features of RAPADILINO syndrome . Molecular confirmation of PWS diagnosis but provides no information for the exact analysis represents the most helpful approach and improves genetic molecular alteration leading to the disease . Microsatellite analysis of counselling for this rare autosomal recessive disorder . Screening and PWS/AS critical region and the telomere of the chromosome15 allows follow-up recommendation for tumour risk - associated with RECQL4 the detection of uncommon rearrangements . mutations in RAPADILINO syndrome - remain very uncomfortable . P0242. PWs-like phenotype in a female affected with P0244. A new mutation in TP6 is responsible for early-aging subtelomeric 15q26.3 deletion features in Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome I. Vlasak; M. Holder-Espinasse1, D. Martin-Coignard2, F. Escande3, S. Manouvrier- Universitätsklinik für Kinder- und Jugendheilkunde, Salzburg, Austria. Hanu1; Objective: Deletions involving only the terminal region of the long arm 1Service de génétique clinique, Lille, France, 2Service de génétique clinique, Le of chromosome 15 are rarely reported. Commonly noted findings are Mans, France, 3Service de biochimie et biologie moléculaire, Lille, France. prenatal-onset of growth failure, hypotonia and global developmental Increases in the number of allelic malformation syndromes have led delay including speech impairment, dysmorphic features are only to their classification according to their pathogenesis rather than their subtle . We report on a 7 year old female delivered at 35 weeks of clinical specific phenotype. TP63 mutations have been identified gestation by cesarian section due to fetal bradycardia . She presented in several such syndromes characterised by autosomal dominant with proportionate dystrophic growth retardation (3rd percentile), transmission and various combinations of ectodermal dysplasia, limb delayed respiratory adaption, and hypotonia . No major malformation malformations and orofacial clefting . was stated but gavage feeding was necessary for several weeks . We report on a family with four affected adult females presenting with From the 2nd year of life she showed increasing appetite and later on Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome, an autosomal dominant clinical entity which foraging eating behaviour . Motor and particularly speech development associates anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with cleft lip and palate . remained poor . Aged 7 years she showed severe growth failure (- Overlapping features with EEC syndrome (ectrodactyly, ectodermal 3 .4 SD), and truncal obesity (BMI + 2 .5 SD), hypotonia, friendly and dysplasia and cleft lip/palate) have led to the recent identification of happy disposition, fair complexion, microcephaly, broad forehead, mutations in the TP63 gene, located on 3q27, in this condition . Our hypertelorism, large mouth and rounded ears . A single palmar crease patients present typical clinical features of Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome, of the small digit was noted . but also ophthalmic anomalies such as corneal dystrophy and early- Lab investigations: Karyotyping and methylation testing for PWS/ aging features such as premature menopause (around 30 years) . AS showed normal results . Molecular screening for subtelomeric These latter findings have never been reported in this condition, and rearrangements (MLPA) revealed a deletion on 15qter, which was could be secondary to a new TP63 deletion which has been identified confirmed by FISH. Parents’ investigation was not possible so far. in this family . Conclusions: Terminal deletion of 15q, and similarly ring chromosome 15, are known to be associated with growth failure, mental retardation P0245. The influence of the polymorphic genes of the HLA and some malformations like diaphragmatic hernia . Prader-Willi like antigenes class ii on the human reproduction. appearance and behaviour are reported here for the first time. Further N. Poltavets, T. Beskorovajnay, N. Vasserman, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov; investigations including refinement of the deletion size and screening Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. for additional rearrangements which may contribute to this phenotype The recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) and unsuccessful attempt of in remain to be performed . vitro fertilization (IVF) may have the same reasons and mechanisms . One of them may be sharing alleles in the HLA antigenes class II, P0243. RAPADiLiNO syndrome in a patient without radial which play significant role in maternal-fetal interaction immunology aplasia: the contribution of RECQL gene mutation analysis reaction at early stage of pregnancy . We have investigated 29 couples Y. J. M. Sznajer1, M. Kestilä2, M. Scaillon3, C. Dangoisse4, A. Siitonen5; with RPL, 39 couples with IVF failure and 65 couples having at least 1Paediatric Clinical Genetics Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola one own child as a control group . The HLA genotyping has been done and Center for Genetic, Hôpital Erasme - (ULB) Free University of Brussels, using the allele-specific nested amplification with specific primers. We Brussels, Belgium, 2National Public Health Institute, Dept of Molecular Biology, have defined groups of alleles in gene DRB1- 12 groups, DQA1 - 8 and Helsinki, Finland, 3Gastroenterology, Hopital universitaire des Enfants Reine DQB1 - 12 . The number of families having 1,2 and 3 shared groups Fabiola - (ULB) Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium, 4Dermatology, of alleles has been counted . It has been revealed that the number Hopital universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola - (ULB) Free University of Brus- of coincidence in three loci is 48 .3% in RPL group, 43 .6% in IVF sels, Brussels, Belgium, 5National Public Health Institute, Dept of Molecular group and 26 .0% in control group (pRPL=0 .044, OR=2 .6(1 .0-6 .6) and biology, Helsinki, Finland. pIVF=0 .082, OR=2 .2(0 .9-5 .1) accordingly) . Also we have investigated We report the case of a 6-year-old boy who developed pre- and distributions of separate alleles, genotypes and haplotypes and found postnatal growth retardation, severe chronic diarrhoea and failure the increased frequencies of DQB1 0302 and DQA1 0301 alleles to thrive . Cheeks only presented a poïkilodermic appearance . Lack among men and DQB1 0602 allele among women in RPL and IVF of eyebrows and eyelashes and absence of cataract were noted . groups compared to controls . Widespread café-au-lait spots were observed . Orthopaedic and In conclusion we can say that the presence of identical allelic groups radiologic investigations identified bilateral congenital radial head on three loci gives twofold-increased risk of pathology of pregnancy . luxation, patellar hypoplasia but absence of thumb anomaly . This boy The risk of pregnancy pathology is considerably higher in presence of of normal intelligence is the first child from healthy unrelated Caucasian certain alleles, genotypes and haplotypes . parents . Standard karyotype was 46,XY normal male, increased chromosome breakage anomaly screening was negative (Mitomycin- P0246. mutations spectrum in X-linked retinitis pigmentosa in C) . On molecular analysis of the RECQL4 gene (8q24), a splice site the Danish population substitution (IVS10-1 G>A) and a nucleotide substitution (L638P) in H. Prokisch1,2, M. Hartig3,2, R. Hellinger3, T. Meitinger3,2, T. Rosenberg4; exon 7 were found . The mother carried the L638P substitution and the 1Technical University of Munich, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Ger- father was identified with the splice site mutation. These were so far many, 2Mitochondrial Medicine Munich, Munich, Germany, 3GSF-National unreported and not present in controls . Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of Human Genetics, RAPADILINO eponym syndrome was suggested as a distinct entity Munich-Neuherberg, Germany, 4National Eye Clinic for the Visually Impaired, due to the peculiar phenotypic features: Radial aplasia/hypoplasia- Gordon Norrie Centre for Genetic Eye Diseases, Hellerup, Denmark. High Palate - Patellar Aplasia - Diarrhoea - LIttle size - Limb Anomaly- X-linked Retinitis pigmentosa (xlRP) accounts for approximately 15 % NOrmal Intelligence - Long NOse . of RP cases and represents the most severe subtype of this disease . Recent molecular progress from RECQL gene family studies Five distinct RP loci on the X chromosome have been proposed . The allowed delineating rather a continuum from Rothmund-Thomson to genes RPGR and RP2 have been identified accounting for 85-90% RAPADILINO syndromes . and 8-15% of xlRP cases, respectively . A mutational hotspot in ORF15 This case emphasizes occurrence of mild limb involvement in a of RPGR was described .Clinical genetics 1 We report the mutation spectrum of xlRP in the Danish population . were deleted . At the age of 4years, there was onset of stereotypic Our study of 28 cases from 28 families with certain or probable xlRP hand-washing movements and epileptic seizures . Two years later, represents all elucidated cases in the Danish population . RPGR and re-evaluation found severe psychomotor delay, microcephaly and RP2 were screened by sequencing . We uncovered a mutation in 26 hyperventilation/breath-holding attacks . An EEG showed background patients (detection rate 93%) . 11 patients (42 .3%) carried a mutation slowing with multiple spike-wave complexes in occipital leads . DNA in the RP2 gene, in 8 patients (30 .8%) the mutation was located in analysis (DGGE and sequencing) identified the hotspot missense exons 1-14 of the RPGR gene and in 7 patients in ORF15 of the RPGR mutation R306C (c .916C>T) in exon 4 of the MECP2 gene; subsequent gene (26 .9%) . The most frequent mutation was p .S6del in RP2 which analysis of the mother’s DNA sample was negative . was found in 4 presumed unrelated patients . Additional genealogical The combination of RS and SMA has not been previously reported . studies, however, disclosed a common ancestry for two of them . Thorough clinical evaluation that considered the coexistence of two Twelve mutations were not reported previously . One splice site mutation rare monogenic syndromes in the same patient, in combination and a larger deletion were further characterized . In one patient we with DNA analysis, allowed accurate diagnosis, providing valuable found the integration of a 342 bp Alu element of the AluYb8 family into information for the genetic counseling of the family . the coding region of ORF15, a rare form of mutation . Conclusions: The proportion of RP2-mediated xlRP in the Danish P0249. Roberts syndrome: clinical spectrum, natural history population is higher than the proportion reported from other populations . and molecular study in two children of consanguineous italian Therefore strategies for diagnostic procedures must consider the parents mutation spectrum of the involved population . L. Giunti1, M. Ottaviani1, L. Carosi1, S. Stagi1, P. Fiorini2, M. Paparo2, S. von Borries3, R. Caligani3, H. R. Vega4, M. Giovannucci Uzielli1; P0247. Paternally inherited MECP sequence variants in three 1University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Children’s Hospital “Anna Meyer”, girls with Rett syndrome Florence, Italy, 3GENEA Laboratory, Florence, Italy, 4Universidad National de D. Bartholdi1, O. Hasselmann2, O. Maier2, A. Schinzel1, W. Berger3, G. Má- Colombia, Instituto de Genetica, Bogotà, Colombia. tyás3; Roberts syndrome (RBS) is an Autosomal Recessive disorder, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzer- characterized by pre- and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, land, 2Department of Neurology, Childrens Hospital, St. Gallen, Switzerland, bilateral cleft lip and palate, tetraphocomelia and loss of cohesion at 3Division of Medical Molecular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Institute of heterochromatic regions of centromeres and the distal portion of the Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. long arm of the Y chromosome . The cytogenetic aspects are known More than 95% of girls with Rett syndrome (RTT) carry mutations in as RS effect, Premature Centromere Separation, heterochromatin the MECP2 gene on Xq28 . Pathogenic sequence variants in this gene repulsion or “puffing” and “splitting”. can also be detected in the majority of girls with variant RTT . Recently, mutations in ESCO2 (establishment of cohesion 1 homolog 1) We report on the molecular analysis of MECP2 in two girls with on chromosome 8p21 .1 have been reported in RBS . ESCO2 mutations variant RTT and one with classical RTT . Patient 1 showed two novel are also responsible for the form of SC phocomelia (pseudothalidomide nucleotide changes in the transcriptional repression domain (TRD) of syndrome) with heterochromatin repulsion (HS) .We report the clinical, MECP2 (c .861C>T, p .A287A and c .881G>A, p .R294Q) . Her healthy cytogenetic and molecular studies of a family with two children with father and grandmother carried the same changes . Patient 2 showed a RBS, a female and a male of the same sibship with consanguineous duplication of three nucleotides in exon 1 of MECP2 (c .43_45dupGGA, parents . A c1595delT mutation, in exon 10 of ESCO2 gene, was p .G15dup) . Further analysis revealed that the healthy father carried identified in both parents in a heterozygous condition The intrafamilial the same duplication. The third girl, who fulfilled the criteria for variability of the clinical spectrum and natural history represents an classical RTT, showed two sequence variants in exon 4: a duplication important aspect for the phenotype-genotype correlation in this very of 5 nucleotides in the TRD (c .750_754dupCCCCG, p .G252AfsX39) rare disorder . and a substitution of an arginine by a tryptophan at a non-conserved amino acid position at the C-terminal segment (c .1030C>T, p .R344W) . P0250. clinical, Orodental and Electron microscopic changes While the first mutation (which is most likely disease causing) has not of Gingival Biopsy in Autosomal recessive Robinow syndrome been described before, the latter was reported in a male displaying suggest a storage Disorder and a midline Developmental Field a “Rett-like” phenotype . Analysis of the family revealed that the Defect frameshift mutation had arisen de novo, while the p .R344W mutation T. H. El-Badry1, S. A. Temtamy2, E. H. A. Abul-Ezz1; was inherited from the healthy father and the paternal grandmother . 1Orodental genetics Dep., Division of Human Genetics and Genome Research, Our data show the difficulties in determining the pathogenic value of National Research Centre, Cairo., Egypt, 2Clinical Genetics Department, Na- novel mutations in the MECP2 gene, especially in girls with variant tional Research Centre, Cairo., Egypt. RTT . They also emphasize the importance of analyzing parental DNA Robinow syndrome is a short stature syndrome with both autosomal to avoid incorrect interpretation of MECP2 sequence variants . dominant and recessive forms (OMIM 180700 and 268310) with some common Features to both forms . The present study aimed at P0248. coexistence of Rett syndrome and spinal muscular correlating the orodental and clinical features as well as study of the atrophy (smA) type ii. A case report electron microscopic changes of gingival specimens, for the first time S. Psoni1, K. Kekou1, J. Traeger-Synodinos1, S. Voutoufianakis2, H. Fryssira1, in the medical literature, as an aid in the diagnosis and pathogenesis E. Kanavakis1; of the Robinow syndrome . The studied samples consisted of seven 1Medical Genetics University of Athens,, Athens, Greece, 2Neurologic Depart- Egyptian cases, four males and three females, with ages ranging from ment, Venizeleion General Hospital, Herakleion Crete, Greece. 2 months up to 12 years . The clinical genetic evaluation of all cases Rett syndrome (RS) is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental included family history, pedigree analysis, clinical examination, detailed disorder characterized by normal development until 6-12months of orodental examination, panoramic X-rays, as well electron microscopic age, followed by regression with loss of acquired skills, gradual onset study of gingival biopsies in two cases . All the cases were of the of microcephaly, stereotypic hand movements and psychomotor delay . autosomal recessive form with positive parental consanguinity . Clinical RS is caused by mutations in MECP2 (Xq28) or CDKL5 (Xp22) . SMA examination revealed short stature, depressed broad nasal root, thick is a neuromuscular autosomal recessive disease characterized by everted lips macrostomia, pseudo lower labial cleft, long philtrum, progressive atrophy and paralysis of proximal muscles of the shoulder and hypertelorism with varying percentages. Skeletal malformations; and pelvic girdle, caused by mutations in the SMN 1 gene locus were also identified. The orodental anomalies were hypertrophied (5q11 .2-13 .2) . gingiva, high arched palate, bifid tongue tip, mandibular hypoplasia We report a 6-year-old girl who, at 2years of age, presented with and malocclusion. Two oral midline anomalies noted in this study; bifid centromelic weakness and psychomotor delay . The EMG showed tongue tip and pseudo lip cleft suggest that Robinow Syndrome is a diffuse neurogenic damage and the karyotype was 46, XX . SMA type midline field defect. II was diagnosed and molecular analysis (PCR-RFLP’s) revealed that Histopathological pictures of electron microscopic examination of the both exons 7 and 8 of SMN 1 as well as the exon 5 of the NAIP gene gingival biopsies revealed destruction of intercellular bridges, widening Clinical genetics 1 of intercellular spaces, presence of intercellular mocoid-like storage syndrome, have structural abnormalities of chromosome 7 . The case of material, and intracellular vacuoles, suggesting metabolic storage, a 4 year old boy with developmental delay, notable dysmorphic features supported by the occurrence of hepatosplenomegaly in some cases . and a history of surgical repair of craniosynostosis is described . The craniofacial findings included premature fusion of cranial sutures, P0251. Rothmund-thomosn (Rts) syndrome and Pulmonary characteristic facial appearance and limb abnormalities . Based on the sarcoidosis: case Report clinical examination of the patient and his parents, he was characterised N. A. Al-Sanna‘a, S. I. Al-Majed, M. J. Al-Matar, B. A. Abu Shullaih; as a sporadic case of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome . Conventional and Dhahran Health Center, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. molecular cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood revealed partial Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome(RTS) (OMIM# 268400) is a monosomy of chromosomal region 7pter→p15 de novo. The TWIST rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by infantile gene, located on chromosome 7p21 .1, is thought to be a negative poikilodermatous skin rash (depigmentation, hyperpigmentation, transcriptional regulator involved in osteoblast differentiation and telangiectasia, and dermal atrophy), sparse hair or alopecia, abnormal maturation and it is thought that haploinsufficiency of the gene can teeth, dystrophic nails, juvenile cataracts, short stature, skeletal cause the disorder . The diagnosis of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome abnormalities, premature aging, hypogonadism, and predisposition to and the identification of the chromosomal abnormality in the patient certain malignancies . facilitated genetic counseling of the family . Here we describe a 17 and 10 year old Saudi Arab sisters with RTS . They both presented with the skin rash which appeared during infancy P0254. spectrum and functional analyses of HsPG2 (perlecan) and progressed with time to the typical poikelodermatous lesions . mutations in Schwartz-Jampel Syndrome : perlecan deficiency Their course was complicated with bone marrow suppression and as a cause of severe myotonia myelodysplastic syndrome . In addition, the oldest sister developed M. Stum, C. S. Davoine, S. Vicart, L. Guillot-Noel, P. Quan, B. Fontaine, S. broncheactasis and bilateral axillary, prevascular, mediastinal as Nicole; well as hilar lymphadenopathiies . The histopatological study of one UMRS546, INSERM; UMRS546 UPMC-Paris6, Paris, France. of the enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes showed non-caseated Schwartz-Jampel syndrome (SJS) is an autosomal recessive condition granulomatous inflammation with features suggestive of sacroidosis. with high clinical variability reported in the literature . Eight mutations Serum angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) level was significantly in the HSPG2 gene encoding perlecan, a heparane sulphate elevated which supported the diagnosis of sarcoidosis . Other proteoglycan present within basement membranes, are described in etiological factors for granulomatous inflammation were ruled out. To 6 SJS families without a detailed clinical description . To assess the our knowledge, this is the first report a patient with RTS and pulmonary spectrum of mutations and the associated phenotype, we investigated sacroidosis . one third of the reported SJS population . Twenty-three unrelated families (35 patients) were screened for P0252. Partial monosomy 7pter→p15 in a patient with Saethre- mutations in the HSPG2 gene . Perlecan expression was evaluated in chotzen syndrome patients’ cultured cells at the mRNA and protein level to examine the A. Xaidara1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli2, V. Touliatou2, E. Papadopoulou2, P. Panayioto- effect of the mutations . Retrospective clinical analysis was carried out poulou2, A. Kolialexi2, E. Kanavakis2, A. Mavrou2; for patients with perlecan mutations. Twenty-five perlecan mutations 11st Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s were identified among the thirty-five patients including genomic Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Medical Genetics Laboratory, University of Athens, deletion, nonsense, frameshift, missense, and splice-site mutations . Choremio Research Laboratory, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Their deleterious effect was confirmed by the reduced, though not Greece. abolished, secretion of perlecan by patients’ cells . A distinct cellular Saethre-Chotzen syndrome represents one of the most common types pattern was observed between truncating and missense mutations with of craniosynostosis inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder and lower level of perlecan mRNAs for the former, and intracellular retention most cases are sporadic . It is characterized by high penetrance and of perlecan protein for the latter . Retrospective clinical analyses of the variable expressivity, leading to difficulties in clinical diagnosis. Some cohort revealed that permanent muscle stiffness, mostly apparent in the patients, who exhibit most of the diagnostic criteria of Saethre-Chotzen face, was the hallmark of the disorder . By contrast, chondrodysplasia syndrome, have structural abnormalities of chromosome 7 . The case of was more variable, and was absent in two cases . a 4 year old boy with developmental delay, notable dysmorphic features Schwartz-Jampel syndrome may be defined as a progressive autosomal and a history of surgical repair of craniosynostosis is described . The recessive disorder with early childhood onset that associates mask- craniofacial findings included premature fusion of cranial sutures, like face, neuromyotonia, and variable osteochondrodysplasia, with characteristic facial appearance and limb abnormalities . Based on the deficiency in perlecan secretion. Two cellular mechanisms, nonsense- clinical examination of the patient and his parents, he was characterised mediated mRNA decay, and protein quality control pathway, are as a sporadic case of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome . Conventional and involved in this deficiency. molecular cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood revealed partial monosomy of chromosomal region 7pter→p15 de novo. The TWIST P0255. ion channel mutations in inheritable idiopathic epilepsy gene, located on chromosome 7p21 .1, is thought to be a negative M. J. A. van Kempen1, E. H. Brilstra1, N. Dekker1, O. van Nieuwenhuizen2, P. transcriptional regulator involved in osteoblast differentiation and B. Augustijn3, A. Weber4, E. Peters1, W. B. Gunning5, K. P. Braun2, O. F. Brou- maturation and it is thought that haploinsufficiency of the gene can wer6, B. P. Koeleman1, D. Lindhout1; cause the disorder . The diagnosis of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome 1DBG-Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Depart- and the identification of the chromosomal abnormality in the patient ment of Paediatric Neurology, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Epilepsy Institute facilitated genetic counseling of the family . of the Netherlands SEIN, Heemstede, The Netherlands, 4Epilepsy Centre Dr Hans Berger Clinic, Breda, The Netherlands, 5Epilepsy Centre Kempenhaeghe, P0253. Partial monosomy 7pter→p15 in a patient with Saethre- Heeze, The Netherlands, 6Department of Paediatric Neurology, Groningen, The chotzen syndrome Netherlands. A. Xaidara1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli2, V. Touliatou2, E. Papadopoulou2, P. Panayioto- Epidemiological research has provided evidence that in about 40% of poulou2, A. Kolialexi2, E. Kanavakis2, A. Mavrou2; patients with epilepsy, a genetic predisposition underlies the idiopathic 11st Department of Pediatrics,University of Athens, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s disorder. Over the past decade, a number of genes have been identified Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Medical Genetics Laboratory, University of Athens, that associate with rare monogenic forms of idiopathic epilepsy . Most Choremio Research Laboratory, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, of the genes encode for voltage- or ligand-gated ion channels or Greece. components thereof . For example, the SCN1A gene encodes for the Saethre-Chotzen syndrome represents one of the most common types brain voltage-gated sodium channel α subunit (Na1 .1) . Mutations in 1 v of craniosynostosis inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder and the SCN1A gene have been found in substantial percentage of severe most cases are sporadic . It is characterized by high penetrance and myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI or Dravet syndrome), borderline variable expressivity, leading to difficulties in clinical diagnosis. Some SMEI (SMEB), intractable childhood epilepsy with generalized tonic- patients, who exhibit most of the diagnostic criteria of Saethre-Chotzen clonic seizures (ICEGTC) and generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures Clinical genetics 16 plus (GEFS+) . Since a year the Department of Medical Genetics have been reported in patients with short stature; most commonly Utrecht offers DNA-diagnostic testing for the SCN1A ion-channel gene . achondroplasia, Turner Syndrome and Down Syndrome . SCN1A mutation analysis is performed on more than 100 probands . A Here we report a 13 year-old girl who was the first child of non- start of a profound phenotype-genotype correlation was made for the consanguineous parents . She was of short stature accompanied first 47 probands. In 16 of 47 (34%) probands a mutation was found. with motor and mental retardation and recurrent respiratory and The yield was highest in SMEI and SMEB patients, intermediate for genitourinary infections . She had a coarse face with a broad forehead, GEFS+ and lowest for other (intractable) epilepsies . Mutations were puffy eyes, beaked nose and low-set ears . She also had a short localized throughout the protein, however, consistent with literature neck, widely spaced nipples and pectus excavatum . Her cardiologic data, a clustering was found in the loops between segments 5 and examination revealed atrial septal defect, mitral valve prolapsus and 6 . We will describe genotype-phenotype correlations and present our atrial septal aneurysm . Abdominal ultrasonography showed agenesis approach to functionally characterize the detected mutations . of uterus and ovaries; brain scans revealed dilatation of the third and lateral ventricles. Growth hormone deficiency was observed during P0256. X-linked nonsyndromic 46,XY sex reversal due to a the evaluation of GH/IGF-I axis . All other laboratory tests including cryptic Xp21 duplication including DAX1. metabolic screening and karyotype were noted to be unremarkable . In M. Murdolo1, C. Angelozzi1, A. M. Pasquino2, M. Segni2, I. Pucarelli2, G. Neri1, conclusion, the peculiarity of this case is that it may be a new clinical M. Zollino1; dysmorphological syndrome which has not been previously described 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, and which may contribute to the understanding of the genetic basis of 2Dipartimento di Pediatria Università La Sapienza, Roma, Italy. short stature . Xp21 duplications including the DSS locus can cause sex reversal in males, usually in association with mental retardation and physical P0259. Autistic Regression in a child with Russell - silver anomalies . A nonsyndromic 46,XY sex reversal with normal SRY syndrome and UPD of chromosome 7, a rare clinical was diagnosed in a 14-year-old girl (patient 1) and in her 27-year- presentation old maternal aunt (patient 2) . They both presented with complete C. Vinkler1, O. Vardi2, M. Davidovich2, T. Sagie3, D. Lev1; sex reversal, including normal vagina and cervix, hypoplastic uterus 1Institute of Clinical Genetics Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 2Child and fallopian tubes. No gonads were identified by sonography in Development Center Maccabi Health Services, Rishon Lezion, Israel, 3Child patient 1 . Streak gonads were detected in patient 2 and they were Neurology Unit Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel. surgically removed . On histological examination, primordial sex cords Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a heterogeneous syndrome which is with absent germ cells and a very few Leydig cells were observed . characterized by severe intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation Physical anomalies were absent, measures were within normal limits, and typical dysmorphic features . In 7-10% of SRS patients, a maternal intelligence was normal . Genetic analyses were carried out by FISH uniparental disomy of chromosome 7 (UPD7) can be detected . on interphase nuclei first, and then by semi-quantitative PCR. Probe We describe a 4 .5 y old boy, with SRS and UPD of chromosome 7 . RP11-662D2, containing DAX1, appeared to be duplicated by FISH Along with the clinical findings that are described in this syndrome he in both 46,XY female individuals . Three copies were detected in the had sever developmental delay which is not commonly found in these obligate carrier mother of patient 1, and two copies in her 46, XX patients and an autistic regression that was not described before in healthy sister . Adjacent probes RP11-377J16 and RP11-540E20, lying this syndrome . proximally and distally to RP11-662D2, at a distance of about 1 Mb from A possible explanation for the autistic regression might be the tendency each other, were not included in the duplication interval . DAX1 copy for undetected hypoglycemic events in children with SRS . Another number was evaluated by semi-quantitative PCR, and results were explanation is that the autism is not a part of SRS but is due to the fully consistent with FISH data in a total of four repeated experiments . chromosomal abnormality . A rare but important type of abnormality To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a nonsyndromic that accounts for some of cases of autism is uniparental disomy familial X-linked 46,XY sex reversal due to DAX1 duplication . (UPD) . There is a well established association of UPD with autism and the imprinted 15q11-q13 Prader-Willi/ Angelman syndrome (PW/AS) P0257. A New syndrome? A case report with short broad region . Recently there was a case with UPD of chromosome 1 and terminal phalanges autism . M. A. Soylemez, C. Sayar, B. Turkover, G. Toksoy, T. Yardimci, A. Giray; This case suggests an association of autism with a locus on Department of Genetics, Zeynep Kamil Women and Child Hospital, Istanbul, chromosome 7 . UPD can cause disease by two mechanisms . First, Turkey. imprinted genes are subject to selective expression that depends on The proposita, a 7 years old boy, was the second born to related the parental origin . Second, UPD can also cause disease by unmasking parents. His physical findings was included short stature, moderate recessive mutations that fall within regions of isodisomy . microcephaly, short broad terminal phalanges, broad toe and thumbs, short-broad nails with inability to flex the knees. He had down slanting P0260. Clinical and radiographic findings in eleven patients with palpebral fissures, thin lips, micro-retrognathia and long-smooth metatropic dysplasia, demonstrating longterm natural history. philtrum . His trunk was narrow and he had pectus carinatum . R. Savarirayan1,2, P. Kannu1, S. Aftimos3; His X-rays findings revealed impressio digitalis of calvarium, end plate 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of irregularities of vertebral bodies and epiphyseal irregularities of knees . Melbourne, Department of Paediatrics, Melbourne, Australia, 3Northern Re- Especially, terminal phalanges of feet and hands were very short . gional Genetics Service, Auckland, New Zealand. Shortness of terminal phalanges and flexion deformity of knee were We present clinical and radiographic data from eleven cases of major signs of the proposita. These findings were suggesting a new metatropic dysplasia (MD), ranging in age from 20 weeks of gestation syndrome to 70 years, with 30-year follow-up in three cases . Included in this cohort is a pair of sibs (aged 56 and 52 years) and a father and P0258. A case of short stature with motor mental retardation, daughter (aged 70 and 33 years) . congenital cardiac anomalies, agenesis of uterus and ovaries Two patients died in infancy (aged 3 months and 4 months) from and unusual craniofacial dysmorphology laryngeal/upper respiratory tract dysfunction while a third infant had B. Durmaz1, O. Cogulu1, A. Alpman1, C. Ozkinay2, F. Ozkinay1; a respiratory arrest secondary to severe laryngotracheomalacia . 1Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Genetics and Teratology, Ege Univer- Longterm intellectual function is normal in the five individuals surviving sity, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ege to adulthood . Progressive and severe kyphoscoliosis occurred in all University, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. three patients followed over 30 years, despite having several spinal Short stature is defined as a condition in which the height is equal to surgical procedures . Overall functioning with regard to activities of or greater than 2 standard deviations (SD) below the mean height for daily living remains reasonable in all five adult patients (ranging in age a given age and sex . Pathological short stature can be distinguished from 33 to 70 years) and joint and back pain were not reported as from normal variants by careful evaluation of the patient by means of being significant in these patients. Final adult height ranged from 110- analyzing the growth parameters . More than 600 genetic syndromes 135cms .Clinical genetics 1 The current classification of metatropic dysplasia into various Small patella syndrome (OMIM 147891) is a rare autosomal-dominant subtypes, based on radiographic findings, is unclear. We suggest that skeletal dysplasia characterised by patellar aplasia or hypoplasia, this condition might be caused by the pleiotropic effects of a single anomalies of the pelvis and feet and also sometimes discrete dominant gene, with gonadal mosaicism reconciling sib recurrences . micrognathia and cleft or high arched palate . Mutations in TBX4 have been identified in 5 families and one isolated case so far. We P0261. X inactivation skewing and recurrent spontaneous report on a large family presenting with this condition, in which we abortions in a Greek population have identified a frameshift mutation in TBX4. Clinical aspects and A. Dasoula1, S. Kalantaridou2, A. Sotiriadis2, M. Pavlou2, M. Syrrou1; x-rays allowed us to discuss the different features of this condition, 1Laboratory of General Biology, Ioannina, Greece, 2Division of Reproductive such as disrupted ossification of the ischia and inferior pubic rami in Endocrinology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical School, infancy, abnormal upper femora, infra-acetabular axe cut, elongated University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece. femoral necks, flattened and widened proximal femoral epiphyses, Recurrent spontaneous abortion (RSA) affects (1-2)% of couples . hypoplasia of the lesser trochanter, tarsal anomalies, and absent or In up to 50% of the cases no etiology is identified (idiopathic RSA). hypoplastic patella responsible for knee instability later in life . In this Normally, during embryogenesis one of the two X chromosomes in family, several individuals also presented with non previously reported female mammals is inactivated randomly . Skewed X-chromosome features such as dental anomalies and delayed puberty in affected inactivation (XCI) is the preferential inactivation of the one (maternal women . TBX4 encodes a transcription factor with a strongly conserved or paternal) allele . Skewed XCI has been correlated with “idiopathic” DNA-binding T-box domain that is known to play a crucial role in lower RSA . We have studied 73 Greek women with idiopathic RSA and 79 limb development in chickens and mice (TBX4 is not expressed in controls for their X-chromosome inactivation pattern . Control women the upper limbs). However, TBX4 is not sufficient to determine limb- have two or more succesfull pregnancies . specific morphologies and is interacting with several other genes. method: Selection of informative women (heterozigosity of HUMARA TBX4 expression has also been identified in the lungs and in the gut locus) . Methylation sensitive assay (HpaII digestion) . during embryo development, but nothing has been reported on dental Results: The ratio of heterozygotes was 72 .6% (53/73) in women with expression so far . We discuss the clinical aspects of this condition, and RSA and 70 .9% (56/79) in control group . the molecular mechanisms involved in limb morphogenesis . Of the 53 informative women with RSA, 5 (9 .4%) showed extreme skewed XCI (> 90%) and 2 (3 .8%) moderate skewed XCI (between P0264. Evidence that multiple genes in 17p11.2 contribute to the 70% and 90%) . Of the 56 heterozygous controls, 2 (3 .6%) showed clinical spectrum of smith-magenis syndrome extreme skewed XCI and 4 (7 .1%) moderate skewed X inactivation . S. H. Elsea1, S. Girirajan1, E. Edelman1, B. B. Szomju1, C. N. Vlangos2, D. J. statistical analysis: Frequency of extreme skewed X-inactivation Bunyan3; between RSA women and controls was not significantly different 1Medical College of Virginia, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, (p=0 .262) . Similarly, no difference was found in the rate of any other United States, 2University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3Wessex degree of skewed X-inactivation between the two groups (p=0 .772) . Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, United conclusion: There is no association between idiopathic RSA and Kingdom. skewed XCI . Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is a complex disorder characterized by speech and motor delays, craniofacial anomalies, and significant P0262. two multiplex test systems for smA therapy control neurobehavioral problems, including self-injury, sleep disturbance, I. Sermyagina, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov; aggression, and explosive temper tantrums . SMS is caused by Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. mutation or deletion of the retinoic acid induced 1 (RAI1) gene on Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a frequent autosomal recessive chromosome 17p11 .2 . In order to analyze the role of genes in the disease characterized by degeneration of spinal cord anterior horn 17p11 .2 region in this disorder, we evaluated the molecular and cells and muscular atrophy . Two highly homologous SMN genes are clinical findings in 32 SMS patients carrying either a 17p11.2 deletion mapped on chromosome 5q13: SMN1 (telomeric copy, SMNT) and or a mutation in the RAI1 gene . Using FISH, we determined that SMN2 (centromeric copy, SMNC) . The disease is caused by mutation or 8/32 individuals carry a common ~3 .5 Mb deletion encompassing deletion in SMN1 gene, which differs from the SMN2 gene only in five the 17p11 .2 region from TNFRSF13B to ULK2 . Smaller deletions nucleotides . One of these differences is located in the exon 7 splicing were found in 9/32, while 4 individuals carried larger and/or atypical enhancer that results in an incorrectly spliced transcript lacking exon 17p11 .2 deletions . RAI1 mutations, including single base and large 7 (SMNΔ7) for the SMN2 gene. More than 94% SMA patients have intragenic deletions and missense mutations, were identified in 11/32 homozygous deletions in SMN1 exon 7, but not in the SMN2 gene . patients . Genotype:phenotype analysis was performed by comparing It is known that SMN2 expresses about 10% of full-length mRNA and the features of patients with deletions and to those with mutations in this form may influence the clinical presentation of the disease. Recent RAI1 using Fisher’s exact test . Phenotypic comparisons show that reports about therapies for SMA contain approaches to increase the cardiac anomalies, speech and motor delay, hypotonia, short stature expression of full-length SMN2 gene transcript from by treatment of and hearing loss are associated with 17p11 .2 deletions rather than phenylbutyrate or valproic acid . with RAI1 mutations at statistically significant proportions (p <0 .05) . We have developed two multiplex test systems for quantitative Interestingly, data show that patients with mutations in RAI1 are estimation of SMN full-length mRNA and SMNΔ7-forms in cell culture overgrown, with height and weight >97thcentile . Further, patients with and blood samples. The first one consists of specific primers for smaller deletions show features similar to those with RAI1 mutations . SMNΔ7 and SMN full-length with conservative TaqMan probes. The We conclude that while RAI1 is the primary gene responsible for the next system includes the universal SMN-primers and specific TaqMan core features of SMS, other genes within 17p11 .2 contribute to the probes for splice SMN mRNA forms . The level of both SMN- types variability and severity of the syndrome. mRNA compare with level of GAPDH gene expression . Cultured skin fibroblasts from SMA type II and SMA type III patients are used for P0265. A P170R heterozygous mutation in the SOX gene in a dosage of valproic acid and for further evaluation of the developed girl with subtle radiological features of campomelic dysplasia multiplex test systems . P. Gritters1, G. Scherer2, S. Unger3, R. J. B. J. Gemke4, J. P. W. Don Griot5, J. M. van Hagen1; P0263. ischiopatellar or small patella syndrome is secondary to 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics and Human Genetics, VU medical centre, Am- mutations in the TBX4 gene: confirmation in a large family and sterdam, The Netherlands, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany, clinical description 3Dept of Human Genetics and Centre for Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, F. Escande1, A. Dieux-Coeslier2, E. Mayrargue3, A. Mézel3, O. Boute2, B. Her- Freiburg, Germany, 4Dept. Paediatrics, VU medical centre, Amsterdam, The baux3, M. Holder-Espinasse2, S. Manouvrier-Hanu2; Netherlands, 5Dept. of Plastic Surgery, VU medical centre, Amsterdam, The 1Service de biochimie et biologie moléculaire, Lille, France, 2Service de généti- Netherlands. que clinique, Lille, France, 3Service de chirurgie orthopédique pédiatrique, Lille, Campomelic dysplasia (CMD1, OMIM#114290) is an autosomal France. dominant syndrome characterized by bowing of the lower limbs, minor Clinical genetics 1 facial anomalies and respiratory distress . Sometimes sex reversal can P0268. Homeobox gene PAX variation in a family with be seen . CMD1 is caused by mutations in the SOX9 gene . Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia. We present a 14-month-old girl with a P170R heterozygous mutation O. Ozdemir1, A. Coskun2, G. Bolayir2, M. Akyol1, R. Gedik2, E. Gul1; in the SOX9 gene . She is the second child of non-related parents . 1Faculty of Medicine, Sivas, Turkey, 2Faculty of Dentistry, Sivas, Turkey. She has a dolichocephalic skull, high arched palate, micrognathia, The term Ectodermal Dysplasia (ED) covers a heterogenous group flat nasal bridge, low set ears and laryngotracheomalacia for of conditions affecting ectodermal organs including hair, teeth, nails, which a tracheostomy was performed . Skeletal survey showed 11 and glands . The term Ectodermal Dysplasia covers a heterogenous pairs of ribs, delayed ossification of distal femoral epiphyses and group of conditions affecting ectodermal organs including hair, teeth, brachymesophalangy II and V . The X-rays were reviewed by the nails, and glands . Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, EDA, the most European Skeletal Dysplasia Network (ESDN) . Subtle radiological common and best-known ED, is usually inherited as an X-linked features of CMD1 were noticed . Most reviewers felt that the scapulae semidominant trait, although rarer autosomal dominant and recessive were slightly small, the thoracic pedicles were poorly delineated and forms exist . Affected males show severe oligodontia or anodontia, and hypoplastic and that there was a slight bowing of the femurs . Previously abnormalities in tooth shapes . Anomalies are seen in both primary and a patient with the same mutation and classical signs of CMD1, permanent dentitions . including Pierre Robin sequence, low-set ears, bowing of tibiae and Further analysis established the causative mutation as a sub- hypoplastic scapulae, was described . This patient died 4 weeks after microscopic deletion encompassing the PAX9 gene, thus, suggesting birth (J.Meyer et al; 1997). These two cases illustrate that genotype/ that haploinsufficiency of PAX9 leads to tooth agenesis. Here we report phenotype correlations are (almost) impossible in CMD1 . the characterization of a small nuclear family . Mandibular incisors, premolars, molars, and maxillary incisors, canines, premolars, molars P0266. surfactant protein B polymorphism in infants with lung are the teeth most often missing or having conical crowns in the failure from Russia some of current family members . Permanent teeth showed reduced K. Danilko1, T. Viktorova1, R. Bogdanova2, A. Fatyihova2, V. Viktorov2; mesiodistal dimensions and shorter root lengths than normal teeth . 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir Primary teeth were normal in size, shape, and number . The single- State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. strand conformatioanal polymorphism (SSCP) was used enabled the Respiratory diseases are among the most common causes of death detection of a possible mutation in exon 2 of PAX9 in our family . Current worldwide . Pulmonary surfactant is a mixture of lipids and proteins, results report variable patterns of homeobox gene in some members which is essential for normal lung function . Alterations in surfactant who has distinct findings of dental abnormalities in HED syndrome. composition have been reported in several lung diseases . It is known also, surfactant protein B (SP-B) gene is polymorphic . P0269. Huntington’s disease genetic testing standards To investigate the possibility of variable genetic susceptibility to RDS J. P. Jakupciak, K. L. Richie; and pneumonia in neonates from Russia, we examined the association Natl Inst of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, United States. between RDS, pneumonia and a polymorphism in intron 4 of the SP-B Huntington’s Disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disease that affects gene . 4 to 7 individuals per 100,000 . HD is an autosomal dominant inherited We analyzed genomic DNA of 108 infants with respiratory distress- disease that is associated with an expansion of a trinucleotide (CAG) syndrome (RDS) and/or congenital pneumonia and 104 healthy term repeat located on chromosome 4 . Individuals with 26 triplet repeats or neonates from Russia by means of polymerase chain reaction . less are normal, and while those with 27 to 35 repeats may not show On the basis of χ² analysis, the SP-B intron 4 alleles distribution did not symptoms themselves, their future generations may have the disease . differ between ill and healthy patients (p=0,19) (Table 1) . There were Individuals with 36 to 39 repeats are at risk, while 99% of HD patients only 0,9% infants with the invariant /deletion genotype in analyzed have 40 or more CAG triplet repeats . International cooperation with group and 8,7% in control group (p=0,02, χ²=5,43). We did not observe the Eurogentest community as well as NIST and the CDC is needed this genotype among the neonates with RDS (p=0,03, χ²=4,83). to promote a strategy to initiate the acceptance and recognition of We suppose the invariant /deletion genotype is protective for such validated materials to serve as international standards for genetic congenital lung disease of neonates from Russia like RDS and testing . In response to the need of standards for Huntington’s Disease pneumonia . So our results is not similar to those reported earlier . It is genetic testing, NIST, is validating a panel of Huntington’s Disease possible due to ethnic differences of Russian population . genomic material for use as standard reference materials (SRM) for HD testing . The panel of standards (each consisting of two alleles) Table 1 . Distribution of the SP-B intron 4 alleles . include a pair of homozygous alleles, closely-spaced normal alleles, Alleles All patients(N=216) Control(N=208) normal/expanded alleles, borderline/expanded alleles, closely- spaced expanded alleles, and normal/large expanded alleles . Future Invariant 205 (94,4%) 192 (92,3%) coordinated efforts between NIST, ACMG, CDC, and the Eurogentest community will increase the number of standards for genetic testing Deletion 3 (1,4%) 9 (4,3%) such that the health care community has the positive and negative controls needed to significantly impact diagnostic accuracy especially Insertion 8 (3,7%) 7 (3,4%) in difficult and ambiguous clinical situations. P0267. spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia with primitive P0270. Autosomal recessively inherited stickler syndrome carpometacarpal osteolysis: a new dominant osteodysplasia J. J. van den Ende1, R. Snoeckx1, G. Van Camp1, S. Usami2; K. Busiah1, M. Le Merrer2, P. Maroteaux3, A. Verloes1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Wilrijk (Antwerp), Belgium, 2Department of 1Clinical Genetic Unit, Robert DEBRE University Hospital, Paris, France, 2Ge- Otorhinolaryngology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Ja- netic Dept, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 3Genetic Dept, Necker Hospital, pan. Paris, France. Hereditary hearing loss is a very heterogeneous condition for which Spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia (SED) is a clinically heterogeneous at the moment more than 70 loci and several genes are identified. Of condition encompassing many skeletal disorders, affecting the spine these genes Connexin 26 (GJB2) is responsible for more than half and the proximal epiphyses of the long bones . We report a new of the recessively inherited cases of pre-lingual deafness . In about ¼ dominant form of SED observed in a woman and her son . The main of cases additional abnormalities exist and the deafness is part of a features are 1) SED with X rays reminiscent of X-linked spondylo- syndrome . epiphyseal dysplasia tarda (a form of SED that has no manifestation We describe a consanguineous Moraccan family with four children in females) leading to severe scoliosis in late childhood,present in affected by congenital hearing loss . Recessive inheritance was a women and 2) primitive, progressive osteolysis of carpal bones, probable, but no mutation could be shown in Cx 26 or in the PDS metacarpals and phalanges that developed in adulthood . Our family gene . appears to be the first observation of an association of SED and acro- Years later additional symptoms in the form of skeletal and ocular osteolysis . problems lead to the diagnosis of Stickler syndrome . DNA analysis Clinical genetics 1 showed a homozygous mutation in the COL9A1 gene in the four defects or anorectal anomalies, nor do they exhibit clinical features patients, and a heterozygous mutation in both parents, fitting the or CNS malformations suggestive of holoprosencephaly, corroborating recessive nature of the disorder. This family is the first case of the notion that the holoprosencephaly spectrum with 7qter deletion is recessively inherited Stickler syndrome . Uptill now 3 autosomal extremely variable . dominant forms of Stickler syndrome have been described, caused by mutations in COL2A1, COL11A1 and COL11A2 . These forms differ in P0273. Autosomal Dominant Familial thoracic Aortic Aneurysm, severity of the deafness and in the presence of ocular manifestations . (tAAD2) associated with a heterozygous tGFBR2 gene Our family showes a different kind of vitreous changes, less pronounced mutation. facial features, and short stature . N. Marziliano1, A. Brega2, M. Grasso1, E. Disabella1, M. Tagliani1, S. Ansaldi1, M. Diegoli3, E. Arbustini1; P0271. mosaic subtelomeric deletion of chromosome 10q in a 1IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Biology and Medi- girl with psychomotor retardation and dysmorphism. cal Genetics, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 3Universita di Pavia- W. Courtens, E. Reyniers, A. Laridon, J. Wauters, S. Scheers, R. van Luijk, L. IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. Rooms, F. Kooy, W. Wuyts; Transforming growth factor beta type II receptor (TGFBR2) gene has University Hospital Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium. been recently reported as associated with Familial Thoracic Aortic We report on a 27-month old girl with feeding difficulties, hypotonia, Aneurysm, designated TAAD2 (MIM%608967) . Two further syndromes psychomotor delay, strabismus, and a facial dysmorphism . Family are allelic at the same locus: Marfan Syndrome type 2 (MFS2, history was unremarkable . Brain magnetic resonance revealed no MIM#154705) and Loeys-Dietz Syndrome (LDS, MIM#609192) . The abnormalities . Standard karyotype was normal 46,XX, but analyses for three conditions share the aortic dilation/aneurysm trait . We here subtelomeric rearrangements using MLPA (Multiplex Ligation dependent describe a novel TGFBR2 gene mutation in a four-generation family Probe Amplification) on blood showed a slightly diminished intensity with autosomal dominant aortic dissection . Mutational analysis was for the telomere 10qter probe. FISH analysis confirmed the presence performed on genomic DNA. The TGFBR2 gene was amplified and of a deletion of the subtelomeric region 10q present in approximately sequenced using intron-specific primers for amplicons containing 35% of the analysed mitoses and interphase nuclei . FISH analyses exons . Controls were 204 chromosomes from unrelated healthy on buccal cells confirmed the presence of a subtelomeric 10q deletion controls . Linkage was assessed with two FAM-labeled microsatellites: in approximately 44% of the cells . Subsequent FISH analyses with D3S2336 and D3S1293 . The W405R mutation (exon 6) of the TGFBR2 specific probes are ongoing in order to define the exact localization of gene was identified in the proband, a 49-year old female with type B the breakpoint . aortic dissection at the age of 48 years . Furthermore, the mutation was Only a few cases with pure subterminal 10q deletion have been also found in her sister (who suffered acute aortic dissection), and in reported so far. The clinical findings in these patients consist mainly of the youngest brother who presented a type A aortic dissection . Two developmental delay, short stature, behavioural anomalies, strabismus, additional sibs are unaffected and non-carriers . The three affected sibs and dysmorphism. The clinical findings in our patient are concordant showed identical D3S2336 and D3S1293 make-up. In TAAD2, the first with those of a subtelomeric 10q deletion . A mosaic subtelomeric 10q diagnosis in the family is usually done after an acute, potentially fatal deletion has, to our knowledge, not yet been reported so far . event . The normal skeletal and ocular phenotypes of these patients We would like to stress the importance of the possibility of the presence raise the problem on how to diagnose them before the occurrence of of a subtelomeric deletion in a mosaic form, detectable by MLPA and an acute dissection . A further problem is how to monitor and protect confirmed by FISH analyses. carriers because the penetrance is complete by the adult age, and the aortic size at dissection seems lower that five cm. P0272. monosomy 7qtel and trisomy 19qtel in two unrelated patients P0274. Diagnosis of HbE by an allelic discrimination analysis. A. B. Sousa1, H. G. Santos2, A. Medeira1, H. C. Fernandes3, R. Lemos4, P. S. K. Sangkitporn, S. Duangruang, A. Dumbua, K. Rattanakittisophon, L. Rendeiro4, I. Cordeiro1; Eksiri, S. Sangkitporn; 1Serviço de Genética do Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 2GenoMed, Department of Medical Sciences, Nonthaburi, Thailand. Lisboa, Portugal, 3Serviço de Pediatria do Centro Hospitalar do Funchal, Ma- Beta-thalassemia/ Hb E is one of the most common form of thalassemia deira, Portugal, 4Unidade de Citogenética do Centro de Genética Clínica, Porto, in Thailand . These patients display a wide range of clinical severities, Portugal. from nearly asymptomatic to transfusion-dependent thalassemia major . Subtelomeric rearrangements are relatively common abnormalities Their Hb F levels are variable and overlap with those of homozygous among severely mentally retarded patients, particularly if the latter Hb E subjects . Differential diagnosis of these hemoglobinopathies is is associated with dysmorphism, congenital malformations, growth therefore problematic . In this study, an allelic discrimination analysis of defects or a family history of mental retardation . The wide variety of Hb E was developed based on the multiplexed and end-point PCR . The subtelomeric chromosome abnormalities is in frame with the diversity presence of two primer/probe pairs in each reaction allows genotyping of phenotypes among positive cases . Nevertheless, as the number of of Hb E at the single-nucleic polymorphism (SNP) site . The method patients reported increases, recognisable patterns emerge pointing at was validated on 90 subjects including 16 Hb E heterozygotes, 30 Hb E particular chromosomal defects . homozygotes, 14 beta-thalassemia/ Hb E and 30 normal subjects . The We have been using fluorescence in situ hibridisation (FISH) with results of Hb E diagnosis by SNP analysis were 100% in accordance subtelomeric probes to detect cryptic rearrangements in patients with the results obtained by DNA sequencing technique . In conclusion, with mental retardation and a “chromosomal phenotype”, whose this approach should prove useful in differential diagnosis of Hb E in conventional karyotypes are normal . populations with a high frequency of Hb E and beta-thalassemia/ Hb We present two unrelated patients who were independently found to E . have monosomy of 7qtel and trisomy of 19qtel [der(7)t(7;19)(qtel;qte l)pat] . They are both severely mentally retarded and hypotonic . They P0275. co-inheritance of iVs ii-1(G>A) beta globin gene have poor growth of prenatal onset, microcephaly, a round face with mutation with a Delta-chain mutation [Delta116 Arg>cys(G18) broad forehead, broad nasal bridge, short nose with anteverted nares, (cGc>tGc)], HbA-troodos, in an iranian family. 2 short wide philtrum, downturned corners of the mouth and thin lips . P. Foulady1, M. Masrouri1, V. Lotfi1, S. B. Azimifar1, S. M. Eram1, A. Abdolhos- Both have imagiological abnormalities of the frontal lobes, and minor seini1, S. Zeinali1,2; congenital heart defects . 1Medical Genetics Laboratory of Dr. Zeinali., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Complex rearrangements make it difficult to ascertain which individual 2Department of Biotechnology, Pasteur Institute., Tehran, Islamic Republic of chromosomal defect is responsible for each phenotypic characteristic . Iran. Monosomy 7qtel is however noteworthy, in that two important genes The β-thalassemia (thal) minor phenotypes with normal Hb A levels 2 have been ascribed to this region: the homeobox HLXB9, for dominantly and decreased MCV and MCH values are relatively rare β-thal traits . inherited sacral agenesis, and Sonic hedgehog, the major gene Amplification refractory mutation system-polymerase chain reaction causing holoprosencephaly . Interestingly, neither patient has sacral (ARMS-PCR) revealed the IVS-II-1 (G>A) mutation in the β-globin Clinical genetics 160 gene of the proband and her father . Direct sequencing of the δ-globin than females in Toriello-Carey syndrome . Evaluation of previously gene of the proband and her father also revealed a previously reported reported well described 21 cases indicate that there is no significant variant called Hb A-Troodos [Delta 116(G18)Arg>Cys] (in cis) with the sex difference in the severity of the status . 2 β-globin gene mutation. This is the first case report of Hb A-Troodos 2 in association with the β0 IVS-II-1 (G>A) mutation . Reduced Hb A P0278. sisters with loss of methylation at both the tNDm and 2 expression by a concomitant Hb A β-thal in cis or trans, may cause the BWs loci. 2 problems in carrier diagnostics, and eventually in genetic counseling S. E. Boonen1, J. M. D. Hahnemann2, S. Poerksen3, E. Oestergaard2,4, N. and prenatal diagnosis when insufficient molecular analyses are Knabe3, I. K. Temple5,6, D. J. G. Mackay7,5; performed . 1Clinical Genetics, The Kennedy Institute - National Eye Clinic, Glostrup, Den- mark, 2Medical Genetics Laboratory Centre, The Kennedy Institute - National P0276. Genetic and environmental risk factors in perinatal Eye Clinic, Glostrup, Denmark, 3Dept. Paediatrics, Glostrup University Hospital, arterial stroke: Data from a cohort of 56 mother/child pairs Glostrup, Denmark, 4Dept. Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, C. J. Curry1, S. Bhullar2, J. Holmes2, C. D. DeLozier1, H. T. Hutchison3; Denmark, 5Human Genetics Division, University of Southampton, Southampton, 1Genetic Medicine Central California, University of California, San Francisco, United Kingdom, 6Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, The Princess Anne Hos- Fresno, CA, United States, 2Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, CA, pital, Southampton, United Kingdom, 7Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, United States, 3Children’s Hospital Central California , Madera, University of Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, United Kingdom. California, San Francisco, CA, United States. Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus (TNDM) is a type of diabetes Perinatal arterial stroke (PAS) is the most common cause of hemiplegic presenting in the neonatal period . It is caused by aberrations within an cerebral palsy, and thrombophilic factors appear critical in its causation . imprinted region at 6q24 . Three underlying genetic mechanisms are We evaluated demographic, historical and prothrombotic risk factors in known so far: paternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 6, paternal 56 patients with PAS and their mothers between 1997 and 2005 . PAS duplication of 6q24, or loss of methylation (LOM) at the differentially was confirmed by cranial imaging (CT/MRI). Boys predominated 33:23. methylated region (TNDM DMR) on 6q24. We present the first report There were 3 twin sets . Ethnicity was 31 Hispanic, 20 Caucasian and of a family with recurrence of TNDM in two sisters with LOM at the 5 other . Most were term (57%) and 18% were post dates . Three were TNDM DMR on 6q24 . In addition to the LOM TNDM both sisters had growth restricted whereas 10 were large for gestational age . 25% of partial LOM at the KCNQ1OT1 in the Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome mothers reported decreased fetal activity; 9 (16%) had preeclampsia; (BWS) region on chromosome 11p15 .5 (KvDMR, domain 2), as 26 (30%) had emergency Cesarean section . Eight placental exams recently reported by us for the older sister (Mackay et al ., 2006) . The revealed 7 with abnormalities . 66% of children presented with seizures parents are first cousins. The clinical phenotypes of the girls show whereas 34% had a later presentation with cerebral palsy . manifestations of both syndromes, albeit so far with macroglossia Prothrombotic risk factors evaluated were Protein C, S and Antithrombin as the only BWS feature in the younger sister in whom the level of III activities, Leiden Factor V, Prothrombin 20210, MTHFR C677T and the KCNQ1OT1 LOM is smaller compared to her older sister . We A1298C, Lipoprotein (a), homocysteine and anticardiolipin antibodies . suggest that these sisters represent a novel, most likely autosomally Abnormalities were found in 27/49 mothers (55%) and 30/55 (55%) recessive inherited defect of the methylation machinery affecting at children . Thirty-nine of the pairs (70%) had at least one abnormality least two different loci . The present report has two important clinical in mother, child or both . Eight children and 10 mothers had more than implications: Firstly, the detection of concomitant KCNQ1OT1 LOM in one prothrombotic factor . Four children had patterns of birth defects these patients with LOM TNDM prompts for testing for KCNQ1OT1 or syndromes . Long term sequelae included cerebral palsy (90%), LOM in future patients with LOM TNDM, as the molecular diagnosis microcephaly (74%), cognitive impairment (67%), and seizures (42%) . of BWS may have implications for the clinical management including Three children died ; only 2/53 surviving children are normal. renal ultrasonography . Secondly, the recurrence reported in this family PAS is the result of multifactorial, synergistic fetal and maternal factors has implications for genetic counselling . among which genetic prothrombotic factors, both fetal and maternal, appear pivotal . P0279. A triple X syndrome patient with anaemia and autoimmune disorder P0277. A case with toriello-carey syndrome V. Altieri1, P. Bassano1, F. Donadio1, F. Fabbiano2, S. Magrin2, R. Calzone1; F. E. Perçin1, K. Karaer1, M. Y. Karaoğuz1, M. A. Ergün1, S. Özdek2, O. Öz- 1Genetics Dept. - ASL Napoli 1 - Director: A. Zatterale, Naples, Italy, 2Haemato- demir3; logic and Bone Marrow Transplant Dept - Director: S. Mirto, Palermo, Italy. 1Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, The 47,XXX is a sex chromosome anomaly that occurs in about 1 in Turkey, 2Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology, 1,000 female babies . Ankara, Turkey, 3Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Girls with triple X syndrome are sometimes taller than average and Cardiology, Ankara, Turkey. have an increased risk of learning disabilities and delayed speech; Toriello-Carey syndrome (MIM #217980) is a rare multiple malformation developmental delay and behavioural problems are not common . Most syndrome characterized by agenesis of corpus callosum, telecanthus, females with triple X syndrome have normal sexual development and are short palpebral fissures, small nose with anteverted nares, Robin able to conceive children . sequence, abnormal ears, redundant neck skin, laryngeal anomalies, A case of a 20-year-old woman with a triple X syndrome is discussed . cardiac defect, short hands, and hypotonia . There is also a considerable The girl was admitted to the Haematologic Dept . because of asthenia and overlap in cardinal symptoms between Ohdo (MIM #249620) and skin pallor . A severe not carential nor haemolitic macrocytic anaemia (Hb Toriello-Carey syndrome suggested that these two conditions could = 5.2g/dL; MCV = 112) was diagnosed. The bone marrow examination be allelic . The only distinction between Toriello-Carey and Ohdo showed myelodysplasia . The negative DEB test allowed to exclude syndromes is rare associations seen in Toriello-Carey but not in Ohdo Fanconi Anaemia while a constitutional triple X karyotype was found . syndrome . Abdomen ultrasonography and oesophagogastroduodenoscopy were Here, we present a female case manifesting both typical and less negative . The biochemical parameters resulted within the normal range, common findings, such as respiratory distress, hoarse voice, hearing while anti DNA and anti nucleus antibodies were positive . An autoimmune loss, abnormal rib number, simian-line, anterior placed anus, triangular connective tissue disorder was then hypothesized . open mouth, high palate and sacral appandage, of the syndrome . The anaemia origin is unclear . Moreover, chronic pure red cell aplasia, Triangular open mouth, hoarse voice and anterior placed anus were that in literature is known to occur on an autoimmune basis, was reported only described ones and never confirmed before. Presence of these in a triple X Japanese woman, while thrombocytopenia was reported in defects in our case support that, they are a part of the phenotypic few other XXX patients . Then a question about the correlation between spectrum of Toriello-Carey syndrome . Additionally, our case has chromosomal aberration, haematopoietic imbalance, and autoimmune pericallosal lipoma which is an unhiterto described finding. disorder arises . To the best of our knowledge, this is the first Turkish patient with typical In addition, the karyotype analysis seems mandatory in women severe phenotype of Toriello-Carey syndrome including early infancy with inexplicable anaemia or thrombocytopenia and/or autoimmune death . It is previously suggested that males are more severely affected abnormalities, even though phenotypically normal .Clinical genetics 161 P0280. three siblings of partial trisomy 19q13.3-qter together gonadoblastoma or dysgerminoma and require preventive removal of with monosomy 20q13.3-qter due to rare the maternal the gonads before hormone treatment . translocation t(19;20)(q13.3;q13.3) We report on a 4-years old child with severe virilization 45,X karyotype A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk, B. Panasiuk, A. Sawicka, A. T. Midro; and cryptic Y sequence. He was the first child of nonconsangineous Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, parents and born at term . He had had right inguinal hernia repair before Poland. referral to our clinic . On physical examination weight was 13 500 g (3rd We present natural histories of three siblings at the age of 21, 19 centile), height 94 cm (3rd centile) . P and 13 years with the same unbalanced translocation in the form enoscrotal hypospadias, severe chordee, bifid scrotum, left of the trisomy 19q13 .3-qter with monosomy 20q13 .3-qter unknown nonpalpable testis were noticed . Ultrasonography showed vagina in so far .Translocation was inherited from the mother, the carrier of the pelvis, and scrotal ultrasound demonstrated right testis with normal t(19;20)(q13.3;q13.3) GTG, RBG. A study of morfological phenotype appearance, but left testis was not found . 45, X karyotype was found was performed according to Stengel-Rutkowski . A catalogue of well- through cytogenetic study from peripheral blood lymphocytes and defined traits was used for systematic collection of clinical symptoms fibroblast of skin biopsy. and anthropological traits . Anamnestic data regarding preconceptional FISH analysis using SRY locus specific probe showed no SRY gene period, pregnancy, birth, neonatal period, developmental course loci . Than, molecular genetic study was carried out using DYS14 and history of diseases were obtained from the parents and hospital “testis specific protein” localized to the Yp11.2 and SRY primers set by records . A semi-standardised protocol was used for the assessment PCR . SRY was negative but DYS14 was detected positive in both DNA of rare anthropological traits in the skull, face, trunk and limbs . Facial samples extracted from peripheral blood and testis tissue . Studies are measurements were performed from frontal and profile photographs underway to analyze other Y specific sequences quantifying seventeen traits by age related indices . On the basis of This is the most severe virilized patient who had 45,X karyotype and Y these data the child’s trait list was set up by checking all informative sequence reported so far . catalogue features for presence or absence . Quantitative features analysis showed that a total 95 out of 807 (12%) of catalogued P0283. the c1173t and G3730A polymorphisms in the vitamin anamnestic and morphological traits were present in all children K epoxide reductase gene and pharmacogenetics of warfarin in and only six additional features were distinct . Interestingly that some Russian population dysmorphic features (slightly asymetric, broad face, slopping forhead, A. S. Ulitina1, M. I. Kadinskaya1, T. V. Vavilova1, O. V. Sirotkina2; upslanting palpebral fissures, long back of the nose, big nares, long 1Saint-Petersburg Pavlov State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian philtrum, pointed chin, hipomimia) have been seen in the mother . Federation, 2Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. P0281. Genetic susceptibility to tuberculosis in Japanese: a Warfarin is widely used for prevention of thromboembolic disease . gene-based analysis There is evidence that the main cause of inter-individual sensitivity to T. Hara1, K. Kusuhara2, K. Yamamoto3; warfarin determined by activity of the microsomal enzyme cytochrome 1Deparment of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu Uni- P450 2C9 (CYP2C9) and vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKORC1) . versity, Fukuoka, Japan, 2Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Recently, two polymorphisms C1173T in the intron 1 and G3730A in Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 3Department of Medical Genet- the 3’UTR of the VKORC1 gene were found . For revealing the allelic ics, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. distribution of VKORC1 polymorphisms in Russian population 125 Tuberculosis (TB) is the second commonest cause of death from unrelated patients aged 15-75 years were investigated . In all patients infectious disease after HIV/AIDS worldwide . Association studies have the warfarin therapy was initiated with therapeutic INR target 2 .0-3 .5 . revealed that host genetic factors, such as HLA-DR2 and SLC11A1 For detection of the C1173T and G3730A variants of VKORC1 the (NRAMP1), play roles in susceptibility to TB . Recently, a linkage analysis polymerase chain reaction and original endonuclease digestion with on sib-pairs mapped susceptibility loci to chromosomes 15q11-13 and HinfI and FauI were used . Our study showed that the frequencies of Xq26 . To identify host genetic factors involved in the susceptibility to VKORC1 genotypes in Russian population were 46%, 38% and 16% TB in Japanese, we performed a gene-based association analysis of for 1173CC, 1173CT and 1173TT, respectively and 37%, 50% and 21 candidate genes [SLC11A1 (NRAMP1), vitamin D receptor (R), 13% for 3730GG, 3730GA and 3730AA, respectively . The 1173TT IL-1beta, IFN-gamma, IFN-gammaR1, IFN-gammaR2, IL-12 (p40), genotypes was associated with significant reductions in mean warfarin IL-12 (p35), IL-12Rbeta1, IL-12Rbeta2, STAT-1, IL-18, IL-18R, IL-23 dose - 29 .3±2 .9 mg/week versus 42 .3±2 .3 mg/week for 1173CC and (p19), IL-23R, IL-27 (p28), IL-27R (WSX-1), TNF-alpha, TNFRSF1A, 40 .1±2 .6 mg/week for 1173CT (p<0 .05) . And this association was true TNFRSF1B and UBE3A genes] on 87 TB patients and 265 controls when the contribution of the CYP2C9 gene polymorphisms in inter- using marker single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) . For the genes individual sensitivity to warfarin was considered . No effect of G3730A with two or more marker SNPs exhibiting significant allele association, on warfarin dose was detected in our population . In conclusion, the we subsequently analyzed the association between adjacent coding C1173T VKORC1 gene polymorphism may modulate the warfarin SNPs (cSNPs) and TB . Among a total of 118 marker SNPs, 3 of IL1B and dose prescribed to acquire the target anticoagulation intensity and 2 of IL12RB1 showed association with TB . Non-synomymous cSNPs investigation of this genetic variant has important clinical significance were not identified in IL1B . Association studies on 4 non-synomymous in selection and individualization of warfarin dosage along with the cSNPs of IL12RB1 (641A/G, 1094T/C, 1132G/C, 1573G/A) in linkage CYP2C9 gene polymorphism determination . disequilibrium showed that 3 of them were significantly associated with the development of TB . Haplotype analysis on the 4 cSNPs P0284. clinical variability in Weaver syndrome demonstrated that frequency of ATGG haplotype was significantly lower M. Arapoğlu, B. Tüysüz; in TB patients than in controls . These data suggested that among the İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genet- 21candidate genes analyzed, IL12RB1 confers genetic susceptibility ics, İstanbul, Turkey. to TB in Japanese . We investigated clinical variability of five patients with Weaver syndrome . All of the cases were referred to genetics department P0282. A severe virilized case with 45,X karyotype and cryptic Y with unusual facies and developmental delay . Dysmorphic facies sequence with hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, large ears, long philtrum C. N. Semerci, N. Corduk, S. Semiz, U. Koltuksuz, F. Duzcan, L. Satiroglu- and retromicrognathia were present in all patients . Macrosomia and Tufan; accelerated growth of prenatal onset was significant in four patients. Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey. Two patients had congenital cardiac defects, developmental delay was Approximately 50% of patients with TS have a 45, X karyotype, the present in all patients and mental retardation could be documented in rest have a structurally abnormal sex chromosome or are mosaic three patients. Skeletal findings are also significant in this syndrome. All for a second sex chromosome . Molecular analysis has demostrated of our cases showed large bifrontal diameter and limited joint mobility . that some patient with TS have a cryptic Y chromosome mosaicism . One patient also had other skeletal findings as camptodactyly, pectus The presence of Y sequences is correlated with risk of developing carinatus, kyphoscoliosis, clubfoot and overriding of toes; another Clinical genetics 16 patient had significantly limited elbow and knee extention. Loose skin, with a heterozygous deletion that involves ~25 contiguous genes thin hair, thin-deep set nails, epicanthal folds and inverted nipples are within a ~1.5 MB region at 7q11.23. Molecular confirmation of WBS is occasional findings in Weaver syndrome and were present in one routinely accomplished using a FISH probe for the elastin gene (ELN) . of our cases . Weaver syndrome is characterised by macrosomia, The classic WBS phenotype consists of distinctive facial features, a accelerated skeletal maturation, unusual craniofacial appearance, cognitive profile including mental retardation with particular deficits in delayed motor and mental development, abnormal skeletal findings and visuospatial abilities and relative sparing of verbal-linguistic function, a looseness of skin . Sotos syndrome and other overgrowth syndromes behavioral profile including both increased anxiety and highly sociable should be included in the differential diagnosis . NSD1 gene mutations personality, elastin arteriopathy with supravalvular aortic stenosis, are described in both Weaver and Sotos syndromes; although, each connective tissue abnormalities and mild growth retardation . Initially the syndrome has its own distinctive facial appearance . search for the etiology of the WBS neurocognitive profile was centered on the LIMK1 gene, but more recently CYLN2, GTF2I, GTF2IRD1 and P0285. Weill-marchesani syndrome (Wms) presenting as a GTF2IRD2 have fallen under greater suspicion . rheumatologic condition We describe a patient with the classical facial dysmorphic features B. M. Owlia; and behavioral profile of WBS. Conspicuously absent was evidence Sadoughi university of medical sciences, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. of elastin arteriopathy, connective tissue abnormalities, growth or Weill-Marchesani syndrome (WMS) is a rare condition characterized mental retardation . FISH testing with the common ELN probe revealed by short stature, brachydactyly, joint stiffness, and characteristic eye 2 normal signals . High-resolution aCGH using a tiling path BAC-array abnormalities including microspherophakia, ectopia of lens, severe revealed a 2 .7 MB deletion telomeric to but not including ELN and myopia, and glaucoma . Both autosomal recessive (AR) and autosomal LIMK1 . The boundaries of this deletion are presented along with dominant (AD) modes of inheritance have been described for WMS . In further consideration of the genotype-phenotype implications raised our paper we report a case of WMS in a 12 year olds girls with history by this novel atypical 7q11 .23 microdeletion . of myopia and operation on her eyes due to glaucoma in 8 years of age . She referred to us due to 2 years background of joint problems P0288. Familial overgrowth and Wilms tumor associated with including stiffness of interphalangeal and intercarpal joints of her hands paternally inherited duplication of iGF2 region on chromosome mimicking rheumatoid arthritis (RA) . In physical examination she 11p15.5 showed indurated skin of hands with remarkable limitation of motion F. A. Collins1, L. St Heaps2, G. Peters2, D. Prawitt3, E. M. Algar4; in small joints of hands . Radiographic and laboratory studies failed to 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, show any characteristic findings usually found in RA. Sydney, Australia, 2Cytogenetics Dept, Children’s Hospital at Westmead, West- mead, Sydney, Australia, 3Children’s Hospital, University of Mainz, Mainz, Ger- P0286. A nonsense mutation in the Elastin gene is responsible many, 4Dept of Paediatrics and Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Royal for Familial supravalvular Aortic stenosis Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia. V. Valaeys1, Y. J. M. Sznajer1,2, A. Willems3, H. Dessy4, I. Smeaton5, M. Tassa- Overgrowth syndromes are a heterogeneous group of disorders . behji5; Associated features such as macrocephaly, hemihypertrophy, mental 1Paediatric Clinical Genetics, Hôpital universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, retardation, facial dysmorphism and congenital anomalies may help Free University of Brussels (ULB), Brussels, Belgium, 2Center for Genetics, distinguish specific recognisable syndromes, such as Beckwith- Hôpital Erasme, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 3Paediatric Intensive Care, Hôpital Wiedemann Syndrome (BWS) However, the advent of molecular universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Free University of Brussels (ULB), analysis has provided evidence for significant clinical and molecular Brussels, Belgium, 4Paediatric Cardiology, Hôpital universitaire des Enfants Re- overlap . Overgrowth syndromes are associated with increased risk of ine Fabiola, Free University of Brussels (ULB), Brussels, Belgium, 5Academic tumorigenesis . Unit of Medical Genetics, The University of Manchester, St Mary’s Hospital, We report a three-generation family with prenatal onset of a generalized Manchester, United Kingdom. overgrowth disorder . The proband ( BW 5 .8kg) presented with bilateral Congenital Supra Valvular Aortic Stenosis (SVAS) is often part of Wilms tumours at age 19 months . A younger sister (BW 5 .08kg) was a phenotypic spectrum encountered in the microdeletion disorder diagnosed with bilateral Wilms at age 5 months . The father (BW Williams syndrome (WS) . Sporadic and/or familial isolated cardiac 5 .5kg) had been treated for unilateral Wilms tumour at age 30 months . SVAS can also occur as an inherited autosomal dominant trait due Intelligence is normal and there are no other characteristic features to mutations (point, translocations, deletions) that disrupt the Elastin of BWS . High resolution karyotype and 11p subtelomere FISH were gene (ELN) on 7q11 .23 . normal . We describe a Caucasian family with isolated SVAS detected in a Three generations of the family were investigated . The results of clinical, father and daughter. The daughter, a first child from unrelated parents, cytogenetic (FISH using a cosmid IGF2 probe), and molecular analysis presented with cardiac arrest in the emergency room and eventually (genotyping of 11p with microsatellite markers; methylation studies at died . Investigations into the family history allowed us to identify an H19 locus; microarray analysis) are presented and are consistent with affected father who developed SVAS and was successfully operated a submicroscopic duplication of the IGF2 gene region at 11p15 .5 on on during childhood . There were no other phenotypes associated the paternally inherited chromosome in affected individuals . with WS, such as facial dysmorphism, stellae iridae, hypercalcemia Loss of imprinting at the IGF2 locus (chromosome 11p15) has previously or mental retardation, throughout this pedigree indicating that their been implicated in a sub-group of patients with BWS suggesting that condition was non-syndromic SVAS . Mutation screening (SSCP/ increased IGF2 gene dosage is important in the pathogenesis of the heteroduplex analysis) of the ELN gene from both individuals identified syndrome. This study identifies a novel mechanism and confirms a heterozygous nonsense mutation in exon 14 which leads to premature others reports suggesting that increased IGF2 dosage is important in termination of the elastin transcript . The family can now be offered ELN Wilms tumour predisposition . mutation screening of future progeny . This case underlines the pathological consequences of a point mutation P0289. molecular genetics of the ATPB gene in Russian Wilson in ELN gene and highlights the importance of family screening to disease patients improve the genetic counselling for future pregnancies . T. Kungurova, E. Zaklyazminskaya, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov; Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. P0287. Atypical 7q11.23 microdeletion sparing ELN and LimK1 Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized detected by acGH in a patient with classical behavioral and by dramatic build-up of intracellular hepatic copper with subsequent dysmorphic features of Williams syndrome. hepatic and neurologic abnormalities . WD is caused by mutation in E. Hatchwell1, D. H. Tegay1,2; the ATP7B gene (13q14 .3-q21 .1) . We have investigated DNA samples 1Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, United States, 2Stony from 144 unrelated WD patients for mutations in ATP7B gene 7 Brook University Hospital, Stony Brook, NY, United States. different exons by SSCP analysis . Altyered mobility fragments were Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS, OMIM 194050) is a multisystem followed by sequencing . We have revealed 6 different mutations in neurodevelopmental disorder associated in the majority of cases homo- and heterozygous state in 69 (48%) probands and of these, Clinical genetics 16 28,4% were due to the H1069Q mutation . This mutation is the most Belgium, 3University of Maastricht, Maastricht, Belgium, 4Microarray Facility, frequent in Russian WD patients . Also other mutations such as VIB, Leuven, Belgium. c3400delC, c1744_1745delAT, c1770insT, delVal1217-Leu1218 and In addition to traditional karyotyping, we have implemented array-CGH H1207R were detected and their frequencies amount 2 .1%, 0 .35%, for the identification of disease-related genes and mechanisms in X- 1 .04%, 0 .35% and 0 .35% correspondently . The mutation c1770insT linked mental retardation (XLMR) . was unknown previously . The investigation of all other ATP7B gene Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS) is an X-linked MR syndrome exons is in progress now . that was only reported in males and is characterised by severe MR, neurological abnormalities and increased serum T3 . Mutations in MCT8 P0290. Neurological sequels in Haemophilia Patients have been identified as the underlying genetic cause. Carrier females D. Mihailov1, M. Serban1, M. Puiu1, S. Arghirescu1, W. Schramm2; appear normal . Molecular characterisation of a balanced translocation 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, t(X;9)(q13.2;p23) in a female patient with syndromic MR revealed the 2”Ludwig Maximillians” University, Munich, Germany. disruption of MCT8. Because of complete inactivation of the normal introduction. Hemophilia is a X-linked inherited coagulopathy, due to X chromosome, the expression of MCT8 in the patient’s fibroblasts is mutations in either FVIII (haemophilia A) or FIX (haemophilia B) genes . abolished. Therefore, this is the first female patient with AHDS. Without adequate therapy, bleeding within the nervous system is the Array-CGH allows genome-wide detection of submicroscopic copy most frequent mortality and morbidity in haemophiliacs . number alterations in patients with idiopathic MR . We have developed Objective. Starting from therapeutic deficiencies in Romania and validated a full-coverage X-array for the detection of micro- and (prophylaxis absence, inadequate doses and duration of “on demand” microduplications at high resolution in patients with suspected XLMR . therapy), we followed-up neurological manifestations and their sequels Screening of 100 XLMR patients revealed genomic copy number in haemophiliacs . alterations in 12% of the patients . These vary in size from a few 100 kb material and method. Retrospective study based on 224 consecutive up to several Mb. In this way, we identified a small duplication at Xq28 haemophilia A (84 .38%) and B (15 .62%) patients, registered and in a large family with severe MR and progressive spasticity . Moreover, treated in Haemophilia Center Timisoara in a seven-year period . We via genotype-phenotype correlation studies we could demonstrate followed-up: frequency of neurological manifestations according to that duplication of MECP2 is the underlying cause of severe MR . This haemophilia severity, pathogenic mechanism, age, inhibitor status, finding adds a new mechanism for MR-associated mutation of MECP2 territorial distribution, evolution and type of sequels . in particular and of XLMR genes in general . Results. An important proportion of patients (33 .92%) presented bleedings with neurological symptoms, 38 .15% of them having P0293. XK aprosencephaly and 13q-deletion. multiple symptomatic haemorrhagic manifestations . Both neurological A. Bohring1, K. Passarge2, R. Exeler-Telker1, I. Conzelmann3, M. Lemmens4, complications (75%) and sequels (76 .4%) were found especially in J. Horst1; patients with severe haemophilia . Predominant pathogenic mechanism 1Institut für Humangenetik, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Mün- was nerve compression (62 .71% of cases) . 5 .93% of neurological ster, Germany, 2Gerhard-Domagk-Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsklinikum symptoms appeared in newborns . Patients with inhibitors presented a Münster, Münster, Germany, 3Klinik und Poliklinik für Frauenheilkunde und high risk of sequels . Most patients (52 .94%) were from other counties, Geburtshilfe, Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster, Germany, 4Praxis für ge- which leaded to a delay in therapy administration . From all patients netische Beratung und Labordiagnostik, Aachen, Germany. with neurological manifestations, 44 .73% presented sequels, the most XK aprosencephaly is a very rare malformation syndrome with frequent being central nervous system sequels, followed by peripheral atelencephalic microcephaly and limb anomalies . Autosomal recessive neurological, sensorial and sensitive sequels inheritance is suggested, however, an association with 13q-deletion conclusions. High frequency of the neurological manifestations is discussed in a few cases in the literature . Here we add a further and great rate of sequels advertise a sanitary enlightenment of the case with the full blown malformation spectrum of XK aprosencephaly haemophiliac family for a rapid attendance of the patient, and optimizing and 13q-deletion . The fetus (16+1 gestational weeks) had severe of the diagnostic and the therapeutic attitude . microcephaly with OFC of 8 .5 cm and complete but hypoplastic neurocranium without bony closure defects as seen in anencephaly . P0291. clinical, biochemical, and DNA study of X-linked The face was severely malformed with no nasal structure present . In adrenoleukodystrophy in Russia addition, the fetus had gastroschisis with protrusion of the gut in the E. Lomonosova, G. Rudenskaya, O. Shekhter, E. Zakharova; lower right quadrant, III-IV- syndactyly on the left hand, absent thumbs Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. bilaterally and oligodactyly on the feet . The fetus had indifferent X-linked adrenoleucodystrophy (X-ALD) is a relatively common and external genitalia, however, internal inspection showed uterus and worldwide spread peroxisomal disorder with pronounced phenotypic adnexa . Except for hypoplastic pulmonal artery and hypoplastic ductus variety . Clinical, genealogical, biochemical, and molecular genetic ateriosus, the internal organs appeared to be normal . Brain autopsy features of X-ALD in 35 families (54 patients) were studied . Childhood revealed agenesis of the cerebrum and cerebellum with well developed and juvenile cerebral forms predominate in the sample obviously brain stem . Lymphocyte chromosomes in the mother showed an due to incomplete diagnostics of adrenomyeloneuropathy and “pure” apparently balanced 4;13-translocation with breakpoints identified at adrenal insufficiency, and in part, to a contingent referring for genetic 4q27 and 13q21 . Micro-satellite analysis in the fetus using tissue block counseling . In some families different phenotypes co-exist . Increase of DNA to check for 13q-deletion revealed loss of the maternal allele very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) is a reliable biochemical marker at least at the locus D13S796 (13q33 .3) . Investigations at the loci in all X-ALD phenotypes including asymptomatic stage . In 25 families D13S258, D13S631, and D13S258 were not completely informative, molecular genetic study was performed, and 24 ABCD1 mutations however, did not contradict loss of heterozygosity at 13q21 .33-ter . were found including 13 novel mutations . Only in two cases mutations occured de novo . Both VLCFA level and mutation type are not related P0294. X-linked lissencephaly with agenesis of corpus callosum to X-ALD phenotype and have no clinical prognostic value . Four and ambiguous genitalia (XLAG), and intractable diarrhea- asymptomatic cases in proband’s junior brothers were revealed which expanding of the clinical spectrum of XLAG is important in respect to early bone marrow transplantation . DNA E. Steichen-Gersdorf1, H. Peters2, D. Kotzot3; diagnostics is more reliable for identification of female heterozygotes 1Dept. of Neonatology,Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute for and for prenatal diagnostics, it is also less expensive and less laborious Medical Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Institute for Medical Genetics, Innsbruck, than biochemical investigation . Austria. Mutations in the aristaless-related homeobox gene (ARX) have been P0292. Identification of new genes and genetic mechanisms in reported in non-syndromic X-linked mental retardation as well as patients with X-linked mental retardation in rare syndromes (X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia M. Bauters1, H. Van Esch2, S. Frints3, P. Van Hummelen4, P. Marynen1, G. (XLAG), Partington syndrome (PRTS), and X-linked infantile spasm Froyen1; syndrome (ISSX)) . 1University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, The patient is the second child of healthy nonconsanguineous parents and was born at term (W 2900g, L 49cm,OFC 33cm; karyotype Cytogenetics 16 46,XY) . The patient presented with intractable neonatal epilepsy . EEG analysis gave apparently normal results . The yield of telomere FISH showed burst suppression and multifocal hypersynchronous activity . analysis was 10 % (21 rearrangements) . A total of 6 rearrangements MRI revealed lissencephaly/pachygyria and absent corpus callosum . were cryptic interstitial: 4 chromosome deletions were inferred by the Cerebellum and brainstem were normal . Recurrent episodes of presence of locus-specific tumors (retinoblastoma, FAP, non-polyposic hypothermia were interpreted as a sign of hypothalamic dysfunction . colon cancer) and were confirmed by FISH; one case with 3q13 The patient had ambiguous genitalia with a micropenis and an empty deletion and one case with 1p21 .3 deletion were diagnosed by 1 Mb shallow scrotum, minor dysmorphisms, severe failure to thrive, microarray-CGH . feeding difficulties with poor sucking needing exclusively tube feeding. Chromosome imbalances were distinctively associated with: mental There was neither psychomotor development nor reaction to visual retardation of any degree; growth anomalies, usually in form of or acoustic stimuli . At the age of 3 weeks he developed intractable disproportion between height, weight and head circumference diarrhoea requiring parenteral nutrition . At 15 weeks of age weight was (not true overgrowth or growth delay), minor physical anomalies 4060g (P3), L 60cm (P25), OFC 34,3cm( < P 3) . (the strongest indicator), including hands and feet abnormalities, Mutation analysis of exon 1-5 of the ARX-Gene revealed a deletion in anomalous dermatoglyphics, in particular excess of arches, “gestalt” exon 3 (c .1105delG) leading to a frameshift mutation with a consecutive for chromosome anomaly . premature stop of translation . New suggestions are provided in the diagnostic strategies of mental The severe phenotype is rare and mostly associated with frameshift/ retardation . Genotype-phenotype correlations are discussed . premature truncation mutations . Intractable diarrhoea so far reported in only one case is of major clinical impact and might be explained by Po02. cytogenetics expression of ARX not only in the telencephalon, testes, and kidney, but also in the gut . P0297. chromosomal analysis in mental retarded children born with dismorphogenic features at Genetic centre, GmcH, P0295. Identification and molecular modelling of a novel familial chandigarh mutation in the SRY gene implicated in the pure gonadal G. Kaur, S. Mishra, A. Sehgal, B. Chavan; dysgenesis GMCH, Chandigarh, Chandigarh, India. G. Gimelli1, S. Gimelli2, N. Dimasi1, R. Bocciardi1, T. Pramparo2, O. Zuffardi2; Here we report ten cases of Down’s syndrome with trisomy 21 1Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2Dept. of Pathology and Medical Genetics, chromosome, referred by the Pediatric department with mongoloid University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. features muscular hypotonea, brachycephaly, protruding tongue, small SRY gene plays a key role in human sex determination and is low set ears upward sloping paplpebral fissures, single palmar crease, responsible for initiating male sexual differentiation . The protein flat nasal bridge. It is noteworthy here that one case of Klinefelter’s encoded by SRY contains a homeobox (HMG) domain, which is a DNA- syndrome with 47, XXY karyotype is also observed out of five children binding domain present in some chromatin-associated proteins of the having dimorphic features at birth . The affected individual is 18 days old high mobility group family, and in some transcription factors . Mutations baby with the features of low set ears malformed right sided pinna, high within the SRY open reading frame are reported to be associated arched palate, abnormal cry, wide spaced nipple, tuft of hair at sacral with XY pure gonadal dysgenesis . The majority of these are de novo region, sandal gap in right foot, short neck and ambiguousgenitalia . mutations affecting only one individual in a family . Only a small subset In addition, we have also done karyotyping of 20 mentally retarded of mutations is shared between the father and one or more of his children, referred from mental retardation centre, GMRC, Chandigarh . children . Most of these familial mutations are localized within the HMG Five cases were diagnosed with 21 trisomy, one child with mosaicism, box and only two are at the N-terminal domain of the SRY protein . one child with Edward’s syndrome . Rest of the children were found Herein, we describe a young girl with pure gonadal dysgenesis and her having normal karyotyping, indicating other biochemical metabolic phenotypically and fertile father carrying a novel familial mutation in defects . the SRY gene at codon number 3 . This mutation is resulting in a serine (S) to leucine (L) substitution in the protein . The secondary structure P0298. High incidence of robertsonian translocation in infertile of the SRY protein was carried out by protein modelling studies . This males analysis suggests, with high probability, that the N-terminal domain R. Kumar, R. Dada, K. Kucheria; of the SRY protein, where we found the mutation, could form an α- All India Institute of Medical Sciences, N Delhi, India. helix from amino acid in position 2 to amino acid in position 13 . The Robertsonian translocation are the most common structural secondary structure prediction and the chemical properties of serine rearragement of human chromosomes occurring at a rate of 1/1000 to leucine substitution stands for a potential disruption of this N- live births . 60% inherit the rearrangement from one of their parents terminal α-helix in the SRY protein . This mutation could play a major and 40% occur denovo . This proportion rises to 1% in infertile men & role in destabilizing the interaction of the SRY protein with the target has been associated with infertility or oligospermia . Among all possible DNA or could favour a translocation of the SRY protein in a cellular types of Robertsonian translocation, the D/D class is the most frequent, compartment where could not play its DNA binding function . & studies of both spontaneous abortions & live births, indicates a predominance of 13:14 translocations. Our finding of this chromosomal P0296. cryptic chromosome anomalies in 43 out of 220 subjects aberrations (3 .7%) in the infertile males are in good agreement with with mcA/mR: suggested diagnostic strategy. literature of 3 .3% . We found three men out of eighty infertile males with M. Zollino1, R. Lecce1, D. Orteschi1, G. Marangi1, M. Murdolo1, M. E. Grimaldi1, 13q14q fusion . These translocations can be transmitted via ICSI/ART . J. Fryns2, J. R. Vermeesch2, G. Neri1; Although robertsonian translocation is likely to be found in chromosomes 1Istituto di Genetica Medica Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 2U.Z. investigation of infertile men, their role in oligospermia is not clear . Gasthuisberg Department of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. The testicular histology of the men carrying such a rearrangement Mental retardation is a common disorder, affecting 2-3% of the general shows a variable picture, ranging from severe impairment to population and several studies point at chromosome imbalance as a near normality . Individuals carrying each of the ten possible major cause . nonhomologous robertsonian translocations of the five humans We analysed a total of 220 mentally retarded subjects, selected on the acrocentric chromosomes (13,14,15,21,& 22) have been reported, basis of a “chromosomal” phenotype . At the time of referral, all of them but two combinations, rob(13;14) & rob (14;21) are observed at a had already had a reportedly normal chromosome analysis . frequency than the rest (73% & 10)%,respectively, of all robertsonian Genetic analyses included 1) repeated conventional chromosome chromosomes . Thus there is a need to screen infertile men prior to analysis, 2) telomere analysis by FISH, 3) locus-specific FISH, on ART as it may result in birth of offspring with same anomaly and or may clinical indication, 4) quantitative molecular cytogenetics in all positive result in poor blasotocyst development and implantation failure . cases, 5) microarray-CGH (preliminary analysis of 5 patients) . Chromosome anomalies were detected in 43 subjects (20%) . The yield of the repeated conventional chromosome analysis alone was 7 % (16 anomalies) . Interestingly, 4 of them were interstitial, and telomere Cytogenetics 16 P0299. A girl with partial trisomy 12p due to an unbalanced The G-band karyotype of the patient was 46,XX,del(17q25-qter) . The 5p:12p translocation parents’ G-band karyotypes were normal . E. Yılmaz, U. Yanar, &. Demir, B. Tüysüz; We wanted to mention that this deletion was not found on the search İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genet- performed on Medline or Orphanet . ics, İstanbul, Turkey. We report a 7 months old girl with partial deletion of short arm of P0302. A detailed breakpoint analysis of 2 patients with rare chromosome 5 and partial trisomy of short arm of chromosome 12 . Her 20q13.33 subtelomere deletion to define genotype/phenotype mother is a carrier of a balanced translocation between chromosomes correlations 5 and 12 [46,XX,t(5;12)(p15.3;p12.2]. She had hypertelorism, flat M. Béri-Dexheimer1, M. Grégoire1, B. Leheup2, A. Toutain3, S. Briault3, K. Bro- face with midfacial hypoplasia, anteverted nostrils, thick alae nasi, chet1, P. Jonveaux1; low set ears with helical hypoplasia of right ear, carp-shaped mouth 1Laboratoire de génétique, CHU Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 2Ser- with everted lower lip, downwards slanting corners of mouth and short vice médecine infantile 3, CHU Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 3Service neck . She also had hypotonisity, developmental delay, hypothyroidism, de génétique, Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France. mild mitral regurgitation, seizures, retinal abnormalities and atopic Pure constitutional deletions restricted to the very distal band of the dermatitis. Clinical findings of 5 p deletion syndrome are not present, long arm of chromosome 20, i .e ., 20q13 .33 have never been reported while her facial appearance and other findings are similar to trisomy so far . The 20q deletion syndrome is usually caused by a chromosomal 12p syndrome. Although; hypotonisity, seizure history and facial deletion encompassing the region of 20q13.12 →20q13.32 and has dysmorphic findings are previously described in trisomy 12p syndrome, features of growth retardation, severe malformations of the limbs, short hypothyroidism, retinal abnormalities and atopic dermatitis have not neck, flat occiput, and mild facial dysmorphism All laboratories from been described until today . the “Association des Cytogénéticiens de Langue Française” (http:// www .eaclf .org) offering an appropriate cytogenetic service in France P0300. molecular characterization of terminal 14q32 deletions in were surveyed over a 10-year period (1994-2004) for cases where a two children submicroscopic telomeric abnormality had been ascertained . A. Schneider1, B. Benzacken2, A. Guichet3, A. Verloes4, D. Bonneau3, N. Collot5, We report on the clinical phenotype of 2 patients with a de novo, F. Dastot-le Moal5, M. Goossens5, L. Taine6, D. Gaillard1, M. Doco-Fenzy1; isolated, subtelomeric 20q13 .33 deletion . The deletion is associated in 1Service de Génétique, CHU-Reims, France, 2Service d’Histologie – Embryo- one child with global developmental delay, craniofacial dysmorphism, logie – Cytogénétique,, Hôpital Jean Verdier , Bondy, France, 3Service de Gé- and in the other one with more severe mental retardation and autistic nétique, CHU-Angers, France, 4Service de Génétique Clinique, AP-HP, Hôpital behaviour . Detailed breakpoint analysis in these 2 cases using FISH Robert Debré Paris, France, 5Laboratoire de Biochimie Génétique, AP-HP, with bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) probes, microsatellite and U-654, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 6Service de Génétique, CHU- single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping has identified a Bordeaux, France. deleted region of approximately 1 .33Mb, with a 324kb difference The occurrence of deletions on chromosome 14 is rare . Indeed twenty between the two deletions . At least 30 genes are deleted . The precise eight cases have been reported with distal 14q deletion diagnosed region of loss has been defined allowing us to identify genes that may by conventional cytogenetics. Among them, five reports dealt with contribute to the clinical phenotype through hemizygosity . Assignment terminal 14q deletion (14q32 to 14qter) . Four of them have been of clinical features to specific breakpoints and refinement of predictive mapped by FISH or microsatellite polymorphism analysis . We report value may be useful in counselling . here the results of the physical FISH mapping in two patients with terminal 14q32-qter deletions . Both patients were mentally retarded P0303. A rare case of mosaic 22q11 microdeletion syndrome and 14q deletion was diagnosed by systematic postnatal screening presenting with atypical features of subtelomeric regions . They presented with thick nuchal skinfold D. Pehlivan, B. Karaman, K. Yilmaz, H. Kayserili, S. Basaran; during pregnancy and had had a normal prenatal karyotype . They had Medical Genetics Department , Istanbul Medical Faculty , Istanbul University, also a short corpus callosum. The first patient was born at terme, BW: Istanbul, Turkey. 3450 g, BL: 49.5 cm, OFC 35cm, he had feeding difficulties, gastro- The acronym CATCH 22 (Cardiac Abnormality/abnormal facies, T cell esophageal reflux, with dysmorphic features: narrow face, bulging deficit due to thymic hypoplasia, Cleft palate, Hypocalcaemia resulting forehead, narrow, upslanted palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, nose from 22q11 deletions) has been used to describe the phenotypes with upturned tip, long philtrum, narrow mouth, microretrognathia, and of microdeletions within the band 22q11 . The spectrum of clinical prominent earlobes . Inguinal herniae were surgically corrected . The features varies from severe problems leading to early death in the second patient was delivered at terme . BW: 3 .170kg, BL: 50cm and neonatal period to subtle dysmorphic findings. Central nervous system OFC: 33 .5cm . He had an hypospadias, a bilateral blepharophimosis malformations have been reported only in three percent of patients and ptosis, an ostium secundum interauricular communication and with this microdeletion . facial dysmorphic features: hypertelorism, long philtrum, tented upper We here report a mosaic case of 22q11 .2 deletion who has atypical lip, long palpebral fissures, and forehead hirsutism. At age 6 months, dysmorphic features and Dandy-Walker malformation which are all he showed infantile spasms . Cortical atrophy and hypoplasia of corpus unusual for CATCH 22 . Chromosome analysis at 550-600 band level callosum were then evidenced on MRI . The size of the deletions were revealed a normal karyogram . Due to congenital heart disease and established to be 5.5 Mbp long for the first case, and 4,6Mbp long for frequent lower respiratory system infections, FISH analysis using the second case . D22S75 probe was performed and the deletion for this region was Grants: AOL 2001-2003 CHU-Reims, Promotion : CHU-Bordeaux found in fifty percent of the peripheral blood cells. France The clinical, cytogenetical, and molecular cytogenetical findings of the index case and the parents will be presented . P0301. A new case of terminal 17q deletion M. Volosciuc, E. Braha, M. Gramescu, V. Gorduza; P0304. chromosomal anomalies found in patients referred with University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. suspected 22q11.2 deletion: revisiting the clinical spectrum of We present the case of patient, SI, 2 years and 9 months old . She is the DiGeorge syndrome second child of unrelated, healthy and young parents . The pregnancy L. Fernández1, P. D. Lapunzina1, I. López Pajares1, M. Palomares1, I. Mar- has a normal evolution . tínez1, B. Fernández1, J. Quero2, L. García-Guereta3, A. García-Alix2, M. Bur- She was born at term by normal delivery . gueros3, A. Delicado1; At the clinical examination we can observe a plurimalformative syndrome 1Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, with dysmorphic face, microcephaly, abnormal dermatoglyphics, 2Department of Neonatology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 3De- hypotony and severe mental retardation . partment of Pediatric Cardiology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. The complementary exam reveals supplementary spleen, spastic Screening for 22q11 .2 deletions is not an easy task because of the wide tetraparesis, squint and normal brain (on the CT) . The complexity variability of the phenotype; many clinical features could overlap with of the plurimalformative syndrome guide us to make the karyotype . those of other known syndromes and reported loci . Patients referred Cytogenetics 166 to rule out a 22q11.2 deletion are usually tested with a locus-specific rare event, and this study addresses the possible significance of the FISH probe, with a detection rate of around 10% depending on the der(16)t(1;16)(q21,q12) abnormality in this case. selection criteria . Patients testing negative for FISH at 22q11 .2 may have other chromosomal aberrations in routine cytogenetic analysis . P0307. Amniotic fluid alpha feto protein levels in Down We have tested 533 patients suspected of having a 22q11 .2 deletion . syndrome pregnancies and other chromosomal abnormalities Fifty-seven of them (10 .7%) were positive for 22q11 .2 deletion, A. Rajaee, A. Kariminejad, M. Mirzazadeh, H. Jafarieh, V. Hadavi, M. Shek- whereas 21 (3 .9%) showed other chromosomal abnormalities involving arabi, M. H. Kariminejad; deletions and duplications, marker chromosomes, apparently balanced Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic and unbalanced translocations and sex chromosome aneuploidies . of Iran. This study, together with other previous reports, highlights the Amniotic fluid AFP levels were studied in a total in 1678 pregnancies. importance of initial conventional cytogenetic analysis in all referred Eighty seven percent of the 23 Down syndrome pregnancies have patients, and provides useful data to optimize diagnosis and laboratory amniotic fluid AFP levels at or below the median and 26% are below protocols according to the most frequent chromosomal findings. 0 .5 MOM compared with 62% and 8 .2% percent of controls . Only thirteen percent of the Down syndrome pregnancies have amniotic P0305. sex reversal and pseudo-hermaphroditism: the fluid AFP levels above the median. importance of gonadal mosaicism in females bearing a Y The mean MOM for Down syndrome cases was 0 .75 . There was no chromosome. significant difference of MOMs of Down syndrome cases at different M. Beaulieu Bergeron1,2, P. Brochu3, E. Lemyre2,4, N. Lemieux1,2; gestational ages. Seventy five percent of the Down syndrome cases 1Pathologie et biologie cellulaire, Université de Montréal, Montréal, PQ, Ca- had amniotic fluid AFP levels below the median at gestational age of nada, 2Centre de recherche, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine, less than 16 weeks, while 86% had amniotic fluid AFP levels below the Montréal, PQ, Canada, 3Pathologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte- median at gestational age of 16 weeks and above . Justine, Montréal, PQ, Canada, 4Pédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire No such association was seen for other chromosomal abnormality Sainte-Justine, Montréal, PQ, Canada. including trisomy 18, 45X, marker chromosomes, balanced autosomal Sex reversal and pseudo-hermaphroditism are rare phenomenons translocations , and unbalanced chromosomal abnormality . occurring in 1/20 000 individuals . Among the patients, many are phenotypic females with an intact or rearranged Y chromosome . P0308. mosaic 45,X/46,X, idic (Yq)/46,X,+mar(Y)/ Known genetic causes of these conditions include mutations of SRY, 47,X,idic(Y),+mar(Y) in a newborn with ambiguous genitalia - A duplications of DAX and WNT4, deletions of DMRT, WT1, SOX9, or case report and review SF-1, or predominance of a 45,X cell line . We present here 10 cases D. S. Krishna Murthy, M. Susan, M. Naveed; of females with a Y chromosome : six isodicentric Y chromosomes, Canadian Specialist Hospital, Dubai, United Arab Emirates. one ring Y chromosome, two XY females, and one XY individual Ambiguous genitalia in a newborn is strongly suggestive of an intersex with pseudo-hermaphroditism. Blood lymphocytes, skin fibroblasts disorder, and proper investigations should be planned immediately after and gonadal tissues were investigated by standard and/or molecular birth . In some cases the presence of a palpable gonad in the scrotum cytogenetics . The seven patients with a structurally abnormal Y may induce to assign the male sex, whereas the anatomy of internal chromosome were found to have a predominant 45,X cell line in and external genitalia could be extremely complex . 45, X/46, X, idic(Yq) blood and/or gonads, explaining their female phenotype . The patient mosaicism is associated with a variety of phenotypic manifestations, with pseudo-hermaphroditism, who had a predominant 45,X cell line including Ullrich-Turner syndrome (UTS), inter-sexuality, and complete in her blood lymphocytes, had a predominant 45,X cell line in some male . A newborn with ambiguous external genitalia, (Clitoromegaly, structures of her gonads, but a predominant 46,XY cell line in the Hypospadias, undescended testes) was investigated for assignment of remaining gonadal structures, therefore explaining her ambiguous gender . Chromosome analysis from peripheral blood culture showed, phenotype . The last two patients had an homogeneous 46,XY cell line mos 45,X/46,X,isodic(Y) chromosome with predominantly 45,X cell in blood, and 46,XY/45,X mosaicism with a predominant 46,XY cell line and instability of the Y chromosome . FISH analysis was carried out line in their gonads . Their phenotype is thus more probably explained using CEP, X-Y and WCP-Y confirming standard cytogenetics studies. by an infrastructural rearrangement of one of the genes implicated in However, CEP XY showed in many interphase nuclei, a single X and sexual differentiation . These results therefore exemplify the necessity Y centromere in majority of the cells . CEP Y signals varied from 0-3 of cytogenetically investigating several tissues, especially the gonads, confirming clonal mosaicism for Y chromosome and mono-centric and in order to explain the phenotype of these patients, and offer better di-centric iso-Yq or iso-Yp. These findings suggested that the coexisting cares and genetic counselling . Support : RMGA-FRSQ and Fondation 45, X cell line is more influential on the determination of the sex du CHU Sainte-Justine. phenotype in individuals with 45,X/ 46,X,idic(Yq) mosaicism . A careful evaluation of these patients is important at birth by a multispeciality P0306. An unusual case of simultaneous sLE and ALL in a nine team, for appropriate sex assignment and for the assessment of year old girl. the risk of neoplastic degeneration should be considered .Possible S. J. Chatters1, N. L. Austin1, M. Hamilton2, H. M. Kempski1; mechanisms of formation of abnormal Y chromosomes and karyotype- 1Paediatric Malignancy Cytogenetics Unit, London, United Kingdom, 2Great phenotype correlations are discussed . Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom. We present a case of a 9 year old girl, diagnosed with systemic P0309. Pregnancy outcome of 513 cases of Amniotic fluid lupus erythematosus (SLE) . A bone marrow specimen was taken for cultures further investigations which, on morphological examination, showed A. Kariminejad, H. Jafarieh, A. Rajaee, M. Mirza-Zadeh, M. Zanganeh, N. the presence of 10% lymphoblasts . Bone marrow immunophenotype Nabavi-Nia, F. Azimi, R. Karimi-Nejad, M. H. Karimi-Nejad; analysis identified a population of cells consistent with a CD34+, Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, CD79a, HLA-DR phenotype, accounting for 10% of the nucleated cells . Islamic Republic of Iran. Immunophenotype analysis also demonstrated a similar proportion of Pregnancy outcome of 513 amniotic fluid cultures referred to this cells with a DNA index of 1 .2 . Cytogenetic investigations on bone marrow center because of high risk pregnancy (high maternal age, abnormality cultures revealed an abnormal high-hyperdiploid karyotype with gains in sonography, fetal loss, history of offspring with psychomotor of chromosomes X, 4, 6 and 10, two additional copies of chromosome retardation, chromosomal abnormality in offspring… . .) was studied . 21 and an unbalanced der(16)t(1;16)(q21,q12) rearrangement in 4/50 Chromosomal study of this group resulted in 16 abnormal karyotypes, (8%) of metaphase cells analysed. A locus specific probe for AML1 and 5 balanced translocations, and 492 normal karyotypes . All 16 cases enumeration probes for chromosomes X, 4, 6 and 10 confirmed the with abnormal karyotypes, opted for therapeutic abortions . Two karyotype analysis . Loss of heterozygosity for CBFB was also detected pregnancies with neural tube defects and one with thalassemia major in 18/200 (9%) of interphase cells . A diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic were also therapeutically aborted . The remaining 494 cases with leukaemia (ALL) was made on the basis of the immunophenotype, normal karyotypes and balanced translocation resulted in 442 term live- cytogenetic and morphological findings. Concurrent ALL and SLE is a born healthy infants, 27 premature births, 14 IUFD and 11 abortions . Cytogenetics 16 The karyotype results were compatible with the pregnancy outcome these cases, treatment with DEB or MMC on fibroblasts can be induce in all cases. For normal amniotic fluid chromosome results, absence elevation of chromosomal breakage and by this method it’s possible to of gross abnormality and concordance of the baby’s gender with the detect specifically the somatic mosaicism. MMC and DEB proved to sex chromosome reported from the amniotic fluid was considered as a be sensitive methods for diagnosis of FA . This diagnosis can be made correct result . From the 11 aborted cases 6 was preceded by leakage unequivocally by combining both the clinical data and the cytogenetic and/or hemorrhage . In our study the abortion rate (2 .2 percent) is evaluation of chromosomal breakage . higher than the expected 1 percent . We believe it to be due to the high rate of genetic disease in our studied population . The high rate P0312. inherited deletion of chromosome 21q might reveal a of consanguinity in couples with abortion and IUFD (63 percent and recessive trait for cheilognathopalatoschisis and nystagmus in a 35 percent respectively) and history of one of the following causes three-year-old boy. for referral: fetal loss, offspring with mental and/or psychomotor J. Knijnenburg1, Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee2, K. B. M. Hansson2, H. Fiegler3, D. retardation, abnormality detected in sonography (45 percent and 43 Rigler3, N. P. Carter3, H. J. Tanke1, K. Szuhai1; percent) places this group in high risk category with causes for fetal 1Molecular Cell Biology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Clinical Genetics, loss other than chromosomal abnormality . LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinx- ton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. P0310. comparative analysis of aneuploidy frequency in the Developmental delay, congenital abnormalities and dysmorphic resting and stimulated cells from workers upon exposure by features are often related to genetic alterations . High-resolution harmful industrial factors techniques such as array comparative genomic hybridization (array- V. A. Timoshevsky, S. A. Nazarenko; CGH) are increasing success rates in the search for genetic alterations Institute of medical genetics, Russian academy of medical sciences, Tomsk, in patients . Russian Federation. Here we present a three-year-old boy with developmental delay, a Comparative analysis of aneuploidy frequency of the four autosomes bilateral cheilognathopalatoschisis, nystagmus and an occipital black (7, 11, 12, and 16) and sex chromosomes in the interphase nuclei of hair lock. Routine cytogenetic screening (GTG-banding) revealed uncultured and cultured lymphocytes (PHA-stimulated) from workers no alterations . With array comparative genomic hybridization (array- of nuclear-chemical industry and clinically healthy men was performed CGH), using BAC/PAC arrays with a resolution of approximately 1 Mb, by use of two-color fluorescent in situ hybridization . The total frequency we detected a deletion on chromosome 21, ranging from q22 .3 to qter . of numerical aberrations of all the six chromosomes was similar in The estimated size was found to be between 0 .5 to 2 .1 Mb . Further non-stimulated cells of both groups . At the same time the frequency analysis using a whole genome tiling path array revealed that the size of sex-chromosomes losses was higher in the test group . In cultured of the deletion is at minimum 0 .5 Mb and at maximum 0 .75 Mb . The cells numerical chromosomal aberrations were scored after at least exact karyotype was defined as 46,XY,del(21)(q22.3). No similarities one cell division in vitro . Total frequency of aneuploidy in the cultured were seen between the phenotype of our patient and other described cells of individuals undergone to influence of the complex of harmful cases with 21q deletion . The deletion was found to be inherited from industrial factors has increased on average by 52 % in comparison the phenotypically normal mother . with non-cultured ones (P=0 .01) . While in the control group a tendency Because of the inherited nature of the deletion, we suggest that the of frequency increasing was observed only (23 %, P=0 .25) . Thus, phenotype of the patient is caused by recessive inheritance and that influence of harmful industrial factors has caused more than double the father is an obligate carrier of a mutation in a gene in this region . increase of a difference between frequency of aneuploid cells in Sequencing of three candidate genes is in progress . cultured and non-cultured leukocytes in the test group in comparison with the control . We suggest that the expression of accumulated in P0313. Array-cGH in a series of 25 patients with mental vivo premutagenic damages of spindle apparatus takes place during retardation, dysmorphic features and congenital malformations cell division . These anomalies are manifested during cell division and revealed an interstitial 1p22.3-p31.1 deletion in a patient with result in numerical chromosomal aberrations . This circumstance must Goldenhar-like syndrome be taken into account as main principle for detection of the harmful P. Callier, C. Thauvin-Robinet, N. Marle, A. Mosca, J. Guy, L. Faivre, F. Mu- influences causing numerical chromosomal aberrations. gneret; Département de Génétique, Hopital le Bocage, CHU Dijon, France. P0311. Differentiation of Fanconi anemia from ‘idiopathic’ Genosensor Array 300 (Abbott) is a multiplex platform for array-based aplastic anemia by induced chromosomal breakage study using comparative genomic hybridisation that detects unbalanced genomic mmc and DEB aberrations including whole chromosome gains/losses, microdeletions, F. Talmoudi1, F. Mallouli2, S. Hdiji3, I. El Kamel1, R. Smiti1, H. Ben Abid4, M. duplications and unbalanced sub-telomeric rearrangements . We Elloumi3, T. Ben Othman5, A. Ben Abdeladhim2, A. Amouri1; analysed a series of 25 patients with unexplained mental retardation, 1Cytogenetics laboratory, Pasteur Institute,Tunis, Tunisia, 2CNGMO, Tunis, dysmorphic features, congenital abnormalities and normal high Tunisia, 3Service d’Hématologie, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Service d’Hématologie, Hôpital resolution karyotype and FISH telomeric studies. Array-CGH identified Aziza Othmana,Tunis, Tunisia, 5Unité de greffe, CNGMO,Tunis, Tunisia. one chromosomal aberration with an interstitial 1p31 .1 deletion . CGH Aplastic anemia (AA) is an inherited disorder in 20% of cases . analysis confirmed the interstitial 1p22.3-p31.1 deletion. The patient Idiopathic AA, in whitch no cause is apperent, accounts for 65% of all was a 20-year-old boy with short stature (1m65), facial asymmetry, cases of AA . hypodontia, short neck, down slanting palpebral fissures, long nose, Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with small mouth, severe scoliosis, moderate psychomotor delay and an extensive genetic and clinical heterogeneity . The lymphocytes of epibulbar dermoid . The phenotype was compatible with Goldenhar FA patients show increased sensitivity to alkylating agents such as syndrome although the presence of mental retardation, absence mitomycin C (MMC), generating increased chromosome breakage . Due of asymmetric ears and absence of deafness . Molecular bases of to the variability of malformations in FA patients and the hematologic Goldenhar syndrome remains unknown . Most cases are sporadic consequences of the disease, it turns out that fiablility of diagnosis is but rare familial cases are reported following an autosomal dominant important and until now, it has been based upon cytogenetic studies of inheritance . Interstitial deletions involving the 1p22 .3-p31 .1 region chromosomal instability . are rare, only five cases have been reported with variable phenotype This study was conducted to differentiate between FA and idiopathic including hypertonia, micrognathia, short neck, proximal implantation AA . We have investigated cytogenetically 26 patients referred for AA . of thumb, fifth finger clinodactyly, increased joint laxity and mental MMC with 2 different concentrations and DEB have been applied to retardation . This observation is of interest since it could be a clue in the lymphocytes of the patients and normal controls . In our laboratory, the search of the genes responsible for Goldenhar syndrome . This cytogenetic diagnosis of FA is based on the combined analyses study demonstrates the utility of the Array-CGH technology to detect of several criteria . According to these criteria, only 12 cases were interstitial deletions . classified as FA patients. Cases with sinificantly more breaks than in normal controls, but less than FA range, are considered ambiguous . In Cytogenetics 16 P0314. A familial duplication of Xp22.2 analysed with high P0316. Description of constitutional de novo balanced reciprocal resolution X chromosome specific array-MAPH (Multiplex translocation in patient with abnormal phenotype Amplifiable Probe Hybridization) methodology. L. Nazaryan, S. Midyan, G. Shakhsuvaryan; C. Sismani1, V. Anastasiadou1,2, S. Parkel3, L. Kousoulidou1, O. Zilina3, S. Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia. Bashiardes1, E. Spanou1,2, A. Kurg3, P. C. Patsalis1; Balanced reciprocal translocations are one of the common structural 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Arch. Ma- chromosomal abnormalities and could be either without any phenotypic karios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Department of Biotechnology, Institute of effects or with abnormal phenotype . In our registry of chromosomal Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia. rearrangements were ascertained 8 cases of balanced translocations . We report a family with syndromic X-linked mental retardation caused 5 of them were phenotypically normal individuals but had reproductive by a duplication of Xp22 .2 . This family has four mentally retarded difficulties including recurrent miscarriages and/or offspring with sons (three are deceased) and one unaffected carrier daughter . Both congenital abnormalities due to segregation of an unbalanced form parents are healthy and non-consanguineous. Clinical findings of the of the translocation . 3 carriers of reciprocal balanced translocations affected males include: hypotonia and developmental delay, scoliosis, associated with multiple congenital anomalies including mental cardiovascular problems and soft dysmorphic facial features . Speech retardation and facial dysmorphology . problem, emotional disturbances and mental retardation were present We examined an 18 years old boy with 46,XY,t(7;9)(q32;q22) in all but to varying degrees . Female carriers have normal phenotype karyotype which have numerous abnormalities . Nonconsanguineous and intelligence . Cytogenetic analysis of the mother showed an parents had normal karyotypes so the translocation was de novo and abnormal chromosome X with a possible duplication of Xp22 .2 which look like as balanced . He was born at term after uneventful pregnancy was passed to all her offspring . FISH using whole chromosome paint and delivery . The patient had square cranium with prominent tubers . confirmed the X origin of the duplication. Further characterization of X-ray examination shows nonclosure median suture . He is noted the abnormal chromosome X was performed by FISH using Kallman to have thick eyebrows, wide forehead, cerebral region exceed the (KAL) probe and several bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) face, flattened downward nose, asymmetric by size and shape eyes, covering the region Xp22.12-Xp22.3. Array-based multiplex amplifiable myopia 1.0, chronic conjunctivitis due to the barrier for tears outflow. probe hybridization (array-MAPH, Patsalis et al. EJMG 2005; He had calf teeth, some of them absent, diastema, hypertrophied and 48:241-9) using a full coverage (238Kb median spacing of probes) deformed gingiva . X-ray examination shows the absence of teeth’s chromosome X specific array, confirmed both the presence and the rudiments . His ears are massive deformed and lowest . He had short location of the duplication (Xp22 .2) and also revealed that the size neck, genu valgum limbs, bigtoe valgus deviation, II-IV drumstick toes, of the duplication is approximately 9 Mb . Based on FISH and array- brachydactyly . The patient had very low level of parathormone: 2 .0 MAPH analyses the location of the duplication is between 9 .78-18 .83 (against 8,3 - 68) . He had not mental retardation . This case requires Mb of chromosome X . Array-MAPH has been demonstrated to be a further investigation of breakpoints mapping for searching cryptic valuable tool to detect, characterize and confirm small chromosomal imbalances or disrupted genes . abnormalities . Furthermore, the clinical and molecular characterization of chromosome X small size deletions and duplications provides P0317. co-localization of the region of genomic instability at important information for accurate description of genetic syndromes, distal 9p in BRCA mutation carriers with the new fragile site genotype-phenotype correlation and genetic counselling . FRA()(p.) M. Sawinska, L. Savelyeva, E. Sagulenko, J. G. Schmitt, M. Schwab; P0315. investigation of sex chromosome abnormalities in Division of Tumor Genetics, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, patient‘s with azoospermia and oligospermia by standard Germany. cytogenetics techniques and interphase Fluorescence in situ Germ-line mutations in BRCA2 gene (13q12-13) lead to a truncated Hybridisation protein, confer a high risk of breast cancer . BRCA2 acts as a tumor J. Mohseni1, S. Mohaddes ardebili2, H. Farahmand-Azar1; suppressor gene and consistent with it, BRCA2 protein plays a 1Genetics Lab, Academic Center for Education, Culture and Research significant role in maintaining genomic stability by involvement in DNA (ACECR), East Azerbaijan province, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical repair and recombination. In pursuit of finding out whether mutation in Genetics Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Ta- the BRCA2 gene influences the genomic instability, the constitutional briz, Islamic Republic of Iran. karyotypes of BRCA2 heterozygous mutation carriers were analyzed . To investigate the prevalence of sex chromosome abnormalities among Previously, with the application of two-color FISH with YAC probes, we azoospermic and severe oligospermic men, a retrospective study was identified chromosomal rearrangements at 9p23-24 in three families carried out in 515 infertile men . with hereditary breast cancer . A common region of duplications, All patients were subjected to lymphocyte culture and analysis of G- inversions and amplifications was established for them (Savelyeva et banded chromosomes . A minimum of 20 cells were analysed for each al ., 2001) . case . The samples suspicious of containing more than one cell line Our further analysis of distal 9p region by multicolor FISH with different were subsequently studied by dual coloure interphase fluorescence in BAC clones allowed us to determine more precisely the map of situ hybridization (FISH) using probes specific for centromeric region rearrangements at the 9p region . of chromosomes X and Y. The red (specific for chromosome X) and In search of a cause of this instability, we propose that unknown fragile green (specific for chromosome Y) signals were enumerated on a site might be responsible for observed chromosomal aberrations . We minimum of 200 interphase cells . induced fragile sites in lymphoblastoid cell lines of BRCA2 mutation 68 patients showed an abnormal sex chromosome constitution using carriers by aphidicolin, which partially inhibits the DNA synthesis . This GTG-Banding . 54 pateints showed 47, XXY karyotype using both led to the identification and further detailed genomic localization of the methods . Fourteen samples were mosaic for X chromosome aneuploiy new aphidicolin-inducible fragile site, FRA(9)(p22.2). We show that by conventional cytogentic analysis . The subsequent interphase FISH FRA(9)(p22.2) breaks are limited to a 500 kb region . study on these samples showed: Two red and one green signals in The identification of FRA(9)(p22.2) rises the question whether this an average of 97% of hybridized cells in two samples, indicating for fragile site is commonly expressed in the human population or it is 47,XXY karyotype; one red and one green in 37% of cells with two specific for the BRCA2 mutation carriers . red and one green signals in 63% of cells in 9 samples, revealing the mosaic karyotype of 46,XY/47,XXY . The remaining 3 samples showed P0318. supernumerary marker chromosome detected in a fetus three types of cell lines: 21% of the cells 46,XY, 53% of the cells 47,XXY with a related pseudodicentric chromosome and in 26% of the cells48,XXXY (46,XY/47,XXY/48,XXXY mosaic) . S. Karymee1, F. Mahjoubi2, M. Khalegian1, S. Tootian1, M. Akbary3; The results indicate that the intephase FISH has the advantage of 1Medical Genetic Laboratory of Akbary, Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, detecting the mosaic form of aneuploidies . Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetic Laboratory of Akbary, Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran.AND Clinical Genetic Dept., National Institute of Genetic Engi- neering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Clinical genetic dept. Tarbiat Modaress University, Tehran, Iran AND Medical Genetic Cytogenetics 16 Laboratory of Akbary, Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of mGy) . In unexposed patients with leukemia the frequency of stable Iran. chromosome aberrations (excluding specific clones) did not depend Dicentric autosomes are considered as unstable constitutional on diagnosis and did not exceed control level . In all liquidators with chromosomes in humans . The presence of centromeres on the leukemia the frequency of nonclonal reciprocal translocations were same chromosome leads to a high risk of attachment of the same increased significantly in comparison with unexposed patients that in 4 chromatid to the mitotic spindle from opposite poles and to the cases corresponded to doses 310 - 400 mGy and in one case - 2240 formation of anaphase bridge during cell division . Therefore, breakage mGy . It had been established that highest cytogenetic effect had been of the dicentric can occur . We describe a fetus in which a minute caused by previous radiation therapy that had been revealed by FISH supernumerary marker chromosome (SMC) was detected in addition analysis . to a larger pseudodicentric chromosome . The case was a 12-week fetus with mosaicism for a normal and two abnormal cell lines: one P0321. clarifying the role of cell cycle control proteins chk1 and had a dic (12;15)(q11.2;q11.2) chromosome the other a minute SMC. AtR using cytogenetics and molecualr cytogenetics. Deletion of centromeric material was proposed as one mechanism of S. D. Scott; centromere inactivation in dicentric chromosomes . This SMC may be Sheffield Children’s NHS Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom. the result of a deletion event leading to inactivation one centromere of ATR and CHK1 are proteins involved in cell cycle control . Their a dicentric chromosome to generate a pseudodicentric chromosome . purported action, when there is slow-down or complete discontinuation Therefore, these case suggest possible mechanisms for the origin of of DNA synthesis at replicatively complicated sites in the genome, is minute SMC . thought to halt synthesis elsewhere in the genome . Examples of such sites are repeat sequences that allow DNA to twist into unconventional P0319. cytogenetic effects in the groups of high priority in non-B DNA (non-helical) structures making synthesis difficult. These different terms following the chernobyl accident repeats are particularly prevalent at both common and rare fragile M. A. Pilinskaya, S. S. Dibskiy, O. V. Shemetun, Y. B. Dibskaya, O. A. Talan, sites (FS); and are thought to be the antecedents of FS expression L. R. Pedan; seen in classical Cytogenetics . ATR/CHK1 induced cessation of DNA Research Centre of Radiation Medicine, Kijiv, Ukraine. synthesis allows replication machinery to reattach at these loci and Selective cytogenetic monitoring among selected groups of high proceed beyond them . exposure (about 2000 persons) from the Chernobyl nuclear plant A mechanism to investigate the role of CHK1 and ATR could therefore accident in Ukraine . Studies have been conducte since January be the potential increase in breakage at fragile site areas after knocking 1987 till on patients recovered from acute radiation sickness, clean- down the function of these proteins . We abrogated the normal in vivo up workers mainly from the 1986-1987 years, Chernobyl power plant function of ATR and CHK1 in HELA cells using siRNA, and investigated personnel (including Sarcophagus workers), self-settlers from 30-km the effect on metaphase phenotype and fragile site stability . We have distance zone, children and adults from regions of obligatory and designed a dual-colour fusion probe spanning FRA16D and have found voluntary evacuation . The frequency of chromosome aberrations in by cytogenetics and FISH that the increase in FS expression upon human peripheral blood lymphocytes were determined with the help knock-down of the ATR/CHK1 pathway was marked . It corroborated of conventional cytogenetics, G-banding analysis and FISH-WCP evidence for both non-B DNA formation leading to replicative difficulty method . The data received during 10-15 years following the accident and for the putative functions of ATR and CHK1 . demonstrated a dose-depended increase of chromosome aberrations level in exposed groups and confirmed the growth of intensity of P0322. Frequency and spectrum chromosomal aberrations in somatic chromosome mutagenesis induced by Chernobyl accident somatic cells at the population living in a zone of influence of factors . It have been shown that even so called “low” radiation doses semipalatinsk test site under prolonged exposure induce specific chromosome damages, G. Abildinova; which can serve not only as biomarkers of radiation exposure, but as Republican research center of mother and child health protection, Almaty, Ka- indicators for selection of risk groups as regards to realize of harmful zakhstan. health effects with genetic component . With the purpose of study cytogenetical effects in somatic cells at the In order to study late effects (in 15-20 years) following the accident, population irradiated as a result of ground and atmospheric nuclear tests new approaches for the evaluation of genetic consequences of in 1949-1962 years . The research consist from complex cytogenetical human radiation exposure have been introduced . These include the analysis (G - method) 174 cultures lymphocytes in peripheral blood study of so called “disgenomic effects” (especially delayed, hidden, (66068 metaphases), including the analysis of frequency and various transmissible chromosome instability and “bystander effect” both in types chromosomal aberrations . exposed persons and in their progeny . The greatest frequency of cells with aberrations is found out in a zone The results of selective cytogenetic monitoring suggest that the extreme radiation risk (ERR) -3,2±0,4 %, that in 2 times is higher, than Chernobyl accident is an important ecogenetic factor for the population in zone minimal radiation risk (MRR) - 1,8±0,2 % and in 3 times - in of Ukraine . control area - 1,04±0,16 % . In spectrum aberrations prevail acentric fragments, the frequency has P0320. Results of FisH-WcP analysis in liquidators of chernobyl made them in zone ERR 1,3±0,2, HRR - 0,94±0,13, that authentically accident including some oncohematology patients differs from this parameter at the persons of zone MRR- (0,43±0,06) M. A. Pilinskaya, S. S. Dibskiy, I. S. Dyagil, T. F. Liubarets; and control groups (0,2±0,06) on 100 cells accordingly . Research Centre of Radiation Medicine, Kijiv, Ukraine. The frequency dicentrics at the persons from ERR and HRR has made The important part of the Ukrainian-American Scientific Project “Study 0,18±0,03, rings - 0,27±0,06, that is higher, than at the persons from of leukemia and other hematological diseases among clean-up MRR and control group - 0,02±0,01 on 100 cells, accordingly . workers in Ukraine following the Chernobyl accident” is a retrospective The stable markers (deletions, translocations) radiating influence have individual dosimetry in Chernobyl liquidators with the help of several made among surveyed from zone: ERR - 0,74±0,16, HRR -0,84±0,12, methods including FISH-WCP technique . This method had been MRR- 0,63±0,13, in the control - 0,37±0,08 on 100 metaphases, used successfully for the reconstruction and verification of individual accordingly . radiation doses in 231 clean-up workers including 5 liquidators Thus, the complex analysis of frequency and types chromosomal with leukemia . The matched control group consisted of unexposed aberrations has shown, that in somatic cells of the inhabitants of the persons - 20 healthy males and 11 patients with oncohematological surveyed areas the tendency to accumulation of unstable and stable disorders. In civil liquidators cases with overestimated official doses radiating markers is observed, that testifies to possible continuation of predominated (mean group doses - 600 and 450 mGy, accordingly) . radiating influence on chromosomal the device. In military liquidators cases with underestimation of official doses in comparison with FISH doses prevailed (mean group doses - 340 and 430 mGy, accordingly) . According to results of FISH dosimetry both groups had been considered as “high-dose” with radiation exposure that exceeded permissible for radiation accident (250 Cytogenetics 10 P0323. cytogenetic studies on the workers occupationally The Chromosomal analysis revealed that 10 samples analyzed exposed to cement dust as Klienfelter syndrome (47,XXY, n=5, and mosaic 47,XXY/46,XY, R. Jayakumar, K. Sasikala, K. Praveen Rajneesh, G. Prema; n=4, 47,XXYY n=1), the other were 46,XY, +mar (n=1), 46XY, dup; Unit of Human Genetics, Department of Zoology, Bharathiar University, Coim- (4)(q31.1;q32)(n=2) , 46XY,Yqh+(n=2), 46,XY,del(13)(p)(n=1). batore, India. The biochemical PR test by β hCG revealed one pregnancy in group 1 Cement factories emit plenty of dust which is potential health hazard . It (1/16, 6 .25%), and 17 pregnancy in group 2 (17/105, 16 .2%), p<0 .01 . is composed of CaO, SiO, KO, SO, AlO, MgO and FeO in varying conclusion: It could conclude that the chromosomal abnormalities in 2 2 3 2 3 2 3 proportions . In addition, various brands of cement contain metals men can decrease the rate of pregnancy or later cause spontaneous such as Mn, Cr, Cd, Ar, Pb, Zn, Cu and Ba . Prolonged exposure to abortion . cement dust causes specific mortality and tumor morbidity with the risk factor for right sided colon cancer and laryngeal cancer . In the P0326. Premature ovarian failure resulting from a chromosome human health arena, the consequences of exposure to genotoxic Xq28 deletion substances have been researched intensively for decades . Structural M. de Blois1, D. Sanlaville1, S. Chevallier1, M. Waill1, O. Raoul1, P. Touraine2, C. changes to the integrity of DNA caused by DNA-damaging agents are Turleau1, M. Vekemans1, S. Romana1; useful end point for assessing exposure to hazardous environmental 1Service de Cytogenetique, Hopital Necker, Paris, France, 2Service d’Endocri- pollutants on human health . Keeping this in mind, the present study nologie et Medecine de la Reproduction, Hopital Necker, Paris, France. is designed to analyze the effect of cement dust on the genetic Premature ovarian failure (POF) is defined as a secondary materials of human, who are occupationally exposed to cement dust hypergonadotropic amenorrhea occurring before 40 years old . It has in the cement industries . By using peripheral blood leucocyte culture, been associated with environmental, autoimmune or genetic causes of experimentals and controls, it is observed minor chromosomal such as chromosome X deletions and translocations . Cytogenetic aberrations such as chromatid gaps, breaks and fragments . From the and molecular characterization of these abnormalities have led to the data obtained, it is inferred that the age of the persons and the period delineation of two Xq POF critical regions spanning respectively the of exposure of stone dust are directly proportional to the number of Xq26-q28 (POF1) and the Xq13 .3-q22 (POF2) chromosomal regions . chromosomal aberrations . The data are discussed pertaining to the In particular a recent study comparing chromosome X deletions recent literature available . observed in four women with POF allowed to define a 4Mb Xq28 POF1 critical region . Here we described the smallest chromosomal P0324. comparison of early and mid-trimester Amniocentesis in Xq28 deletion published to date. It confirms that POF1 critical region is 1459 Amniotic fluid cultures located within the Xq28 band . H. Jafarieh, A. Kariminejad, A. Rajaee, M. Mirza-Zadeh, N. Nabavi-Nia, F. The patient is a 35 years old woman . She presents with POF and Azimi, M. Zanganeh, R. Kariminejad, M. H. Kariminejad; Hashimoto thyroiditis . No ovarian antibodies were detected . Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetic Center, Tehran, Islamic Repub- A chromosome Xq28 deletion resulting from an unbalanced lic of Iran. (X;Y)(q28;q11.2) translocation was detected on her karyotype. Cytogenetic results of 655 amniotic fluid obtained at 12-14 gestational Molecular detected a 7,5Mb chromosome Xq28 band deletion . The week (early amniocentesis) and 804 fluids at 15-18 gestational mechanism involved in the aetiology of POF in our patient will be week (mid-trimester amniocentesis) were compared . The rate of discussed: chromosomal abnormalities for early amniocentesis was 3 .2 percent and for mid-trimester amniocentesis was 5 .3 percent and for level III P0327. Various outcomes of cytogenetic evaluation in patients mosaicism (EA = 0 percent, MA=0 .24 percent) . Level I and II mosaicism with hypogonadism occurred more frequently in mid-trimester amniocentesis . We did not V. Belengeanu1, S. Farcaş1, C. Popa1, A. Belengeanu2, K. Rozsnyai1, D. have maternal cell contamination in either group . The number of Stoicănescu1; repeat amniocentesis was 0 .6 percent in the EA group compared with 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 0 .1 percent in the MA group . Procedure-related abortion, leakage and Timişoara, Romania, 2Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of hemorrhage after amniocentesis was not significantly different between Medicine and Pharmacy, Timişoara, Romania. these two groups 1 .7 percent, 1 .2 percent for EA and 0 .9 percent 1 We report on diverse chromosomal findings in a series of patients percent respectively . Follow-up of 508 of the above cases revealed referred to cytogenetic evaluation for hypogonadism or suspicion of sex compatibility with karyotype results in 100% of both groups . No sex chromosome abnormality during a period of 2 years . gross abnormality such as equino-varus was detected in the live-born Patient 1 is a 7-year-old boy with abnormal external genitalia: small infants reported with normal karyotype in both groups . penis, bilateral cryptorchidism and absent scrotums; testes were not palpable in the inguinal channels, nor found on abdominal NMR . P0325. correlation between chromosomal abnormalities and He was moderately mentally retarded and had bilateral absence of Fertilization rate in infertile couples patella . Chromosome analysis detected dup(1)(p22 .1p31 .1) . Patient S. M. Kalantar1, S. M. Seyed Hassani1, m. h. Sheikhha1, h. Fazli1, h. Khodai2, 2 is a 5-year-old boy with macrocephaly, mild facial dysmorphism, m. Solimani1; mild psychomotor delay, obesity, small penis, undescended testes and 1Research and Clinical Center for Infertility of Yazd, yazd, Islamic Republic of hypoplastis scrotums . Conventional cytogenetic analysis evidenced Iran, 2Mother Hospital, yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. additional material on 12p . Patient 3, aged 25 was referred with introduction: The aim of this study was to determine the relationship suspicion of Klinefelter syndrome with tall, asthenic body habitus, between rate of chromosomal abnormalities in infertile men abnormal varicosity of legs, mild learning disorder and recurrent depressive and out come of pregnancy rate (OPR) . episodes . A mosaic karyotype: 46,XY/47,XXY/48,XXYY was found . materials & methods: It was retrospectively reviewed the genetic Patient 4, aged 48 had gynecomastia, history of cryptorchidism, low abnormalities detected clinically in 150 infertile men who were referred testosterone, elevated FSH levels and a mosaic karyotype: 46,XY/ for their infertility problem . Semen analysis (SA) was performed on 46,XX/47,XXY . Patient 5 was also suspected of Klinefelter syndrome, semen samples . Metaphase spreads were made using standard with eunuchoid body habitus, gynecomastia, sparse body hair and high- cytogenetic techniques . Cultures were harvested and Karyotyping was pitched voice. Chromosome analysis revealed normal male karyotype; performed on G-banded chromosome preparations . The chromosomal hormonal investigations showed low testosterone, FSH and LH levels; status was analyzed using CytoVision Ultra ver .4 .0 from Applied tentative diagnosis of Kallmann syndrome was made . Patient 6 aged Imaging . The results of OPR were blindly reviewed . According to the 22, diagnosed with β-thalassemia minor in childhood, symptomatic, normal and abnormal chromosomal analysis, they divided into two having required blood transfusions, presented with short stature, groups as 1 and 2 . The OPR was compared between group using X2 absent secondary sexual characteristics and primary amenorrhea . and the level of <0.05 was considered significantly different. Hormonal evaluation revealead hypogonadotropic hypogonadism . Results: SA was abnormal in all infertile men, mean +SD of sperm Surprisingly, 45,X karyotype was found . count was 14x106/ml+2 .1 and all were recommended to have ICSI The cases presented above highlight the importance of cytogenetic treatment . examination in the evaluation of all patients with hypogonadism . Of those patients 16 men had abnormal chromosome analysis . Cytogenetics 11 P0328. individual sensitivity of chromosomes of human P0331. cytogenetic analyses of families with fertility problems lymphocytes to radiation: stage-effect dependence. R. Mikelsaar1, J. Lissitsina1, M. Punab2; E. Diomina, N. Ryabchenko; 1Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Esto- R.E. Kavetsky Institute of Experimental Pathology, Oncology and Radiobiology, nia, 2Center of Andrology, Tartu University Clinicum, Tartu, Estonia. Kyiv, Ukraine. Infertility affects approximately 15% of couples . It can be the result Prediction of human individual radiosensitivity on chromosomal of chromosomal abnormalities in 2 .8-13 .1% of infertile couples: in level is relevant for revealing individuals with increased radiation females 1.1-9.8% and in males 2.1-14.3%. To assess the significance and cancer risks as a correlation exists between genome instability of chromosome anomalies in infertility, we have studied cytogenetically and the probability of cancer development . This study presents the 90 infertile males (32 azoospermic and 58 oligozoospermic men), 25 investigation of in vitro irradiation and individual cytogenetic effects infertile couples and 30 control fertile men . Chromosome analyses from in peripheral blood lymphocytes of 20 healthy donors on different peripheral blood lymphocytes cultures using GTG, C-banding and FISH stages of the cell cycle . With this purpose analysis of chromosomal methods were performed . Major chromosomal abnormalities showed aberrations in cultured lymphocytes after 1,5 Gy γ-irradiation in G S 10-fold increase (13 .4%) in 90 infertile males (15 .6% in azoospermics 1, and G stages of cell cycle was carried out . and 12 .1% in oligozoospermics), compared to the control group . There 2 It was shown that chromosomal radiosensitivity varies qualitatively were sex chromosome abnormalities (47,XXY) in 5(5 .6%) patients: in and quantitatively during the cell cycle . Transition of chromosome type 4(12 .5%) men with azoospermia and in one man with oligozoospermia . aberrations to chromatid was marked during the progress of cells to Autosomal structural rearrangements were found in 7(7 .8%) patients, mitosis. Exchange aberrations prevailed in the first half of the cycle from which 6(10 .3%) men had oligozoospermia . These results whereas a change in damage spectrum to deletions in the second half of confirmed the high incidence of chromosome abnormalities in the cycle was observed. The lowest chromosomal sensitivity to γ-radiation infertile population . Both the numerical sex chromosome abnormalities was observed in the S- stage and the highest in late G-stage and G- and structural autosomal anomalies may cause the variable degree of 1 2 stage . Thus the highest variations in individual chromosomal sensitivity spermatogenic disturbances . to radiation were detected in G-stage (from 14 to 124 aberrations/100 We have studied 25 infertile couples, in which men had azoospermia 2 lymphocytes) in comparison with G-stage (from 56 to 83) . High CV or severe oligozoospermia (sperm count <5M/ml) . Of these couples, 1 value 24% was observed for G - radiosensitivity parameters . Analysis chromosome anomalies were found in 6(24%): in 4 males (47,XXY) and 2 of the character of their distribution made it possible to reveal 12% in 3 females . In one couple, both male and female had chromosomal individuals from investigated group with increased chromosomal abnormality: 47,XXY/46,XY and 46,Xfra(X)(27 .3), respectively . radiosensitivity . The data obtained allow improving and recommending Therefore, we agree with authors, who suggest that chromosome G-assay for cytogenetic monitoring of critical groups of population analyses should be performed routinely in both male and female of 2 taking into account development of stochastic effects of Chernobyl every infertile couple . Supported by a grant from ESF number 5486 accident in Ukraine . and target grant TARMP0421 . P0329. Prenatal and Rapid Prenatal Diagnosis of trisomy 21 in P0332. chromosome 22q13.3 deletion syndrome with a de novo cultured and Uncultured Amniotic Fluid apparently balanced t(17;22)(q11;q13.3) L. P. L. Neagu1, M. D. Buia1, P. G. Visan2; M. Stefanova1, A. Linev1, K. Kutsche2; 1Medlife Memorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 2Universty Of Bucharest, 1Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University Bucharest, Romania. Hospital Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. The aim of the present work was to examine the efficacy of using The terminal 22q13 .3 deletion syndrome is characterized by severe both conventional cultures from amniotic fluid and chorionic villi and expressive language delay, mild mental retardation, and minor FISH tests for rapid prenatal diagnosis of common chromosome dysmorphisms . A number of different chromosomal aberrations have aneuploidies . During one year were investigated 103 pregnant women been found to be associated with this phenotype . Here we report a by amniocentesis and 27 pregnant women by chorionic villi samples . 3-years-old girl with an apparently balanced de novo translocation, A total of 10 pregnant women with Down syndrome fetuses over of t(17;22)(q11;q13.3). Clinically she demonstrates severe speech delay, ten months period were included in this study . Karyotypes obtained mild mental retardation, and various dysmorphic features, such as from amniotic fluid or chorionic villi, and FISH diagnosis was possible high prominent forehead, epicanthic folds, strabismus, blue sclera, in all cases . A mosaic for trisomy 21 proved, by comparison with the depressed nasal bridge, thin upper lip, prominent philtrum, malocclusion extensive analysis of long term cultures to be positive . Otherwise the of teeth, large ears, narrow upper chest, narrow and sloping shoulders, techniques were reliable, accurate and relatively straightforward to skin dimples, clinodactyly of toes, and hyperflexibility of joints. She is perform . Results of long term cultures were obtained in 12 - 14 days, considerably hypotonic since birth . We performed FISH analysis using while results by FISH could be available within 48 hours . In most cases numerous BAC clones to delineate both breakpoint regions of the an additional long term full analysis was also done, so to exclude rare 17;22 translocation and identified a 5-Mb terminal deletion comprising aneuploidies and structural rearrangements . This methodology is seen the chromosomal region 22q13 .31-qter . These data suggest that this as a useful addition to the prenatal diagnosis repertoire . aberration is most likely associated with the majority of the phenotypic abnormalities seen in the patient, thereby further contributing to P0330. A supernumerary marker chromosome detected in a child the clinical and genetic delineation of the terminal 22q13 .3 deletion with dysmorphic face and developmental delay syndrome . F. Mortezapour1, F. Mahjoubi2, S. Tootian1, M. Zamanian1, M. Rahnama1, F. Razazian1, F. Taleb Manuchehri1, S. Solymani1, F. Naserikenari1; P0333. the analysis of 4p chromosomal abnormalities using 1Iranian blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, micro-array cGH; genotype-phenotype correlation. Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian blood Transfusion Organization Research N. M. C. Maas, C. Melotte, G. Van Buggenhout, J. Fryns, J. R. Vermeesch; Center, Tehran, Iran. AND1National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Bio- Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. technology, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. The Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome is usually caused by terminal A small C-band marker chromosome was detected on culture of blood deletions of the short arm of chromosome 4 and is phenotypically lymphocytes of a child with flat nasal bridge, short palpebral fissures, defined by growth and mental retardation, seizures, and craniofacial micrognathia, high forehead, low-set ears. The fingers toes were abnormal. manifestations like the typical Greek warrior helmet . Large variation The child has developmental delay but with no sign of mental retardation . is observed in phenotypic expression of these features with mental She suffers from sever anemia . The karyotype was done on peripheral retardation ranging from severe to mild . white blood cells . Parental chromosomal analysis was done . Both parents To generate a phenotypic map of the region, we localized the had normal karyotype . Since the child was suffered form sever anemia, breakpoints of the 4pter aberrations using a chromosome 4 specific Fanconi test was done using standard protocol . However, the Fanconi test micro-array, containing 1903 BAC/PAC clones from CHORI . was negative . The origin of the marker chromosome is to be subsequently In total, DNA from a group of 25 WHS patients was analysed, 13 with a identified via chromosome microdissection and reverse-FISH. cytogenetic visible and 12 with a submicroscopic deletion . Six patients Cytogenetics 1 carried an interstitial deletion, and three patients carried a deletion that more information about chromosome or part of a chromosome . In did not include the Wolf-Hirschhorn critical region . chromosome microsurgery the chromosome of interest or chromosomal The correlation of the phenotypes of these patients with their genotype region of interest is dissected using a fine glass microneedle under an enabled us to refine the phenotypic map of the region. The deletion of inverted microscope . The chromosomal DNA isolated by chromosome the WHS candidate gene1 (WHSC1) is hypothesized to be the cause microsurgery is then amplified employing one of the molecular methods of the WHS facial characteristics . In contrast to this hypothesis, we such as PCR. The PCR amplified chromosomal DNA can be used identified one patient with the WHSC1 deletion, but without the facial in different applications for example fluorescent in situ hybridization characteristics, and one patient with the typical facies without the (FISH) . WHSC1 deletion . In the latter, a 500 kb upstream deletion was detected . In FISH, fluorescently labelled nucleic acid molecules are deposited Possibly, a positional effect influences the WHSC1 expression. in chromatin at the site of specific DNA sequences. By this method In conclusion, we show that small terminal 4p deletions encompass a unique sequence, chromosomal subregions, or entire genomes can be spectrum of phenotypes, of which the WHS is the most common . specifically highlighted in metaphase or interphase cells. The technique is simple in principle. Specific DNA or RNA sequences are first labelled P0334. Phenotypic abnormalities found a case with chromosome with nonradioactive molecules, for example biotin . The probe and the deletion at 11q23.2: a case report target chromosomes or nucleic acids are denatured . Complementary F. Razazian1, F. Mahjoubi2, S. Totiyan1, M. Rahnama1, F. MortezaPourbarfi1, F. sequences in the probe and target are then allowed to anneal . After Taleb Manuchehri1, S. Solymani1, F. Naserikenari1, M. Zamanian1; washing and incubation in fluorescently labelled affinity reagents, a 1Iranian blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Re- discrete fluorescent signal is visible at the site of probe hybridisation public of Iran, 2Iranian blood Transfusion Organization Research Center. AND FISH has several applications both in research and diagnosis areas . National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, Teh- In this presentation, briefly, the way to make FISH probes by ran, Islamic Republic of Iran. employing chromosome microsurgery will be explained and some of An Iranian pediatric patient was referred to our clinic with some of the applications of FISH probes will be mentioned . the main phenotypic characteristics features of Turner syndrome . In addition, she had other morphological abnormalities such as prominent P0337. Genetic counselling of the families of epicanthal folds, broad flat nasal bridge with short, upturned nose, t(1;11)(p36.22;q12.2) and t(12;14)(q15;q13) carriers with short philtrum with carp-shaped mouth, and nonprogressive moderate breakpoint mapping at the BAc clone resolution psychomotor developmental delay . She has marked hypotonia . A. T. Midro1, R. Lesniewicz1, M. Gajęcka2, B. Panasiuk1, G. Schwanitz3, L. She had poor vision, hearing and speech problems . In addition, Shaffer4; she was mentally retarded . Chromosome analysis was performed 1Medical University Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland, 2Health Research and Educa- on her metaphases . All cells examined showed deletion in the long tion Center, Washington State University, WA, United States, 3Institut of Human arm of chromosome 11 . The karyotype of the child was reported as: Genetics, Bonn University, Germany, 4Health Research and Education Center, 46,XX,del(11)(q23 .2) . The both parents had normal chromosome Spokane, WA, United States. compositions . The phenotype of this case and other reported cases . Empirical data of 60 pregnancies from 10 families of t(1;11) may help to define a syndrome caused by the deletion of this region. )(p36.22;q12.2) of one pedigree and empirical data of 11 pregnancies from 3 families of t(12;14)(q15;q13) of a second pedigree were P0335. High resolution cytogenetic assessment in 30 mestizos collected . Probability rates for the occurrence of an unfavorable with systemic Lupus Erythematosus pregnancy outcome were calculated according to the method of A. B. Falcón de Vargas; Stengel-Rutkowski and Stene . Chromosome investigations were done HCC-Institute of Inmunology, Caracas, Venezuela. by combining at least two different banding techniques, fluorescence SLE have been reported in association with Klinefelter´s syndrome in situ hybridization (FISH) with probes corresponding to 1p36 and and karyotypes 47 XXX . We reported chromosome changes in SLE 11q12 and M-FISH . . Breakpoint locations and the 1p36 and 11q12 patients in an early publication in 1982 . We decided to performed translocation fragment sizes were estimated . The chromosome 1 Cytogenetic (CG) studies in 30 untreated venezuelan mestizos SLE- breakpoint is located between BAC clones AL096841 and AP001098 ACR criteria patients (26 females and 4 males, aged 16 to 60 years), (1p36 .22) whereas the chromosome 11 breakpoint is located at to establish the prevalence of chromosome changes . In conventional AP003721 (11q12 .2) . Any other rearrangements and changes of and high resolution chromosomes, 1,500 metaphases and early chromosome 1 were not found by CGH method . M-FISH investigation prometaphases were studied in these patients and in 30 healthy controls of family 2 confirmed the breakpoint position obtained by banding matched by age and sex . Numerical and structural changes were seen techniques . Based on indirect analysis of pedigree one it was found, in SLE group only (p: <0 .001) . Chromosome instability in the form of that probability rate for the birth of a child with unbalanced karyotype breakages in all the patients in more than 60% of the metaphases, ( monosomy 1p36.22→pter together with trisomy 11q12.2→qter after being more affected Cr 1p, 6p, 12p and 14q; clonal changes in 104 (7 2:2 disjunction and adjacent 1 segregation) is <0 .9% (0/50) (low %) of the metaphases (-2, -12, + X (XXX, XXY) and -9,-10,-11,-13,-19,- risk), for a stillbirth 2 .0±1 .9 % (1/50) and for miscarriages 34±6 .7% 20 clonal changes . Polyploidies and endorreduplications in 60% and (17/50) For pedigree two there was found no risk for an unbalanced 46.6% respectively; acrocentric segregation type GG and DG in 50% progeny at birth, and low risk for miscarriages of about 1% (1/11) after of the patients and genetic polymorphism in centromeric region type ascertainment correction . The data were offered for genetic counselling 1qh+, 9qh+ and 16qh+ in 20% of the patients . of the families (BMBF project POL 03/025 and DPJ 05/005 KBN Polish- We conclude that chromosome changes could be frequently German project no 5253, KBN Polish Project No 106 078) seen in patients with SLE similar to those described in hereditary photosensitivity disorders and other conditions characterized by DNA P0338. Analyses of complex Philadelphia chromosome damage repair defects and genetic instability such as in cancer and translocations in chronic myeloid leukemia by conventional and secondary to viruses and mutagenic agents . Prospective studies moecular cytogenetics are required to define genetic polimorphism and also the genetic or A. Amouri1, I. El Kamel1, F. Talmoudi1, N. Ben Romdhane2, S. Ladab3, T. Ben mutagenic basis of these changes in SLE patients . Othman3; 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Laboratoire d’hematologie, Hôpital La P0336. Application of chromosome microsurgery in producing rabta, Tunis, Tunisia, 3CNGMO, Tunis, Tunisia. FisH probes Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia is a clonal haematological malignancy, F. Mahjoubi; characterised by overproduction of granulocytes and accounts for National centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic approximately one quarter of all leukaemia cases . In the majority of Republic of Iran. patients there is replacement of normal bone marrow by cells with an One of the advanced technologies in molecular cytogenetics abnormal chromosome - the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome due to the is chromosome microsurgery . With the help of this technology, translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 . molecular genetics and cytogenetics come together in order to get Routine diagnostic methods for detection of the bcr-abl translocation Cytogenetics 1 include conventional cytogenetics, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chromosome 3 . Father’s karyotype revealed a translocation between chain reaction (RT-PCR), and more recently, fluorescence in situ 3 chromosomes (3,8 and18) with an additional pericentric inversion in hybridization (FISH) analysis . Routine cytogenetics is sensitive at the the translocated chromosome 3 : 46,XY,inv(3)(p12q22)t(3;8;18)(p22; initial diagnosis and during treatment . p22;p11.2). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed Bone marrow samples from 50 patients with chronic myeloid leukemia using chromosome paints and subtelomeric probes to confirm the (CML) were investigated using cytogenetic methods . Fluorescent in involved chromosomes and to localize the breakpoints . The foetus situ hybridization (FISH) with BCR-ABL probe was used to confirm inherited the der(18) chromosome leading to a partial trisomy 8p and and/or complete the findings. a partial monosomy 18p . He also inherited the paternal chromosome Five variant Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) translocations were 3 with a pericentric inversion but without the translocation . Indeed, a identified. Three-way Ph translocations were found in four patients. crossing-over occurred outside the inverted segment leading to an FISH analyses allowed more accurate characterization of these entire chromosome 3 . The higher risk of producing an abnormal child complex translocations with subtle abnormalities and the identification and the different modes of chromosomes segregation will be discuss . of cryptic rearrangements . P0342. molecular cytogenetic detection of de novo cryptic P0339. Dihydropyrimidine Dehydrogenase gene (DPYD) unbalanced chromosomal rearrangements by array cGH and encompasses the common fragile site, FRA1E. subtelomere FisH in two patients with congenital anomalies and F. Hormozian, J. G. Schmitt, E. Sagulenko, L. Savelyeva, M. Schwab; dysmorphic features Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum( DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. S. K. Murthy1, S. Mani1, S. Naveed1, A. I. Al Khayat2, M. T. Al Ali1; Common fragile sites represent components of normal chromosome 1Molecular Cytogenetic Unit, Genetics Department, Al Wasl Hospital, Dubai, structure that are particularly prone to breakage under replication United Arab Emirates, 2Pediatrics Department, Al Wasl Hospital, Dubai, United stress . Although the cytogenetic location of 88 common fragile sites Arab Emirates. are listed in the Human Genome Database, the DNA at only fourteen Array based comparative genomic hybridization (a-CGH) and of them has been defined and characterized at the molecular level. subtelomeric fluorescence in situ hybridization (tel-FISH) has We identified the precise genomic position of the common fragile site proven to be very useful tools in the detection of aneusomy due to FRA1E, mapped to the chromosomal band 1p21 .2, and characterize cryptic chromosomal rearrangements . We report here de novo the genetic complexity of the fragile DNA sequence . FRA1E extends for submicroscopic rearrangements detected by these methods in two 370 kb of genomic region within the dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase patients with congenital malformations and dysmorphic features but (DPYD) gene, which genomically spans approximately 840 kb . The 185 normal karyotypes. The first patient with dysmorphic features showed kb region of highest fragility, which is account for 86% of all observed an unbalanced chromosomal rearrangement due to t(7;9)(q36.1;p23) breaks at FRA1E, encompasses the central part of DPYD including leading to a deletion of 7q tel and duplication of 9p ter, detected by array- exons 13 to 16 . DPYD, encodes dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase CGH and later validated by subtelomere FISH . The second patient (DPD), which is the first and rate-limiting enzyme in a three-step with congenital anomalies showed an unbalanced rearrangement metabolic pathway, involved in degradation of the pyrimidine bases due to t(2;20)(q 37.1;20p13) leading to a deletion 2q37-qter and uracil and thymine. Deficiency in human DPD is associated with duplication of 20ptel, which was confirmed by subtelomere FISH. autosomal recessive disease, thymine-uraciluria, and with severe 5- To our knowledge, deletion and duplication seen in these two cases fluorouracil toxicity in cancer patients. are not reported earlier . About 14 cases with deletion of 7q36 .1-qter and duplication of other telomeric regions excluding 9p; and 9 cases P0340. complex chromosomal rearrangements in ten patients of deletion 2q37 .1-qter and duplication of other telomeric regions with reproductive problem excluding 20p, are reported earlier . Clinical presentation of the two S. Park1, J. Park1, M. Lee1, B. Lee1, Y. Kim1, J. Kim1, H. Ryu1,2; patients are discussed . Array-CGH and subtelomeric FISH techniques 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Cheil General Hospital, Seoul, Republic of enable us to establish a better genotype-phenotype correlation and Korea, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sungkyunkwan University, provide with valuable information that are extremely helpful in genetic School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. counseling and medical care of the patients and their families . Complex chromosomal rearrangements(CCR) are rare aberrations in phenotypically normal persons . The rearrangements involving P0343. connexin31 can induce neuronal differentiation via a three or more chromosomes are usually associated with reproductive non-gap junctional mechanism impairments as infertility or repeated spontaneous abortions . We found H. Unsworth, T. Aasen, D. P. Kelsell; 10 cases with balanced CCRs in 2,907 patients with reproductive Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United King- problem through cytogenetic investigations . The most common dom. CCRs with simple unidirectional rearrangements with one break Connexins (Cx) are the major protein subunits of gap junctions, per chromosome were found in 4 males and a female . The simplest aqueous pores in the plasma membrane, which allow passage of CCRs with two or three simultaneous independent simple reciprocal molecular messengers, short peptides and ions between cells to translocations were 3 females . A female carried a CCR with a simple provide a mechanism of synchronised cellular response . Around 20 reciprocal translocation and a three-way exchange simultaneously . human Cx isoforms have been identified and Cx mutations in the 31 The complicated CCR involving more breakpoints than chromosomes kDa isoform, Cx31, underlie a myriad of human diseases, including observed in a female referred for repeated spontaneous abortions . dominant or recessive skin disease, dominant or recessive deafness or dominant neuropathy with deafness . We previously demonstrated P0341. Prenatal diagnosis of an unusual transmission of a that Cx31 was expressed in differentiating keratinocytes in skin . Here complex chromosome rearrangement we show that endogenous Cx31 is also expressed in human neuronal N. Morichon-Delvallez, D. Sanlaville, S. Fontaine, S. Chevallier, M. Prieur, M. cell lines, particularly in differentiated neurones . Exogenous Cx31 Vekemans, V. Malan; expression induced neuronal differentiation in the human neuronal cell Service Cytogénétique, CH Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. line SH-SY5Y, but not keratinocyte differentiation in primary human The occurrence of complex chromosome rearrangements is extremely keratinocytes . Neither the autosomal dominant neuropathy with rare . The majority of balanced complex translocations (involving three or hearing loss mutation (66delD)Cx31 nor the (R42P)Cx31 skin disease more chromosomes) have been reported in women ascertained through associated mutation are able to traffic to the plasma membrane and miscarriages or the birth of an abnormal child . Men are ascertained form functional gap junction channels . Remarkably, the (R42P)Cx31 because of primary infertility . Here we report on a foetus with an mutant can nevertheless induce neuronal differentiation to a level equal unusual transmission of a complex chromosome rearrangement . A 28- to wild-type Cx31, whereas differentiation is reduced after (66delD)Cx31 years-old woman was referred for chromosome analysis on chorionic expression . As well as indicating a potential disease mechanism for the villi because of an increased nuchal translucency detected using neuropathy with hearing loss Cx31 mutation, this work demonstrates a foetal ultrasound examination at 12 weeks’ gestation . The karyotype tissue-specific function of Cx31 and provides, for the first time, evidence showed a derivative chromosome 18 and a pericentric inversion of that Cx proteins are essential to non-junctional aspects of cell biology .Cytogenetics 1 P0344. cytogenetic study of Fanconi Anemia in iranian patients: Some of the chromosomal changes(aberrations) which seem effective 10 years experience in men infertility include: S. Tootian.S1, F. Mahjoubi2, M. Zamanian1, M. Rahnama1, F. Mortezaporbarfi1, 1 . Balanced chromosomal translocation S. Tootian1, F. Taleb Manuchehri1, S. Solymani1, F. Naserikenari1; 2 . Chromosome inversion 1Iranian blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, 3 . Marker chromosome Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian blood Transfusion Organization Research 4 . Sex chromosome abnormality Center, Tehran, Iran.AND Clinical Genetic Dept. National Institute of Genetic Our investigation provides the circumstantial and direct evidences Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. which confirm the importance of the sex chromosome in reproductive Background: Fanconi′s Anemia (FA) is the most common genetic disorders . We have analyzed 823 blood samples from infertile men form of aplastic anemia which is an autosomal recessive disorder . which 617 of them were oligospermic and azoospermic . Constitutional The features seen in FA are growth retardation, skin hypo- chromosome aberrations were diagnosed in 274 of these patients . We hyper pigmentation, combined radial ray and thumb deformities, have observed 26 .4% chromosomal abnormality in azoospermia men, hypogenitalism, microcephaly, renal malformation and microphtalmia . that is compatible with the data from literature . Leukemia, carcinoma or liver tumor is the most frequent malignancies The following abnormal chromosome complement were found: seen in the course of the disease . 46,XX;47XXY;47,XYY;48,XXXY;45,X[10]/46,XY[134];46,XY[4]/ Aim: To investigate 400 suspected Fanconi′s anemia patients referred 47,XXY[82]; to the Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization (IBTO) to confirm 46,XX[11]/47,XXY[36];46,XY[6]/47,XYY[38];46,XY[10]/46,XX[26]/ diagnosis . 47,XXY[61]; Methods: MMC was used to study induced chromosomal breakage in 46,X,del(Y)(q );46,X,inv(Y)(p ;q ) . 11 . 23 11 . 2 11 . 22 all those 350 patients . Peripheral blood was cultured in the presence of We have found some patients with complex structural and aneupoloidy phytohemagglutinin . For each patient two cultures were set up . abnormalities: Results: In total sixty- one were cytogenetically diagnosed as Fanconi × 46,XX,inv(9)(p q )/47,XXY,inv(9)(p q )[4] 11; 13 11; 13 anemia (~%19 .2) . Most patients had high, spontaneous and induced × 47,XXY[93]/48,XXY+mar[4]/48,XXXY[2] chromosomal breakages . No relationship was found between the × 47,XXY,inv(9)(p q ) 11; 13 clinical severity of the disease, age of the onset and the anemic state . × 47,XXY,t(1;17)(p q ) 36.1; 21 In our study the percentages of female affected was slightly higher × 46,X,del(Y)(q )[98]/45,X[6] 11 . 2 than male (19 .7% verses %17 .7) which is different from what have × 47,XXY,inv(9)(p q )/t(10;22)(q q ) 11; 13 26.3; 13 .1 been reported by other researchers . We found in 3% patients mosaic × 46,X,idic(Y)(p q )[27]/45,X[36]/46,XY[2] 11.32 ; 11 .32 situations for FA . They had 2 populations of peripheral T cells: one We believe that many infertilities especially severe oligospermic with the increased chromosomal breakage typical of FA and one with and azoospermic cases raises the need for a cytogenetic analysis wild-type cytogenetics . The wild-type clone may result from somatic besides molecular techniques to reveal the existence of any genetic reversion of a mutated FA allele .In summary, although the initial abnormalities diagnosis of FA is made by the characteristic clinical features but the definitive diagnosis can be achieved by cytogenetic investigation. P0347. cytogenetic analysis in 2,907 patients with reproductive problem P0345. 12 years experience of cytogenetic investigation in J. Park1, S. Park1, M. Lee1, B. Lee1, J. Kim1, Y. Kim1, H. Ryu1,2; iranian Leukaemic Patients 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Cheil General Hospital, Seoul, Republic of M. Khaleghian1, F. Mahjoubi2, G. Togeh3, A. Okhovatian4, M. Keyhani3, M. Korea, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sungkyunkwan University, Akbari5; School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Cytogenetic investigations were performed on 2,907 patients with Iran, 2Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran.AND Clinical Genetic reproductive problem as primary infertility or recurrent spontaneous Dept, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, abortions . The overall frequency of major chromosomal abnormalities Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Dept of Hematology, Imam Hospital, Tehran, was 12 .4% . The frequency of chromosomal abnormalities was seen Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dept of Hematology, Sarry , Iran, Teh- to be higher in males(14 .4%) than in females(9 .7%) . The frequency of ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran. chromosomal abnormalities in the primary infertility group(22 .4%) is AND Department of Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modaress University, considerably higher than that found in the recurrent spontaneous abortion Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. group(7 .3%) . The frequencies of chromosome abnormalities between We analyzed bone marrow and peripheral blood samples of more males(6 .5%) and females(8 .2%) in the recurrent spontaneous abortion than 900 Iranian Patients referred from Major hematology-oncology group were not significantly different(p>0.05). However the rates of centers at Tehran and provincial capitals . They were either suspected chromosome abnormalities between males(24 .3%) and females(16 .1%) of leukemia at presentation or being monitored for their response to in primary infertility group were significantly different(p<0.05). Sex medication . Bone marrow or/and blood cells were cultured, harvested chromosome abnormalities were detected in 9 .9% of the males and and G-banded according to the standard protocols . Chromosome in 2 .2% of the females . Reciprocal translocations exhibited the highest analysis was performed following ISCN guidelines . The patients were frequency of autosomal chromosome aberrations . Robertsonian divided into six major groupings as far as the leukemia subtypes were translocations and inversions were followed . Supernumerary maker concerned: CML, AML, ALL, MIDS, Lymphoma and others . They were chromosomes were found in three cases . Structural imbalanced more male patients than female (1 .32: 1 ratio) . In terms of sample type aberrations of autosomal chromosomes were detected in four cases . most cases had bone marrow aspiration whereas peripheral blood was High frequency of chromosome abnormalities found in patients with utilized only in fraction of cases . The common typical chromosomal reproductive problem suggested that a chromosome analysis and abnormalities as well as rare and complex forms were observed . The genetic counseling should be performed on infertility couples before overall chromosomal abnormality rate obtained was around 50% . The the application of an assisted reproduction technique . breakdown figures for different categories were roughly as follows: 80% in CML, 40% in AML, 25% in ALL, 30% in MDS and 50% in other types . P0348. interstitial deletion of 13q in a boy with microcephaly, Compared to published data, the observed chromosomal abnormality psychomotor retardation and mild dysmorphic features rate in the present study is considered average . K. B. M. Hansson1, W. G. Leeuwenburgh-Pronk2, A. van Haeringen1, I. Snoeck3, K. Szuhai4, J. Knijnenburg4, J. M. de Pater1; P0346. cytogenetic Analysis of infertile irainian men 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The S. F. Soleimani, F. Mahjobi; Netherlands, 2Dept.of Pediatrics, HAGA Hospital, Juliana Children’s Hospital, Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization Research center(IBTO), Tehran, Islamic the Hague, The Netherlands, 3Dept.of Neurology, HAGA Hospital, Juliana Chil- Republic of Iran. dren’s Hospital, the Hague, The Netherlands, 4Dept. of Molecular Cell Biology, Male infertility factor accounts for about half the cases of couple Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. infertility . Partial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 13 are associated Cytogenetics 1 with a widely variable phenotype. The most common findings are cytogenetic analysis facilitates detection of rare and new subtelomeric growth retardation, craniofacial dysmorphisms, digital and limb rearrangements as well as a better understanding of their role in the abnormalities, cardiac and brain defects, and mental retardation . The development of children . various manifestations depend on the size and location of the deletion, with a critical region for severe malformations being proposed in 13q32 P0351. strategies for detection of chromosome abnormalities in (Brown et al, 1993) . children with developmental delay. We report on a fifteen month old boy who was referred for karyotyping J. B. Ravnan1, J. F. Stefanik2, G. Avery1, J. T. Mascarello1; because of microcephaly, growth and psychomotor retardation, and 1Genzyme Genetics, Santa Fe, NM, United States, 2University of Connecticut, mild facial dysmorphic features . Conventional chromosome analysis Storrs, CT, United States. (GTG-banding) revealed an interstitial deletion in the long arm of Clinical geneticists are faced with an array of choices for genetic testing chromosome 13 . With array comparative genomic hybridization of children with developmental delay or mental retardation . Without (array-CGH) the size of the deletion was estimated to be between specific features to suggest a particular single gene disorder, most 14.9 and 16.1 Mb and the exact karyotype was defined as 46,XY,d geneticists will pursue chromosome analysis followed by subtelomere el(13)(q21 .32q31 .1) . The karyotypes of the parents were normal . An FISH testing and/or array-CGH testing if the chromosome results are accurate estimation of deletions is important for genotype - phenotype normal . Because subtelomere FISH and array-CGH testing can show correlations and this case contributes further data to phenotypes abnormal results for large chromosome rearrangements as well as for associated with rare monosomies . cytogenetically cryptic rearrangements, the question has been raised Brown S, Gersen S, Anyane-Yeboa K, Warburton D . Preliminary whether it might be effective to start with subtelomere FISH or array- definition of a “critical region “ of chromosome 13 in q32; report of 14 CGH studies and then pursue chromosome analysis if needed . In order cases with 13q deletions and review of the literature . Am J Med Genet . to find out what proportion of chromosome abnormalities detected by 1993, 45:52-59 traditional G-banding could be detected by these alternative tests, five years of blood chromosome data from the Genzyme Genetics Santa P0349. 7p15.3-21.2 deletion: a recognizable phenotype Fe laboratory were reviewed . Abnormal chromosome results were M. Schouten1, J. Engelen1, C. Gubbels1, A. van de Meeberg2, I. Kok- reviewed and classified as theoretically detectable or undetectable by Wijesinha3, S. Robben1, C. Schrander-Stumpel1, D. Marcus-Soekarman1; a subtelomere FISH panel or array-CGH . Discussion of these results 1Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Stichting Maere, will be presented and the efficacy of different testing strategies will be Eindhoven, The Netherlands, 3St. Anna Zorggroep, Geldrop, The Netherlands. outlined . Syndactyly may be an isolated trait with autosomal dominant inheritance . In combination with other congenital anomalies or mental P0352. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for Duchenne retardation, an underlying syndrome should be suspected . We report muscular dystrophy (DMD) by fluorescence in situ hybridization a 21-years old woman with a 7p deletion . She shows dysmorphic (FisH): a case report features, is mentally retarded and retarded in growth . Chromosomal H. Filkova1, I. Slamova1, P. Kuglik2, R. Gaillyova1, B. Ravcukova1; analysis showed a 46, XX,del(7)(p15 .2p21 .2) karyotype . The region 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, that is deleted contains the TWIST-gene, involved in Saethre Chotzen 2Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Brno, syndrome . Patients with identical breakpoints are rarely reported in Czech Republic. the literature . Reported patients with a similar phenotype had different Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal X-linked recessive breakpoints (Grebe, Am J Med Gen, 44:18-23 (1992) and Wang, J disorder with an incidence of approximately 1 in 3500 males, caused Med Genet, 30:610-612 (1993) ) . We reevaluated the breakpoints of by mutation in the DMD gene, located on Xp21 .2 . About 2/3 of DMD our patient . They appeared to be identical to the breakpoints of the cases are caused by gross DMD gene deletion mutations .Mutations in patients reported in literature (karyotype: 46,XX,del(7) (p15 .3p21 .2) the DMD gene result in a progressive muscle degeneration and early ) . We compare features of the face and hands with similar patients death . reported so far and follow-up data of our patient from baby to adult We reported a case of a family with a occurence of DMD . By means of are presented . PCR deletion of exon 45-50 was founded at one year son with clinical proved DMD . His healthy mother was detected as carrier for this P0350. subtelomeric rearrangements screening in 31 patients mutation . The preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) was used for with devepolmental delay including rare loss of 14q detection of deletion in dystrophine gene at next pregnancy . I. Petkovic, I. Barisic; PGD is a principally new approach for the prevention of genetic University Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. disorders, which allows the selection of unaffected IVF embryos Subtil subtelomeric chromosome rearrangements in children with for establishing pregnancies in couples . PGD can be applied for unexplained combination of developmental delay/mental retardation with monogenic disorders or chromozomal abnormalities using diagnostic dysmorphism and congenital anomalies have been subject of intensive protocols based on the PCR or fluorescence in situ hybridization. investigation in the past several years . The investigation perforemed so Seven embryos were biopsied and four of them were analyzed by far revealed wide variation in the frequency of subtelomeric aberrations FISH method by using exon 46-47 DNA probe . Of these, two affected rangin from 0-35%, with an average detection rate of about 5% . In male embryos , one affected female embryo and one unaffected male this study we performed the screening for subtelomeric chromosome embryo were detected, it was transferred . rearrangements with multicolour FISH assay in order to determine the Supported by grant MSM 0021622415 . frequency of aberrations in our group of children with developmental disabilities and contribute to our knowledge on the clinical significance P0353. DNA methylation patterns of metaphase chromosomes in of subtelomeric rearrangements . This investigation included 31 children human preimplantation embryos with developmental delay, dysmorphic features and / or congenital A. Pendina1, I. Fedorova1, O. Efimova2, T. Kuznetzova1, O. Leontieva3, N. anomalies, and normal karyotype . The analysis was performed using Bitchevaya3, V. Baranov1; slides obtained by short-term culture of peripheral blood lymphocytes 1Lab. for prenatal diagnosis, Ott’s Institute of Obst.& Gynecol. RAMS, and multi-colour FISH probe panel ToTelVysion (Vysis) . Aberrations St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Dep. of Genetics & Breeding, of subtelomers were detected in 2 (6 .4%) of patients including rare St.Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Interna- observation of loss of 14q subtelomeric region . Our patient is 5-years tional Center of Reproductive Medicine, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. old girl with microcephaly, dysmorphic features including high forehead DNA methylation is an epigenetic phenomenon which is known to have with bitemporal narrowing, epicantus, broad nasal bridge, hypoplastic a crucial role in mammalian genome reprogramming, especially during nares, dysplastic ears, high arched palate, small capred-shaped preimplantation development . DNA methylation patterns were studied mouth and receeding chin . She showed mild developmental delay, but in 27 IVF human triploid embryos at different stages of preimplantation detailed clinical and laboratory investigation did not show additional development (from zygote to blastocyst stage) . 5-methylcytosine- abnormalities . Results of this investigation point out the usefulness abundant DNA segments in metaphase chromosomes were identified of subtelomeric screening and present evidence that a continual with commercially available monoclonal antibodies . 1-3 metaphase Cytogenetics 16 plates from each embryo were analyzed . The pattern of chromosome follow up examinations . At the age of 5 months hemophagocytic methylation in early preimplantation embryos and up to blastocyst lymphohistiocytosis was suspected which is not characteristic for both stage differed essentially from this one in chromosomes of adult PHA- monosomies . Pneumonia, hepatomegalia, ascites, acute polyorganic stimulated lymphocytes (Pendina et al ., 2005) . Undermethylation, insufficiency developed, and the child dead at age 5.5 months. non-equal methylation status of homologous chromosomes, Multiple heart abnormalities including a secundum type ASD, AP, and hemimethylation and hypomethylation of one or two homologues a common isthmus of coronary arteries, were confirmed at autopsy, as from triad and sister chromatid exchanges were typical features of was thymus hypoplasia (w=4g) . methylation pattern in early embryos . Hemimethylated chromosomes Our patient demonstrated some features of del22q11 .2 syndrome appeared to increase in number during cell cleavages . They were (heart malformations, hypocalcemia, immune deficiency, early death) few at 2-cell stage and dominated at 8-cell stage . Hypomethylated and lack of signs of holoprosencephaly, which has been associated chromosomes, initially detected in zygote, were typical up to the with rare deletions of 21q22 .3 . blastocyst stage . Non-equal methylation status of homologous chromosomes in triads was observed in all metaphases studied . Our P0356. FisH and PcR Analysis in two Patients with Ambiguous results suggest that both active and passive demethylation take place Genitalia and Double Ring Y. and that maternal and paternal genomes have different reprogramming A. M. El-Gerzawy1, A. M. Mohamed1, N. A. Meguid1, I. M. Ramzy1, N. A. timing in development of human triploid embryo before implantation . Helmy1, H. F. Kayed1, S. El-Bioumy2; Further research of stage- and chromosome-specificity of methylation 1National Research Center., Giza, Egypt, 2El-Galaa Educational Hospital, Cairo, pattern in early human embryos is in progress . Egypt. Supported by CRDF and RFBR . We reported on two male cases who presented with ambiguous genitalia and double ring Y chromosome . P0354. High frequency of RB1 aberrant methylation in We aim to correlate genotype and phenotype of the patients . spontaneous abortions with chromosomal mosaicism We performed GTG banding, FISH using whole chromosome painting E. N. Tolmacheva, E. A. Sazhenova, A. A. Kashevarova, I. N. Lebedev; probe (WCP), specific locus identifier (LSI) for SRY gene, telomere Xp/ Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Yp probe and X and Y cocktail centromeric probe . Molecular analysis Aneuploidy screening in PGD programs as well as molecular using sequence tagged sites (STS), one located within the SRY gene, cytogenetic investigation of spontaneous abortions have revealed and 10 STS on Yq spread over intervals 5 and 6 . a high frequency of chromosomal mosaicism during early stages of Both cases had 3 cell lines, 45,X / 46,X,ring /47,X,+2rings . FISH embryo development . Molecular basis of chromosome non-disjunction analysis revealed that rings derived entirely from the Y chromosome in somatic embryo cells are poorly investigated . But one of the most ,different in size, some were dicentric, different in genetic materials provocative factors is the disturbance of the cell cycle checkpoints . as only one ring had the SRY gene, case 1 had deleted Yp telomere Recently the significance of promoter DNA methylation as epigenetic while case 2 had it intact . Molecular analysis confirmed the presence mechanism of the cell cycle genes silencing was shown . It is possible of SRY gene in both . Case.1 had absence of amplified fragment of that aberration of the embryo genome reprogramming can result in SY254, 255, 283, 158, and 160 suggesting the breakpoint was within epigenetic inactivation of the cell cycle checkpoints and chromosomal 6D region. Case.2 had absence of amplified fragment 160 which mosaicism . To test this hypothesis we have examined promoter suggested the breakpoint lies between 6D and 6F . Both cases had hypermethylation of the RB1 gene in the first-trimester spontaneous ambiguous genetalia , no dysmorphic features and no Turner stigmata . abortions with mosaic chromosomal aneuploidies . The mosaic state of Case .1 had short stature . chromosomal abnormality was confirmed by interphase FISH analysis Both had the same chromosomal anomalies but at the molecular level of non-cultured placental tissues with centromere-specific DNA probes. they had different break sites . Breakpoints demonstrated that both had Aberrant promoter methylation of the RB1 gene in the cytotrophoblast no risk of gonadoplastoma , case .1 is a candidate of azoospermia in and extraembryonic mesoderm was detected in 5 of 9 (55%) and in 7 the future, short stature in case 1 may be explained by deletion of the of 8 (88%) mosaic abortions, respectively . No cases of abnormal DNA stature gene near the subtelomeric region of Yp . methylation were found in placental tissues of 23 first-trimester induced abortions . Our preliminary results indicate the possible link between P0357. Experience of usage of different DNA-probes in clinical epigenetic regulation of the cell cycle checkpoints and genesis of cytogenetics chromosomal mosaicism during early stages of embryo development . N. V. Shilova, T. V. Zolotukhina; This study was supported by RFBR (grant 05-04-48129) . Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. P0355. Patient with double partial monosomies 21q22.3 and Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with different DNA-probes 22pter->q11.2: questions of karyotype-phenotype correlation has provided more ability to identify chromosome segments, to reveal O. M. Khurs, V. Koshkina, N. Rumyantseva, A. Polityko, I. Naumchik; cryptic abnormalities that are undetectable using standard banding Republican Medical Center “Mother and сhild”, Minsk, Belarus. techniques and to perform chromosomal enumeration . Chromosomal abnormalities involving double partial monosomies are In our study FISH was performed for diagnosis of structural very rare . We report on a mildly dysmorphic boy with congenital heart chromosome rearrangements, marker chromosomes, low-level malformation (ultrasonography) who was examined cytogenetically gonosomal mosaicism and more commonly aneuploidies in prenatal for del22q11.2. Proband (G1, complicated by pyelonephritis, colpitis; diagnosis . P1, at term, unremarkable) was born with BW=3050g; BL=50cm; FISH testing was done on metaphases using WCP8, WCP11,CEPX, OFC=34cm. Muscular hypotonia, decreased reflexes, strabismus, CEPY DNA- probes (Vysis) and on nuclei using biotinilated DXZ1 upslanting palpebral fissures, short nose, flat bridge, long philtrum, (Oncor), DYZ1 (Lau et al .) DNA-probes and AneuVysion kit (Vysis) micrognatia, heart murmur, cryptorchism were present at birth . under the manufacturer’s protocols . Usage of WCP11 DNA-probe High resolution GTG-banding analysis revealed an unbalanced allowed to determine derivate chromosome 15 undetectable by translocation with a breakpoint in 22q11 .2 containing the DiGeorge/ conventional cytogenetic method in translocation (11;15)(q24;26.3). In Velocardiofacial syndrome (DG/VCFS) critical region . Karyotype of the a case with previously detected translocation involving chromosome patient was 45,XY,der(21)t(21;22)(q22.3;q11.2),-22 de novo. 11, the breakpoints were altered . Use of the WCP8 DNA-probe allowed FISH using LSI 21 (q22 .13-q22 .2) and N25 LSI probes (Vysis) was to exclude a translocation in case with add (8)(p23) . Origin of marker done to characterize the derivative chromosome and to elucidate chromosomes was estimated - ish der(Y)(DYZ3+) the DG/VCFS deletion . The translocation breakpoints were distal to and ish r(X)(DXZ1+) . Among 33 patients with reproductive problems 21q22 .2 and distal to the D22S75 locus on chromosome 22 . Finally low-level gonosomal mosaicism in 36,5% was detected; in 51,5% this double partial monosomies 21q22 .3->qter and 22pter->q11 .2 were was excluded; and in 12% mosaicism was confirmed. In 46 (3,4%) shown . from 1362 cases of prenatal diagnosis after CVS, the AneuVysion kit Normal growth, microcephaly, motor development delay, retinopathy, was applied, because of bad quality or small numbers of metaphases . hypocalcemia, anemia, and immune deficiency were found by There were no false-negative or false-positive results . Usage of this Cytogenetics 1 DNA-probes does not replace conventional prenatal karyotyping . P0360. A report of a dysmorphic child with an apparently However it allows to rapidly exclude or to diagnose the more common balanced translocation aneuploidies (trisomies 13,18,21 and monosomy X) and thereby F. Taleb Manouchehri1, F. Mahjoubi2, M. Rahnama1, S. Tootian1, F. Morteza- to decrease levels of anxiety for pregnant women . FISH with high- pourbarfi1, S. Solymani1, M. Zamanian1, F. Naserikenari1, F. Razazian1; specificity DNA-probes increases the quality of cytogenetic diagnosis 1Iranian blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, and allows to base further recommendations for genetic counselling . Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, Iran. AND 1National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Bio- P0358. Atypical cases of Down syndrome in Armenian registry of technology, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. chromosomal abnormalities Here we describe phenotypic description of a male child referred to S. Midyan, L. Nazaryan; our centre . The patient presented with dysmorphic face, congenital Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia. respiratory problem defect and abnormalities in feet and hands . Among 540 children with birth defects were revealed 58 with Down Chromosomal analysis was done on preparation made from peripheral syndrome (DS) . It has been found 4 atypical cases of DS: 46,XY,der blood using standard protocol . G-banding revealed an apparently (14;21)(q10;q10),+21,mat, 46,XY,der(21;21)(q10;q10),+21,de novo (2 balanced reciprocal translocation between chromosome 1 and 16 . cases) . The latter case was accompanied with the balanced reciprocal The karyotype was ascertained as: [46,XY,t(1;16)(p11.2;p12)]. The translocation t(1;16)(p36;q13) without any additional phenotypical father had normal karyotype . The mother had an apparently same effect to supplement DS . balanced translocation . The abnormalities present in this child could The 4-th case was a 15 days old infant, who was delivered to a 40 years be caused by the possible deletion of some of the important genes old woman at 36 weeks of gestation . He was referred for cytogenetic located on regions involved in the breakpoints or it can be just a study because of the following features: microcephaly, brachycephaly, coincidence . backward-sloping forehead, prominent occiput and dropped eyelids, hypertelorism, epicantus, short and flat nasal bridge, downturned P0361. chromosome 8p23.1 euchromatic variant in a mentally lips, short neck with a low hairline, spread abdomen distension with retarded boy and his father hydropic anterior wall, low set umbilicus with uretro-umbilical fistula, J. Albuisson1, O. Raoul1, E. Delabesse2, M. Picq1, M. Rio3, M. Prieur1, C. Tur- ascites, inguinal and umbilical hernias . The infant had low motor leau1, M. Vekemans1; activity and died at age of 21 days . Pathological study revealed 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, the massive hemorrhages and oedema of the lung parenchyma, 2Inserm EMI 0210, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Service de numerous development defects of central nervous system, internal Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. hydrocephaly and congenital heart disease . Conventional cytogenetic Chromosome 8p23 .1 duplications are recurrent rearrangements analysis using GTG-banding revealed 48,XY,+21,+mar karyotype in all described in association with developmental delay and congenital heart the metaphases scored . The marker chromosome’s size corresponds defect resulting presumably from a gene dosage effect of the GATA4 to the 21, 22 and Y chromosomes . It has a centromere with two dark gene . Cytogenetically indistinguishable rearrangements transmitted bands in both p and q arms and looks like i(21) . FISH analysis was over several generations and without phenotypic consequences performed, using centromeric 13/21 and Y probes . No additional signal have been described. This makes the clinical significance of these was detected in more than 30 cells . This DS case with a rare cytogenetic duplications unclear, and may lead to hazardous interpretations abnormality as a full double aneuploidy of autosomes demonstrated especially during prenatal diagnosis . Recently the underlying molecular typical DS manifestation along with additional dysmorphic features . mechanism of these benign inherited forms of cytogenetically visible duplications have been elucidated . High copy number variants of P0359. second trimester screening for Down syndrome and at least two defensin antimicrobial gene clusters, embedded within trisomy 18 using biochemical markers present in serum samples several low-copy-repeat (LCR) clusters, are responsible for this of pregnant women in north - west of iran euchromatic variant. These LCR are either region specific or repeated S. Mohaddes Ardebili1, J. Mohseni2; throughout the genome . This complex genomic structure contributes 1Medical genetics unit, Tabriz univ. of medical sceinces, Tabriz, Islamic Re- to the highly recombinogenic potential of the 8p23 region surrounded public of Iran, 2Academic center for education culture and research (ACECR), by REPP and REPD 8p chromosome duplicons . Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. Here we present a 4-year old boy referred to us for hyperinsulinism, The main objective of the present study was to evaluate the efficacy of speech delay and overgrowth, and his phenotypically normal father, second trimester screening for Down syndrome and trisomy 18 in the both carrying a cytogenetically visible duplication of 8p23 .1 . FISH population of pregnant women in north - west of Iran . analysis using BAC clones did not show a duplication of the region The study involved 300 women who attended screening between comprised between REPP and REPD . Molecular analysis of the α- and 15th and 18th weeks of pregnancy . A blood sample were obtained to ß-defensin gene cluster polymorphisms will be presented . Advantages measure alpha feto protein (AFP), intact human chorionic gonadotropin of real-time quantitative PCR in association with FISH in elucidating (hCG) and unconjugated estriol 3 (UE3) . The combined risk (maternal the cytogenetic 8p23 .1 duplications will be discussed . This observation age, AFP, hCG and UE3) was calculated by a computerized risk figure should contribute to define a general strategy using cytogenetic and program using a fixed 5 percent false positive rate. The screen positive molecular tools for the exploration of this complex region . pregnancies were referred to prenatal diagnosis by standard and molecular cytogenetic methods . P0362. chromosome Breakage Findings in children with Bone Twenty one screen positive pregnancies for Down syndrome (7%) marrow Failure syndromes - single centre experience and 9 screen positive pregnancies for trisomy 18 (3%) were detcted . S. S. Cirkovic, M. Guc-Scekic, D. Vujic, D. Micic; The mean age in study population was 25 .11±5 .47, in screen positive Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic”, Belgrade, pregnancies for Down syndrome 30 .62±7 .88, in screen positive Serbia and Montenegro. prengnancies for Edward syndrome 30±4 .26 and in screen negative Fanconi anemia (FA) is described as an autosomal recessive disorder, pregnancies 24 .75±5 .45 . Prenatal diagnosis using interphase FISH characterized by the development of progressive pancytopenia, and standard cytogenetic techniques revealed Down syndrome in different congenital anomalies and increased predisposition to 3 screen positive pregnancies . Two screen positive pregnancies for malignancy . Nature of cause and therapy management are the main Down syndrome were terminated due to fetal death . Non of the screen terms that distinguish FA from acquired aplastic anemia (AA) . positive pregnancies for trisomy 18 were affected . Specific cellular sensitivity of FA cells to the clastogenic effect of DNA The results are comparable to those of similar studies except for cross-linking agents, such as diepoxybutane (DEB), was used to median values of biochemical markers which demonstrate a significant facilitate the diagnosis of FA among AA patients . difference from those reported for other ethnic groups, and can be Since February 2004 until December 2005, 18 children with AA and used for prenatal screening of pregnancies for Down syndrome and other bone marrow failure syndromes were diagnosed and treated trisomy 18 in north - west of Iran . at the Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic” in Belgrade . Chromosome breakage study was performed on Cytogenetics 1 spontaneous and DEB-induced 72 hours cultures of peripheral blood . out to be 45,X[28]/46,XY [72] . In 5th and 6th cases cytogenetic diagnoses DEB (0.1μg/ml) was added after 48 hours of culturing and metaphases were confirmed by FISH analysis. The obtained results demonstrate the were examined for chromosomal instability and abnormalities . importance of FISH for the improvement of conventional cytogenetic In examined group of 18 patients, five of them (27.8%) were found diagnosis and further correct and timely medical care for the patients to have increased DEB-induced chromosome breaks . The range of with Turner syndrome . DEB-induced chromosome breaks were: for DEB-insensitive patients 0 .00-0 .20 and for DEB-sensitive patients 0 .58-2 .15 breaks per cell . No P0365. Parental-origin-determination-FisH (pod-FisH): a new overlap between DEB-sensitive and DEB-insensitive group was found . approach to distinguish homologues chromosomes The range of spontaneous breaks for DEB-insensitive and DEB- M. Gross1, B. Horsthemke2, C. Karst1, H. Mkrtchyan1,3, U. Claussen1, T. Liehr1, sensitive patients were overlapping: 0 .00-0 .07 and 0 .00-0 .27 breaks A. Weise1; per cell respectively . 1Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany, 2Institut für Authors will discuss the significance of DEB test in differential diagnosis Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 3Department of Genetic and Laboratory of of AA . Cytogenetics, State University, Yerevan, Armenia. The differentiation of homologues chromosomes (chr) and their P0363. Automated microscopy of amniotic fluid cells: Detection parental origin can presently be determined only by molecular genetic of FisH signals using the fastFisH™ imaging system. methods like microsatellite- or SNP-analysis . Only in exceptional cases M. W. Kilpatrick1, P. Tsipouras1, M. Sharp1, J. Tepperberg2, F. Tafas1; a distinction on chromosomal level is possible - e .g . due to variations 1Ikonisys Inc, New Haven, CT, United States, 2Laboratory Corporation of Ameri- within the heterochromatic regions of chrs . 1, 9, 16 and Y or the p- ca, Research Triangle Park, NC, United States. arms of the acrocentric chrs . In the absence of such polymorphisms FISH is a valuable adjunct to Cytogenetics, providing a rapid a distinction of the homologues chrs on a single cell level was not screen for common abnormalities . However, FISH is expensive, possible until now . A recently detected polymorphism called LCV labor intensive, and requires a high skill level and subjective signal or CNP include polymorphisms up to several Mb in size (Iafrate et interpretation . Ikonisys fastFISH(TM) is a fully robotic fluorescence al ., 2004, Sebat et al ., 2004) . Due to the big size of the described microscopy platform requiring only that slide-containing cassettes are polymorphic regions we started to develop a FISH-based approach loaded into the instrument . The system scans each slide and returns for an inter-individual differentiation of the homologues chrs inherited it to the cassette with no requirement for user input . Images of cells from different individuals, called parental-origin-determination-FISH are digitally captured and automatically analyzed for the presence of (pod-FISH) technique. pod-FISH probe sets are at present chr-specific specific FISH signals, that are enumerated and reported. Following and are composed of BAC clones covering in summary 122 regions scanning, the workstation provides a gallery for each slide, displaying distributed over the whole human genome . One- up to 5-color pod- the image of each cell and its FISH signals, so that the operator can FISH probe sets were created, evaluated, optimised and verified on a confirm the diagnostic relevance of the data reported. We blindly known heterochromatic polymorphism of chr 16 . Moreover, a case with compared Ikonisys fastFISH(TM) against manual FISH analysis for a known UPD 15 was used to show the suitability and reproducibility of 62 amniocentesis samples probed for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X, the method . This new method will open new doors for diagnostic and and Y . Two pairs of slides were produced from each sample, one pair scientific fields that could not be questioned by now: eg introduction of evaluated using standard manual microscopy and the other using the new diagnostic markers for leukaemia after transplantation . Supported Ikoniscope(TM) fastFISH(TM) Imaging System . 100% concordance by a grant from the university of Jena, Deutsche Krebshilfe (70-3125- was observed between the results obtained using manual microscopy Li1) and IZKF / TMWFK (TP 3 .7 / B307-04004) . and the automated system . 10 samples were then analysed using fastFISH(TM) Auto, that produces a test outcome based on fully P0366. Localisation and characterisation of common fragile sites automated FISH dot-count analysis . These also demonstrated 100% E. Kuehnel, A. Fechter, L. Savelyeva, M. Schwab; concordance with manual analysis . This suggests that the automated German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. system is capable of providing accurate detection and quantitation of Fragile sites (FS) are chromosomal regions of high genetic instability, FISH signals and has potential where the reliability and speed offered defined as non-randomly distributed regions that show breaks, gaps, or by an automated system would be of benefit. rearrangements in metaphase chromosomes . These genetic alterations can be shown experimentally after culturing cells under conditions of P0364. molecular-cytogenetic diagnosis of patients with turner delayed DNA replication or repair . At least 120 chromosomal loci have syndrome been identified as FS in the human genome [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. M. Manvelyan1,2, I. Simonyan2, R. Aroutiounian1; gov/LocusLink/list .cgi] . 1Department of Genetics, Biological Faculty, Yerevan State University, Yerevan, On the basis of their frequency within the population FS are divided Armenia, 2Research Center of Maternal and Child Health Protection, Yerevan, into two major groups, rare and common . Both groups can be Armenia. further divided according to their chemistry of induction . Rare FS The identification of marker chromosome is important for the are observed in less than 5% of humans and most are induced by patients with karyotype 45,X/46,X+mar . In the dysgenic gonads the folic acid deficiency, whereas common FS are found in all individuals gonadoblastoma locus on the Y chromosome (GBY) can be oncogenic . and the majority (76/88) is induced by aphidicolin, the remaining by Thus, the presence of Y chromosome material in the karyotype of bromodeoxyuridine or 5-azacytidine . these patients may cause the development of gonadoblastoma . Untill now 14 common FS, all belonging to the aphidicolin induced Gonadectomy is generally recommended for these patients . With the group and expressed with the highest frequency, have been cloned methods of conventional cytogenetics the following karyotypes were and characterised at the molecular level . The majority of them have revealed at 6 patients with delay in physical and sexual development: been involved in somatic rearrangements found in the chromosomes 45,X[50]/46,X,del(X)(q12)[50]; 46,X,delY(q11)[60]/45,X[40]; of cancer cells . 46,X,del(X)(q12)[60]/45,X[40]; 46,X,del(X)(q12)[72]/45,X[28]; However, the localisation of the bromodeoxyuridine or 5-azacytidin 45,X[70]/46,X,r(X)(p11q21)[30]; 46,X,del(X)(p11.2)[70]/45,X[30]. induced common FS and the majority of aphidicolin induced common Cytogenetic diagnoses have been verified by FISH (fluorescence in FS which are expressed with lower frequency, is only roughly known situ hybridization) , using CEPX, CEPY (sat . III), CEPY (alpha sat .) and through G-banding . To shed light on those unknown common FS, six- SubtelXpXq (Vysis, USA; Cytocell Technologies, U.K.) DNA-probes. colour fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) with BAC probes labeled The investigations were carried out with consultations of Institute with fluorescence-conjugated nucleotides is used to determine their of Medical Genetics (University of Zurich) . As a result of molecular- precise localisation and their molecular characterisation . Additionally cytogenetic investigation in the 1st and 2nd cases we revealed the their level of expression will be determined in metaphases of different karyotype 45,X [50]/46,X . ish inv dupY(q11)[50] and 46,X . ish inv lymphoblastoid cell lines . dupYp(q11)[60]/45,X[40] correspondingly . In the 3rd case cytogenetic diagnosis was specified as 46,X. ish r(X)(p11q21)(DXZ1+,DXYS129- )[60]/45,X[40] . In the 4th case cytogenetic diagnosis has been turned Cytogenetics 1 P0367. A study of fragile X syndrome in iBtO research center depressed nasal bridge, abnormal hairy ears, long philtrum, high- M. Zamanian1, F. Mahjoubi2, M. Rahnama1, F. Mortezapor barfy1, F. Nasiry1, F. arched palate and micro-retrognathia . Beside the several clinical Razazian1, S. Soleimany1, S. Tootian1, F. Taleb Manochehry1, S. Seyed Mortaz3; findings of our patient, who shared similar abnormalities which were 1Iranian blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, reported in the four cases of medical literature with pericentric inversion Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian blood Transfusion Organization Research 2 has some distinct and interesting phenotypic appearances such Center, Tehran, Iran. AND1National Institute of Genetic Engineering and as hairy auricula, omphalocele and patent ductus arteriosus . These Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Iranian blood findings led us for the suspection of other syndromes which might be a Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, separate entity as the consanguinity of the parents was considered . Islamic Republic of Iran. Fragile X syndrome is the most common inherted from of mental P0370. cytogenetic endpoints as indicators of chromosomal retardation . The syndrome is associated with a CGG repead expansion damage in hypertensive patients treated with beta-blocker in the 5/UTR of the first exone of the fragile mental retadation1(FMR1) drugs: In vivo study before and after antihypertensive therapy. gene . This gene maps toXq27 .3 and coincides with the cytogenetic M. Telez, O. Peñagarikano, C. Ugarte, P. Flores, L. Valverde, A. Joven, J. fragile site(FRAXA) .The present study deal with the prevalence of Ramirez, L. Lombardero, I. Arrieta; fragile X syndrome among individuals suspected for fragile X syndrome Basque Country University, Lejona, Spain. that referred from various parts of the country to The blood Transfusion Arterial hypertension represent one of the most frequent diagnoses in Organization reacerch center of Iran From 1999-2005 . Results of the population at large in terms of prevalence and incidence . cytogenetic performed in a group of 247 unrelated individuals (196 Among the most used antihypertensive drugs, the group of chemical males and 51 females)are presented . In total 32 positive cases were known as β-bloquers have been found to have markedly beneficial detected . Other chromosomal abnormalities were also found in 15 therapeutic value in treating hypertension . As a results of the high cases . All cytogenetically diagnosed fragile X patients had mental volume of these drugs used and suggestions that some members retardation, attention deficits, hyperactivity disorders, and poor visual of this chemical class may produce chromic toxicological effects, the contact . Futhermore, we found a positive correlation between the regulatory agencies have become concerned over the possible long- frequency of fra(X) and the clinical characteristics . We emphasize term adverse effects of β-bloquers. the importance of the clinical evaluation in the study of familial mental Our previous studies was analyzed the beta-blocker atenolol and retardation, molecular analysis at least for the cases cytogenetically reported its genotoxic effect in vivo after comparing hypertensive found negative for fragile X, and in the screening of isolated cases with patients with an age- and sex-matched control sample . To complete suspect of having the fragile X syndrome . the study and to bias interindividual susceptibilities we are doing a further study where patients act as their own controls . P0368. three cases With Gonosomal chromosomal Anomalies In this study SCE and MN constitute the genotoxicity biomarkers used . T. Fıstık1, B. Eser1, H. Şamlı1, S. Cevrioğlu2, M. Solak1; Their frequencies are measured in peripheral blood lymphocytes of 1Afyon Kocatepe University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, hypertensive patients a) before starting the antihypertensive treatment, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University Medical Faculty Depart- b) three months after therapy and c) one year after iniciated the ment of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey. pharmacological treatment . In this study, Cytogenetic analyses were carried out for two cases The results obtained show increases in the frequency of SCE three with primary amenorea and one case with premature ovarian failure months after therapy, whereas the values of this biomarker before diagnosed clinicly at the Gynecology and Obstetrics Department . starting the antihypertensive treatment and one year after iniciated case 1 and 2: Two cases with primary amenorea in 20 and 14 year old are similar . An “adaptative response” to the drug could explain these women are studied . In ultrasonography, neither uterus nor cervix were results . found and the vagina was atrophic in both patients, and bilateral solid As regard the MN assay the results indicate a progressive increase structures were observed in Case 1 . Pathologial investigation of these in their frequency and these could show that MN assay is sensitive solid structures has shown that their tissue type is compatible with enough to detect the chromosomal damage resulting from that testis tissue . Blood hormonal levels for Testosterone were measured antihypertensive treatment . extremely higher in Case 1 as well as FSH, and LH . However, in case 2, only a slight increase was observed for these three hormonal levels . P0371. A case Of intrachromosomal insertion On chromosome case 3: The third case had premature ovarian failure at the age of 7 involving Five Breakpoints 31 years having an atrophic uterus and ovaries as well as substantial G. Toksoy, B. Türköver, C. Sayar, M. Söylemez, T. Yardımcı, A. Giray; increase in blood FSH level . Zeynep Kamil Hospital, ISTANBUL, Turkey. Chromosomal analyses were performed using modified “whole blood” Intrachromosomal insertions are uncommon rearrangements . and Giemsa-Trypsin-Leishman banding methods in our laboratory . For Cytogenetic delineation of these abnormalities can be difficult. It is all cases 50 metaphase spreads were investigated . The karyotypes highly probable, that these abnormalities have been misinterpreted of the first two case were 46,XY and the third one was 46,X,del as inversions . Fluorescence in situ hybridization technique (FISH) by (X)(q27) . using different probes made it possible to delineate such chromosomal This study also proves the importance and necessity of the cytogenetic abnormalities . investigations for finding out the chromosomal abnormalities as well as We report a de novo case of intrachromosomal insertion on chromosome for supporting the clinical diagnosis . 7 . Following uneventful pregnancy of healthy, unconsanginous parents a newborn baby was born with severe congenital malformations P0369. Hairy auricula, atypic facies, omphalocele and congenital (severe growth retardation, trigonocephaly, short neck, dysmorphic heart defect with pericentric inversion 2 face, cleft palate, digital anomalies) . The baby died at 41 . day of age . E. .. Bora1, O. Giray1, A. Ulgenalp1, N. Demir2, H. Kirayoglu1, F. Ozkinay3, H. Chromosomal investigation was performed on peripheral blood Akin3, D. Ercal1; lymphocytes and GTG banding analyses at 550-600 band level 1Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics-Division revealed a derivative chromosome 7 . Parental chromosomes were of Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynocology, Izmir, normal . FISH technique was applied by using different probes (WCP Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, 7-Cytocell, P&Q dual painting probe-metasystems, Williams dual Izmir, Turkey. color probe-Vysis, 7 p&q telomeric probe-Cytocell) . According to the We report a patient who had multiple congenital malformations with FISH and GTG banding findings, the rearrangement was interpreted pericentricentric inversion of chromosome 2 . Chromosomal analysis as intrachromosomal insertion with the breakpoints; 7p21, 7p15.3, of the consanguineous parents who presented with a reproductive 7q11 .23, 7q31 .2, 7q34 history of four recurrent spontaneous abortions and two neonatal (Karyotype; deaths, showed the presence of the same pericentric inversion of 46,XY, der(7)(pter-->p21::q34-->q31 .2::q21-->p15 .3::q11 .23-->q31 .2:: chromosome 2; 46,XX,inv(2)(p11q21) in the female partner. p15 .3-->q11 .23::q34-->qter)) . The physical examination of the case revealed frontal bossing, broad- This case shows us how useful the FISH results are for the clarifying Cytogenetics 10 of the complex rearrangements . De novo unusual inversions should these genes may help in the clinical interpretation of karyotypes with be investigated by FISH technique especially in cases with multiple constitutional structural Y-chromosome abnormalities . congenital malformations . We present four male patients in which FISH analysis was helpful . The aberrant Y-chromosomes were characterised by FISH using P0372. Paternal heterozygous inv(8p23.1) predisposing to 8 different probes: RP13-76L22 (Yp11 .32), c34F5 (Yp11 .31), SRY duplication 8p23.1? (Yp11 .2), pDP105 (Yp11 .2), pDP97 (DYZ3), RP11-160O2 (Yq11 .22), T. Dijkhuizen, R. Hordijk, W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse, G. G. Oudesluijs, K. B. J. 63C9 (Yq11 .23) and RP11-479B17 (Yqter) . Gerssen-Schoorl, K. Kok, C. H. C. M. Buys, B. Sikkema-Raddatz; In two males with oligo- or azoospermia, FISH demonstrated absence Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Gronin- of DAZ . gen, The Netherlands. A) mos 46,X,der(Y),del(Y)(q11 .223)invdup(p11 .2-pter)[47]/ Rearrangements of the short arm of chromosome 8 manifest as 46,X,idic(Y)(p11 .1-q11 .223::q11 .223-p11 .1) [3] . The second line was complex inverted duplications and deletions, or as simple duplications not found at karyotyping . or simple deletions . In most instances band 8p23 .1 is involved, and the B) mos 45,X[50]/ 46,X,idic(Y)(q11 .2)[48]/ breakpoints are thought to correspond with segmental duplication sites 47,X,idic(Y)(q11 .2),+idic(Y)(q11 .2)[2] . at the proximal and distal 8p23 .1 boundaries . Recent reports have Two cases were detected in amniotic fluid, screened because of shown convincing evidence that there might be a causal relationship maternal age . FISH, performed nine years and 5 month after birth, between maternally heterozygous inversions in band 8p23 .1 and respectively, demonstrated absence of DAZ and duplication of SHOX inversion duplication deletions of 8p in the offspring, due to loop in both cases . formation and meiotic recombination in meisosis I . C) mos 47,X,der(Y)del(Y)(q11 .23)invdup(Y)(p11 .2pter),+der( We present three male patients with different chromosome 8p Y)del(Y)(p11 .2) del(Y)(q11 .22)[24]/46,X,der(Y)del(Y)(q11 .23) aberrations: i .e . an inv dup del(8p), an inv dup(8p) and a dup(8p) . invdup(Y)(p11 .2pter)[6] . The rearrangements were ascertained by chromosome and FISH D) mos 45,X[23]/46,XY[1]/46,X,idic(Y)(q11 .2)[72]/ analyses, and further characterized by micro array CGH analysis . Two 47,X,idic(Y)(q11 .2)x2[4] . copy number transitions (breakpoints at 8p23 .1 proximal and 8p23 .1 Demonstrating the absence of DAZ helped explain the impaired distal) are observed in all three patients, coinciding with the known spermatogenesis in patients A en B, and predicted a high risk of infertility segmental duplication sites . in patients C en D . The SHOX duplication may have contributed to We performed FISH analysis on the parents of all patients to see the observed increased height (three years in front of age at the age whether we could find a heterozygous maternal inversion in 8p23.1 of 9 years) in patient C . The phenotype of patient D is normal at the to support a causal relationship with the observed aberrations in moment . our patients . The mothers of the inv dup del(8p) and the inv dup(8p) In conclusion, FISH analysis in patients with structurally abnormal patients indeed carried a heterozygous inversion in 8p23 .1, whereas Y chromosomes may help in understanding (and predicting) their the fathers appeared normal . Interestingly, the mother of the dup(8p) associated phenotypes . patient had a homozygous inversion 8p23 .1, whereas the father had a heterozygous one . It is tempting to speculate that in this case the P0375. mosaic status of lymphocytes in men with Klinefelter paternal heterozyous inversion mediated the formation of the abnormal syndrome chromosome 8 . M. Kanwar, R. Dada, R. P. Kumar, M. Jena, K. kucheria; All India Institute of Medical Sciences, N Delhi, India. P0373. inverted tandem duplication resulting in a functional Klinefelter syndrome (KFS) is characterized by gynaecomestia and disomy of chromosome Xq28. hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism and azoospermia . Recently few B. Keren1, D. Couet2, D. Sanlaville1, I. Texier1, M. Le Lorc’h1, S. Chevallier1, J. studies have shown that KFcases have 46, XY cell line and in such Bonnefont1, N. Morichon-Delvallez1, M. Vekemans1, B. Gilbert-Dussardier2, S. cases there may be isolated foci of spermatogenesis . Such cases have Romana1; better prognosis on assisted reproductive techniques (ART) .So we 1Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 2Hôpital de la Milétrie, Poitiers, France. tried to look for low-level mosaicism in ten infertile Klinefelter patients Inverted tandem duplications are well-known chromosome who did not show features of hypogonadism to identify for presence abnormalities . The most frequent involves the short arm of chromosome of normal cell line which could not be identifyied on analyzing twenty 8 and is associated with a 8pter deletion . It has been demonstrated metaphases . In these cases we analyzed 150 well spread G banded that segmental duplications (low copy repeats) do mediate these metaphases in each case and found that two cases showed 4-5% 46, rearrangements . Here we report on an inverted Xq28 tandem XY cell line.This had not been identified on analyzing 20 metaphase duplication associated with a terminal Xq28 deletion . The child’s clinical spreads . features are suggestive of a chromosome Xq28 functional disomy The main problem with conventional karyotyping is that routinely 20 i .e . growth retardation, developmental delay, microcephaly, failure to metaphases are analyzed and counted, this may miss low-grade thrive, pulmonary veins stenosis, recurrent pulmonary infections and mosaicism . Such KF cases(diagnosed as pure 47,XXY) may have foci micropenis . of spermatogenesis, which could be used for TESA in ART . Therefore Standard cytogenetic and FISH analysis revealed a Xqter deletion analyzing a large number of metaphases may detect low percentage associated with a Xq28 duplication . The abnormal X is inherited from of 46, XY cell line and such cases carry a good prognosis on ART . the phenotypically normal mother . Cytogenetic studies after BrdU Recent techniques like FISH (florescence in situ hybridization) are rapid incorporation and measure of incorporation ratios at the androgen and sensitive and can help in analyzing a large number of metaphases receptor locus show extreme skewing of inactivation i .e . the abnormal and interphases cells in short time and can detect cryptic and low level X is preferentially inactivated . mosacism, which may have been missed cytogenetically . The presence of inverted homologous low copy repeats on the terminal long arm of chromosome X suggests that they did mediate the P0376. submicroscopic DER(X) detected by FisH - Unusual rearrangement. To our knowledge this is the first case of chromosome finding in a Klinefelter Syndrome patient Xq28 functional disomy caused by an inverted duplication . E. Kocarek1, D. Novotna2, M. Malikova2, T. Jancuskova3, J. Hrabakova1, M. Havlovicova2; P0374. structural Y-chromosomal aberrations: four cases 1Charles University 2nd Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Motol Uni- demonstrating the value of FisH versity Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Charles University - School of Sci- A. M. F. Kersemaekers, K. B. J. Gerssen-Schoorl, R. H. Sijmons, B. Sikkema- ences, Prague, Czech Republic. Raddatz; Our presentation deals with Klinefelter syndrome patient (18-years-old Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Gronin- male) with unusual FISH finding. Common cytogenetic examination gen, The Netherlands. identified abnormal karyotype (47,XXY). The Y-chromosome harbours genes for spermatogenesis (DAZ-gene), Due to some mild phenotypic features that could result from possible sex determination (SRY) and growth (SHOX) . FISH analysis for mosaicism FISH examination was indicated . Molecular cytogenetic Cytogenetics 11 analysis was carried out with centromeric and locus specific probes (71,63,65y) have an udefined lymphoproliferative disease with an IgAk (DXZ1, KAL) to chromosome X and a heterochromatine probe (DYZ1) paraproteinemia . Six children (28-35y) are studied . to chromosome Y . The FISH analysis demonstrated presence of a FAMILY-C: two brothers(72,75y) with B-NHLand .two sons (25,45y) are very small derivative X-chromosome that consist of only centromeric included . segment . It was present in 55% of cells . This small centric fragment METHODS: Bone marrow specimens and PB lymphocytes were was not identified by a common cytogenetic analysis. cultured using standard techniques . Thirty GTG banded metaphases At the beginning of the FISH analysis of mitotic chromosomes (using the were analyzed (ISCN1995) . X-centromeric probe) the free X-centromeric fragment was considered FISH was performed using the LSI13 probe so(VYSIS) . to be only a fluorescent artefact. Besides this one X chromosome RESULTS: The karyotypes looked normal . With FISH we isolated showed only weak hybridisation signal on the centromeric region . single signals of RB1gene in both groups . We evaluated as a deletion The previous FISH result on mitotic chromosomes had therefore the the presence of a single signal in 10% of the interphase nuclei (200 similar appearance as this in mitosis of a normal male . The second X- analyzed) or in 2 metaphases (20 analyzed) . chromosome with the weak signal on centromeric region was identified CONCLUSIONS by subsequent FISH analysis using the Kallman region specific probe 1) FISH technique is valuable for detection of RB1 gene deletion in pts combined with X-centromeric one . It is not excluded that the presence with lymphoproliferative disorders and in 1stdegree relatives . of the small derivative X-chromosome could lead to possible X- 2) The del13q14 is compatible with an inherited condition . chromosome mosaic in other tissues of the patient . The poster discuss 3) The1st degree relatives are in high risk of a forthcoming similar possible implications of this result to postnatal and prenatal diagnosis disease . of X-chromosomal aneuploidies . Our work was supported by research 4) Our results are compatible to that in the literature which are referred project of the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic No . 00064203 . as familial leukemia, lymphoma, multiple myeloma, hairy cell leukemia . P0377. chromosome study for diagnosis and prognostic evaluation of leukemia P0379. Report of 2 cases of translocation of chromosome Y and B. B. Ganguly, S. Shinde, N. N. Kadam, M. B. Agarwal; an autosome chromosome in azoospermic males MGM Centre for Genetic Research and Diagnosis, MGM’s New Bombay Hospi- M. Zanganeh, R. Kariminejad, M. Rahimi, A. Moshtagh, M. H. Kariminejad; tal, Navi Mumbai, India. Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic Cytogenetic study has been carried out on 71 individuals diagnosed of Iran. with some kind of hematological disorder . Conventional and FISH Besides sex chromosome numerical aberrations, several structural technique were considered in cultured and uncultured bone marrow abnormalities such as translocations, markers or inversions are more samples and ~50 cells were examined using software for karyotyping frequently found in the karyotype of infertile men (Thielemans et al., and FISH imaging . Conventional G-banding study has collected 1998 ; Gekas et al., 2001 ) . Y-autosome (Y/A) translocations have information on multiple abnormalities in 65% cases, including t(10;11); been reported in association with male infertility . Different hypotheses del(5q); del(7q); -7; t(15;17); t(3;6); +8; del(1q); -Y; t(X;14) in Ph+ve have been made as to correlations between Y/A translocations and CML; del(20q); t(4;7); t(14;18); -13; t(9;22)+inv(16); ins(1)+inv(6)+t spermatogenetic disturbances . In an early review by Smith et al, (7p;9q)+t(8;21); 48,XX,+6,+21/51,XXX,+6,+21(x2),+m; paracentric 1979 it was postulated that Y:acrocentric translocations are less often inv(8); t(9;22;21); 46,XY/45,XY,t(4;14),der(14),inv(4); etc. FISH study associated with infertily & hypogonadism that are Y;non-acrocentric was efficient to detect rearrangements in G-banding negative cases. translocations . G-banding has identified two cases with three-way translocations, We are reporting 2 cases of balanced translocation of chromosome t(9;22;11) and t(9;22;21) where FISH result showed bcr-abl chimerical Y and an autosome in azoospermic males. The first case, a 31 year fusions . The patients detected with multiple rearrangements had poor old male patient with 4 years history of infertility due to azoospermia prognosis . CML patients with three-way translocation showed poor has 46,X,(Y;5)(p11;q13) and the second case, a 34 year old male with treatment outcome. One CML with 46,XY/45,XY,t(4;14),der(14),inv(4) azoospermia has 46,X,(Y;2)(q11.2;q35). configuration received bone marrow transplant and responded well. In the Mendelian cytogenetic network database of the 8 cases with Two AML patients with complex clonal abnormalities expired within 2-3 breakpoints of Yq11 .2, 6 have aoospermia/oligospermia, and the one months after detection. G-banding study has also identified constitutive case with breakpoint at Yp11 also has Azoospermia/Oligospermia . abnormalities in 6 patients, including pericentric inversion in 9 (2), Y This would suggest that the Y;autosome translocations involving these (2) and X (1), and mosaic hermaphroditic karyotype 46,XY/46,XX (1) . breakpoints are associated with Azoospermia/Oligospermia or as more The study has yet to correlate with antibody markers and treatment generally postulated will lead to meiotic disturbances . outcome . This study indicates the importance of conventional technique for primary diagnosis as well as follow-up programme for recognizing P0380. male shrew Recombination maps for Each chromosome clonal evolutions and multiple rearrangements . However, FISH must Identified by DAPI-banding be considered as an adjunct to G-banding technique . P. Borodin1,2, N. Belonogova1,2, T. Karamysheva1, N. Rubtsov1, A. Polyakov1, J. Searle3; P0378. Detection of RB1 deletions by fluorescence in situ 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Novo- hybridization in healthy first degree relatives of patients with sibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3University of York, lymphoproliferative disease York, United Kingdom. S. N. Kokkinou1,2, A. Lindou1,2, C. Tzanidakis1,2, A. Varouta1,2, I. Fotopoulou1,2, Studies in human and mouse meiotic chromosomes demonstrated that H. Alafaki1,2; the rate of recombination was increased in pretelomeric regions and 1Cytogenetic Unit, Halandri Athens, Greece, 2Sismanoglio General Hospital, reduced near the centromeres . An excess of recombination frequency Marousi Athens, Greece. was detected in GC-rich regions . We analysed the chromosome-wide INTRODUCTION: Interstitial deletions of 13q14 are found in and regional patterns of meiotic recombination in another mammalian hematological malignancies . species: the European common shrew (Sorex araneus L .) . This species The RB1locus is within the deletion interval of del (13)(q12q14) in is characterised by unprecedented chromosome polymorphism and X/ leukemic cells, it is a tumor suppressor gene, responsible for the Y1,Y2 system of sex determination. We generated the first cytological development of solid tumors . Its role in hematological diseases is recombination maps for each autosome of this species identified unclear . DAPI-banding . We prepared synaptonemal complex spreads from AIM OF THE STUDY: We showed that RB1gene deletion . is not spermatocytes of male shrews of various karyotypes, identified restricted in pts with lymphoproliferative disorders but it is expanded in each autosome by DAPI-banding, validated this identification by 1stdegree relatives . fluorescence in situ hybridization of chromosome-specific DNA libraries, PATIENTS: FAMILY-A:a 73y old man with HCL .and a son (49y) with and mapped recombination along individual chromosome arms, using B-CLL .Two children (10,12y) are studied . immunolocalisation of MLH1, a mismatch repair protein that marks FAMILY-B:a 69y old man has B-CLL .A brother and two sisters sites of crossingover . Majority of bivalents and the autosomal arm Cytogenetics 1 of sex trivalent demonstrated high recombination frequency near aspect of the genetic analysis of patients with MCA/MR . In addition, telomeres and low frequency near the centromeres . However each in our study 3 patients were mosaic for a structural chromosome bivalent had unique pattern of crossover distribution along its length . rearrangement . One of these patients had monosomy 7 in as little as This pattern was apparently determined by interplay between chiasma 7% of the cells, illustrating that array CGH allows the detection of low interference and the region specific differences in GC-content. Taking grade mosaicisims . an advantage of clear DAPI-banding revealed in the spreads of shrew spermatocytes we demonstrated that recombination frequency was P0383. investigation of cytogenetic causes of mental retardation 1 .5 times higher in G-negative regions than in G-positive . We found in Romanian children. Results of a two years study that the chromosome arms, which had low frequency of recombination M. Budisteanu1, A. Arghir2, C. Burloiu1, A. Lungeanu2; in normal karyotype, were prone to pairing failure in complex synaptic 1”Prof. Dr. Al. Obregia” Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Victor Babes” configurations, such as chain of IX. National Institute, Bucharest, Romania. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate chromosomal P0381. tiling resolution array cGH reveals a low percentage abnormalities in children with mental retardation (MR) . mosaic trisomy 8 in a patient with mental retardation MATERIAL AND METHOD: 80 children with MR were included in this R. Pfundt1, N. de Leeuw1, J. Tuerlings2, W. Verhoeven2,3, I. Neefs1, I. Schelt- study over a period of 2 years (2001-2003) . inga1, J. Engelen4, H. Mieloo1, D. Koolen1, E. Sistermans1, B. de Vries1, C. van All patients were evaluated, by clinical and paraclinical exams (including Ravenswaaij-Arts1, D. Smeets1; dysmorphological features, psychological tests, neuroimagistic 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, studies) . Cytogenetic investigation consisted of karyotype examination 2Vincent van Gogh Institute for Psychiatry, Venray, The Netherlands, 3Erasmus (GTG banding) and fragile site induction . University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 4Academic Hospital RESULTS: The chromosomal studies identified the following Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. abnormalities: fragile X syndrome in 4 cases, trisomy 21 in 4 cases, For nearly two years, we have been using tiling resolution BAC arrays partial trisomy 18 in one case, deletion 1q42 in one case, 3p duplication (>32,000 clones) in a diagnostic setting . This novel technique has in one case . Several cases have been diagnosed with various genetic been implemented in our department in order to unravel a diagnosis in syndromes: Williams syndrome (one case), Cornelia de Lange patients that initially showed a normal karyotype, but still are suspected syndrome, Berardinelli-Seip syndrome (2 cases), based on the clinical of having (submicroscopic) chromosomal imbalances . Here we report features, but without a molecular genetic confirmation. 18 mentally on a 68-year old male individual with mild mental retardation . Previous retarded children with different dysmorphic features, had not revealed chromosomal analysis and extensive FISH analyses had revealed a any numerical or structural chromosomal abnormalities . Almost all of normal male karyotype and normal FISH results . Subsequent array these patients have severe MR and other neurological or psychiatric CGH analysis of the DNA of this patient revealed a normal pattern for all disorders . chromosomes, except for chromosome 8 . Although no discrete gains CONCLUSIONS: Genetic abnormalities are an important cause of and/or losses were detected on chromosome 8, all BAC clones from mental retardation in children . Cytogenetic analysis should be included this particular chromosome displayed a positive test over reference in the protocol of investigation in all children with mental retardation . ratio instead of the expected scattering around zero . The average Acknowledgements: CEEX National Program, Module III . ratio of the BAC clones on chromosome 8 was 0 .1, indicative for a possible mosaic trisomy 8. We were able to confirm this mosaicism P0384. BAC array CGH reveals five genomic aberrations in 30 by performing interphase FISH analysis with a centromere probe of patients with idiopathic mental retardation chromosome 8 . After analysing 400 nuclei, three signals were detected N. Matsumoto1,2, N. Miyake1, O. Shimokawa3, N. Harada4, N. Niikawa3,2; in 29 nuclei, whereas the other 371 nuclei showed the expected 2 1Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School signals for chromosome 8 . This result is indicative for a ~7 % mosaicism of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 2Solution-Oriented Research for Science and for trisomy 8 in this patient as was initially identified by array CGH.This Technology (SORST), JST, Kawaguchi, Japan, 3Departments of Human Genet- finding clearly demonstrates the power of tiling resolution BAC arrays ics, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, in detecting even low grade chromosomal imbalances as a result of Japan, 4Kyushu Medical Science Nagasaki Laboratory, Nagasaki, Japan. low percentage mosaicisms . Array using 2,173 BAC clones covering the whole human genome has been constructed. All clones spotted were confirmed to show P0382. Emerging patterns of cryptic chromosomal imbalances a unique signal at the predicted chromosomal location by FISH in patients with idiopathic mental retardation and multiple analysis in our laboratory . A total of 30 individuals with idiopathic congenital anomalies mental retardation (MR) were analyzed by comparative genomic J. R. Vermeesch1, N. Maas1, B. Thienpont1, T. de Ravel1, I. Balikova1, J. hybridization using this array . Three deletions [46XY,del(15)(q11 .2q Fryns1, K. Devriendt1, Y. Moreau2, B. Menten3, F. Speleman3, G. Mortier3, A. De 12)mat, 46,XX,del(1)(1q43qter), and 46XY,del (3)(p21p21)de novo], Paepe3; one duplication [46XY,dup(22)(q11)de novo], and one unbalanced 1U.Z. Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 2ESAT, Leuven, Belgium, 3Center for translocation [46XY,der(22) t(19;22)( p13.3;q13.31)pat] could be Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium. detected in five patients, which are likely to contribute to MR. The Chromosomal abnormalities are a major cause of mental retardation constructed array was shown to be an efficient tool for the detection of and multiple congenital anomalies (MCA/MR) . Screening for these pathogenic genomic rearrangements in MR patients as well as copy chromosomal imbalances has mainly been performed by standard number polymorphisms (CPNs) . karyotyping . Previous array CGH studies on selected patients with chromosomal phenotypes and normal karyotypes suggested an P0385. Apparently balanced t(2;21) „de novo“ with 2q37.3, incidence of 10-15% previously unnoticed de novo chromosomal 21q11.2 and 21q21.1 microdeletions imbalances . Here we report on array CGH screening of a series of N. Oliva Teles1, S. Pereira2, M. Mota Freitas1, J. Aguiar1, C. Dias1, R. Santos1, 140 patients with idiopathic mental retardation and multiple congenital P. Jorge1, M. L. Rodrigues1, M. Pinto1; anomalies (MCA/MR) but normal karyotypes . Submicroscopic 1Instituto de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal, 2Centro chromosomal imbalances were detected in 20% (28/140) patients and Hospitalar Vila Nova de Gaia, Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal. included 18 deletions, 7 duplications and 3 unbalanced translocations . Microdeletions of the long arm of chromosome 2 in q37 .3 have been Seventeen from twenty four imbalances were confirmed de novo and detected since 1995 using specific probes and have been associated, 19 were assumed to be causal . Excluding subtelomeric imbalances, in about half the cases, with a phenotype similar to Albright’s our study identified 11 (8%) clinically relevant interstitial submicroscopic hereditary osteodystrophy . Few cases have been described with imbalances . Taking into consideration this and previously reported proximal deletions of chromosome 21q, in q11 .2 and q21 .1, possibly studies, array CGH screening with a resolution of at least 1 Mb, has because this region does not include genes responsible for the severe been performed on 432 patients with MCA/MR . Most imbalances are phenotype . non-recurrent and spread across the genome . In at least 8 .8% (38/432) The authors present the clinical description and cytogenetic and of these patients de novo intrachromosomal alterations have been molecular findings of a male patient aged 5, referred for cytogenetic identified. Hence, array CGH should be considered as an essential studies because of dysmorphic features, mild delay of psychomotor Cytogenetics 1 development with impaired fine motor skills and speech delay. The high we discuss its feasibility (sensitivity, specificity and reproducibility) resolution GTG banding karyotype revealed an apparently balanced as a first approach to detect aneuploidy and unbalanced terminal translocation between the end of 2qter and 21q . As the karyotypes chromosomal rearrangements in spontaneous miscarriages . For this of the parents were normal, the child’s translocation was de novo . purpose, 182 miscarriage DNA samples were tested with the SALSA Cytogenetic molecular techniques (FISH) were performed on the family P070 and P036B MLPA probe mixes . Results obtained by MLPA and it was concluded that the subtelomeric region on the long arm of were validated by performing targeted DNA microsatellite analysis, chromosome 2 was absent in the child . Because the phenotype of the karyotyping and/or conventional CGH . As no false-negative results proband was not characteristic of the 2q37 .3 microdeletion, molecular were obtained, MLPA with subtelomeric probes could be employed as typing of the long arm of chromosome 21 was performed . This showed a first approach to the screening of aneuploidy in SAs. Nevertheless, loss of heterozygosity for markers D21S1911 and D21S11, that is, an the presence of false-positive results suggests the need of revise interstitial microdeletion involving bands 21q11 .2 and 21q21 .1 . probes design in order to improve the accuracy of the technique . The authors emphasize the importance of high resolution GTG banding in the characterization of dysmorphic syndromes and of making an P0388. mosaic variegated aneuploidy accurate clinical description of the patient, comparing the phenotype M. Moghe, K. Godbole; with those observed in other cases, described in the literature, with Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital and Research Center, Pune, India. similar cytogenetic alterations . Mosaic variegated aneuploidy (MVA) is a recessive condition characterized by mosaic aneuploidies, predominantly trisomies and P0386. clinical features in a girl with a mitotic abnormal monosomies, involving multiple different chromosomes and tissues . segregation of a chromosomal balanced translocation Although it is not typically associated with a distinctive phenotype, F. Forzano1, M. Pierluigi1, S. Cavani1, M. Malacarne1, C. Marciano1, V. Vias- some common findings including microcephaly, IUGR have been solo1, M. Mogni1, C. Cuoco2, R. Curia3, F. Dagna Bricarelli1, F. Faravelli1; reported previously in children with MVA . It has been suggested 1Human Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Cytogenetics Laboratory, that a non-random gain of chromosomes specific to each somatic G.Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 3Paediatric Neuropsychiatry Unit, ASL 22, tissue might result in higher frequency of certain trisomic cell lines in Novi Ligure, Italy. different tissues . MVA has been previously reported in patients with We report a 16 years old girl with an imbalanced mitotic segregation of malignancies, recurrent miscarriages and multiple malformations . a maternally inherited balanced translocation . We report a 16- month-old male child born to a non-consanguineous Blood karyotype is 46,XX t(17;22)(p13;q12)mat (8%)/45,XX,- couple , with antenatally diagnosed polyhydramnios and failure 17,-22,der(17) (62%)/47,XX,t(17;22)(p13;q12) +der(22) (30%). to thrive and developmental delay postnatally . In addition he had Chromosome analysis on other tissues is currently in the pipeline . microcephaly, scaly skin with easy bruising and palmo-plantar atrophy, Pregnancy and delivery were uneventful . She had congenital hip patchy alopecia, central nuclear cataracts detected by 7 months of age dislocation and delayed psychomotor development, but no major and dysmorphic facial features including flat nasal bridge and short malformation . Growth was normal . She subsequently showed nose, small mouth with high arched palate, crowded teeth, bilateral refractory partial epilepsy, autistic trait, scoliosis, and a neurogenic single palmer crease . His relevant investigations including biochemical detrusor dysfunction in the last months . studies for peroxisomal dysfunction, skeletal survey etc were normal . No similar patients had been described in literature so far, since all However, His karyotype revealed MVA . Out of 93 metaphases studied, the cases reported with a chromosomal mosaicism (Dufke et al, 2001; hyperdiploidy was found in 17 (47-49 chromosomes) while hypodiploidy Kuharya et al, 2002), resulting from a parental balanced translocation, in 14 cells . Parental karyotypes were normal . presumably derived their abnormal karyotype from a meiotic error Here we present a details of cytogenetic analysis of our patient and a postzygotic rescue . Our patient clearly demonstrate that an including MVA and its implications to this family . aberrant mitotic segregation can be a possible althoug rare outcome of a balanced translocation . This should remark the relevance of P0389. interphase in situ Hybridization analysis of 14q32 and performing an exhaustive cytogenetic analysis in mentally retarded 13q chromosomal abnormalities in multiple myeloma: About 17 patients, especially when a chromosomal rearrangement is found cases within the family . A. Gmidene1, H. Sennana1, T. Ben Othman2, A. Khlif3, B. Meddeb4, B. Med- REFERENCES 1- Dufke A, Mayrhofer H, Enders H, Kaiser P, Leipoldt deb4, M. Elloumi5; M . Unusual chromosomal mosaicism as a cause of mental retardation 1service de Cytogénétique et de Biologie de la Reproduction de Sousse, and congenital malformations in a familial reciprocal translocation Sousse, Tunisia, 2centre national du greffe de moelle osseuse, Tunisie, Tunisia, carrier, t(17;22) (q24.2;q11.23). Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2001;93(3- 3service d’hématologie clinique, Sousse, Tunisia, 4service d’hématologie clini- 4):168-70 . 2- Kulharya AS, Lovell CM, Flannery DB . Unusual que, Tunis, Tunisia, 5service d’hématologie clinique, Sfax, Tunisia. mosaic karyotype resulting from adjacent 1 segregation of t(11;22): Multiple myeloma (MM) is a clonal B-cell neoplasia characterized by importance of performing skin fibroblast karyotype in patients with the accumulation in bone marrow of malignant plasma cells producing unexplained multiple congenital anomalies . Am J Med Genet . 2002 a monoclonal immunoglobulin . Dec 15;113(4):367-70. Because cytogenetics are often caught out by the low proliferation, and because some chromosomal changes may be cryptic, we have P0387. mLPA as a screening of aneuploidy and unbalanced conducted an interphase FISH study anlysing 14q32 and 13q14 chromosomal rearrangements in spontaneous miscarriages rearrangements, which are the most common genetic aberrations in D. Diego-Alvarez, M. Rodriguez de Alba, C. Ramos, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas, M. A. MM, in 17 tunisian patients with MM using a dual-color IGH probe Lopez-Martinez, J. Aneiros-Fernandez, C. Ayuso, I. Lorda-Sanchez; mapping at 14q32 and a probe specific of the D13S319 locus, at Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. 13q14 . Chromosomal anomalies account for no less than 50% of first Interphase FISH revealed translocations involving the IGH locus in 14 trimester spontaneous abortions (SAs) . Despite establishing the (88 .2%) patients . cause of miscarrige is recommended in order to offer an appropriate Eight (47%) patients had 13q14 deletion, seven of whom also had IGH genetic counselling, cytogenetic study of such specimens entail translocation high rates of culture failure or wrong diagnosis due to maternal In conclusion, this study demonstrates the high incidence of the IGH cell contamination . Moreover, some authors support the idea that rearrangement in tunisian patient with MM . conventional cytogenetics may yield normal karyotypes or selected Moreover, the D13S319 deletion indicate the presence on this locus of abnormal ones that allow in vitro cell proliferation, suggesting that a yet-unidentified gene with a tumor suppressor function. rates of abnormalities uncommonly seen by classic cytogenetics may For a better inderstanding of pathological mechanisms of MM and to be more frequent than the reported ones . assess the incidence of each IGH translocation, other FISH analysis The Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) technique will be further perfomed using probes specific of the most common permits the detection of copy number changes of subtelomeric DNA partner sites of the IGH gene like: Bcl 1 located at 11q13, FGFR3 at sequences for both arms of every chromosome in a single assay . Here 4p16, C-maf at 16q23 and the proto-oncogene c-myc located at 8q24 .Cytogenetics 1 P0390. cytogenetic analysis of pol and gag msRV sequences in P0392. High-resolution of comparative genomic hybridization ms patients improves detection of chromosomal aberrations with prognostic M. Zawada1, M. Pernak1, I. Liweń1, D. Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska1,2, K. No- significance in neuroblastoma wicka1, J. Rembowska1, H. Hertmanowska3, M. Wender4, J. Nowak1; P. Kuglik1, V. Vranova1, D. Zezulkova2, L. Stefancikova1, E. Necesalova2, H. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, Filkova2, A. Oltova2, P. Mazanek3, J. Sterba3; 2University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 3State Hospital, Department 1Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk of Neurology, Poznań, Poland, 4Neuroimmunological Unit, Medical Research University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University Center, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland. Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Clinic of Pediatric Oncology, University Hospi- Pathogenesis of MS is still poorly understood . Multiple sclerosis- tal, Brno, Czech Republic. associated retrovirus (MSRV) is postulated as one of the pathogenic Neuroblastoma (NB) is a genetically very heterogeneous pediatric factors of MS . malignant tumor . The clinical course of NB vary markedly . Therefore The aim of our studies was the assessment of MSRV pol and gag copy molecular and cytogenetic markers are studied as strong predictors number in MS patients compared to healthy individuals and persons of clinical outcome, to amnedclinical staging and aid in treatment with myasthenia . FISH studies with biotinylated PCR products of pol and planning . gag sequences were performed on chromosomes, interphase nuclei This malignancy is characterized by a broad spectrum of clinical and chromatin fibers of stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes. behavior. Low-, intermediate, and high-risk groups have been defined Although MSRV pol was found in all examined persons, the copy based upon expected outcome following conventional therapy using number of this sequence was significantly greater in MS patients both clinical and biological criteria . The criteria currently used to assign (6-24 copies on nuclei) than in myasthenia (4-5 copies) and normal risk-group are as follows: Clinical stage, MYCN status, Shimada individuals (3-6 copies) . In addition, the MSRV pol sequence exists histology and DNA ploidy . Recently, other cytogenetic changes as as tandem repeats on chromatin fibers. MSRV pol probe hybridized to 3p, 11q deletions and 17q rearrangements may also have prognostic chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 14, 17 and X . In the contrary, MSRV value . gag sequence was found in range 2-4 copies in both MS patients and A global view of genetic imbalances in NB patients can be detected by controls . CGH . With recently developed high resolution (HR-CGH) method, we In conclusion, evident difference in MSRV pol copy number between can find aberrations of < 10 Mb. MS patients and controls suggests that MSRV pol may play some role In our work, CGH was applied to 46 NB specimens and the data were in the etiology of multiple sclerosis . reviewed and correlated with clinical characteristics, including survival Scientific work has been supported by Ministry of Sciences and analysis. The results from our study confirmed different CGH profiles Information Society Technologies funds (Grant No 2 PO5A 139 28) . in the three major clinicogenetic subgroups . Using conventional CGH the highest incidence of genetic imbalances was observed on P0391. A Neocentromere locus at 13q31 in a supernumerary chromosomes 1p, 2p, 3p, 11q and 17q . In addition, by means of HR- marker Resulting in a mosaic tetrasomy of Distal 13q CGH we were able to detect clones with whole or partially chromosome I. M. Carreira1, A. Mascaranhas1, E. Matoso1, A. Couceiro2, M. Julião3, A. losses or gains occurring with low frequency . Jardim1, L. Ramos2, H. Tonnies4; Our results have illustrated the power of CGH/HR-CGH as a sensitive 1Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Coimbra, Portugal, 2Maternidade method for the detection of all clinically important genetic alterations Bissaya Barreto, Centro Hospitalar de Coimbra, Portugal, 3Departamento de in neuroblastoma with good correlation to other relevant methods, e .g . Anatomia Patológica, Hospital da Universidade de Coimbra, Portugal, 4Institut FISH . für Humangenetik Chromosomendiagnostik & Molekulare Zytogenetikd von Berlin, Institute of Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany. P0393. Breakpoint mapping in a Danish patient with otosclerosis Neocentromeres are functional centromeres originated in non- and a balanced translocation t(12; 15) (p13.32; q25.1) centromeric regions of chromosomes . The formation of neocentromeres I. R. Johansen1,2, Z. Tümer1, N. D. Rendtorff1, I. Bache1, N. Tommerup1, L. results in conferring mitotic stability to chromosome fragments that do Tranebjærg1,2; not contain alpha satellite DNA . 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functionel Genome Research, 2200 Copen- We present a prenatal diagnosis in a 34 year-old gravida, on the hagen N, Denmark, 2Department of Audiology, Bispebjerg Hospital, Bispebjerg 24th week of gestation with ultrasound malformations: large cisterna Bakke 23, Copenhagen NV, Denmark. magna, no renal differentiation, hypotelorism and ventriculomegaly . Otosclerosis with a prevalence of 0 .2-1% is the single most common Cytogenetic analysis of G-banded chromosomes from the amniotic fluid cause of hearing impairment . The disease is characterized by isolated cells and fetal blood revealed a supernumerary marker chromosome endochondral bone sclerosis of the labyrinthine capsule . Conductive in mosaic. Molecular cytogenetics analysis using fluorescence in hearing loss develops when otosclerotic foci invade the stapedio- situ hybridization with alpha satellites probes, chromosome specific vestibular joint (oval window) and interfere with free mobility of the painting and subtelomeric probes for chromosome 13 was performed stapes . Sensorineural hearing loss may also be present . Mean age of as well as comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) . These onset is in the third decade and 90% of affected persons are under 50 studies showed that this marker was an inverted duplication of the years of age at the time of diagnosis . At present, seven otosclerosis distal portion of chromosome 13q with no detectable alpha satellite loci (OTSC1-7), are known or reserved, but no underlying genes have DNA . The presence of a functional neocentromere on this marker been identified. chromosome was confirmed by immunofluorescence with antibodies to The objective of the present study was to map the breakpoint in a patient centromere protein-C (CENP-C) . The neocentomeric constriction was with otosclerosis and a balanced translocation . Hearing impairment at band 13q31 . Parents decided, after genetic counseling, to terminate segregated with the balanced translocation in a brother and the father . pregnancy . An autopsy was performed and the anatomopatologic At present, we have localised the breakpoint to 15q25 .1 and 12p13 .32 study revealed a female fetus with facial dysmorphisms, low set ears respectively, by fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) mapping. and renal dysplasia . Interestingly, on chromosome 15 this localization is just proximal to the Mosaicism, often observed in patients with neocentromeres, suggests otosclerosis locus, OTSC1,described by linkage analysis . However that its segregation efficiency is lower than for normal centromeres. the breakpoint is within the DFNB48 deafness locus . We are planning Eleven supernumerary neocentromeric chromosomes originating to screen DNA from a panel of otosclerosis patients for mutations in from the distal region of chromosome 13q have been reported . This identified candidate genes. frequency suggests this chromosome to have and increased propensity for neocentromere formation . However, there is only one more case P0394. Partial monosomy 13q syndrome. Report of four described with the location of the neocentromere in band 13q31 . unrelated cases. L. Grozdanova1, I. Ivanov1, T. Krastev1, B. Dimitrov2, M. Stefanova1; 1Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. Partial monosomy 13q syndrome is an uncommon but well-recognized abnormality of chromosome 13 . The wide spectrum and variability of Cytogenetics 1 phenotype manifestations associated with this syndrome depend on P0397. the familial reciprocal translocation t(2;6) (p21;p25) how much of the long arm of chromosome 13 is deleted . Here we associated with wide spectrum of phenotypic signs - from report four unrelated cases with a de novo partial 13q deletion . Three normal to severe malformations of them are cytogenetically visible, such as r(13)(p11;q34) found in 3 B. Aleksiūnienė1, A. Matulevičienė1, V. Kučinskas1,2; years old boy, del(13)(q31-32) in 3 months old boy, and del(13)(q22 .2- 1Medical Genetics Center, Vilnius University Hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Dept. q33) in 2 months old girl . Subtelomeric FISH analysis reveal the fourth Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. aberration, submicroscopic terminal del(13)(q34), in 9 months old We present a case of familial reciprocal translocation t(2;6)(p21;p25) girl . Clinical presentation of all cases share large number of common associated with wide spectrum of phenotypic signs - from normal to features: pre- and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, broad severe malformations . A girl who presented with unusual phenotypic prominent forehead, hypertelorism, small nose, depressed nasal signs had a reciprocal translocation 46,XX,t(2;6)(p21;p25), inherited bridge, anteverted nostrils, enlarged mouth with down-turned angels, from phenotypically normal father . Our patient is four-year-old girl, slight micrognathia, highly arched palate, apparently low set ears, the second child of healthy non consanguineous parents from the short neck, small hands, thenar hypoplasia, proximal placement of second complicated pregnancy with symptoms of early toxicosis and the thumb, clinodactyly of the fifth finger, partial or full simian palmar miscarriage . The girls‘ dysmorphic features are presented from the crease, over-riding toes . All cases present with mental retardation, birth: dolichocephaly, coloboma and lid ptosis of the right eye, cleft lip most profound in ring 13 patient. Brain anomalies are confirmed in and palate on the right size, lissencephaly . The ulcerative colitis was three of them and suspected in the fourth . Genitalia are abnormal in diagnosed about one year ago . The psychomotor development of our the patient with r(13) whereas the subtelomeric terminal deletion case patient is with slight features of delay . shows anorectal anomaly . This report further contributes to the clinical Her clinical findings such as cardiac and abdominal ultrasonography and genetic delineation of the partial monosomy 13q syndrome in were without pathological changes. Lissencephaly was identified on a accordance to the size of the deleted region . cranial ultrasound scan at the early infancy . The identical translocation has a twin brother of the girl‘s father P0395. cytogenetic abnormalities in a case with plasmacytoid too. There are five healthy children and one miscarriage in this twin dendritic cell leukemia brother‘s family . A. Zagorac1, A. Erjavec Skerget1, B. Zagradisnik1, S. Zver2, M. Glaser1, N. Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes showed Kokalj Vokac1; the same reciprocal translocation t(2;6) (p21;p25) in girl with 1Maribor Teaching Hospital, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia, 2Medical Center Ljubljana, severe malformations and her father and father‘s twin brother are 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. phenotypically normal . Chromosome analysis was performed from CD4(+)CD56(+) malignancies are rare hematologic neoplasms, which GTG banded metaphases . The resolution level was 400-500 bands . were recently shown to correspond to the so-called type 2 dendritic cell (DC2) or plasmacytoid dendritic cells . We present a case of P0398. Parental origin in recurrent trisomic abortions CD4(+)CD56(+) acute leukemia that coexpressed CD 123, HLA - I. Lorda-Sanchez, D. Diego-Alvarez, R. Cardero, M. Maiques, J. Diaz-Reca- DR , CD 36, CD 38, CD 45RA and was CD 3 negative, showed the sens, M. Rodriguez de Alba, C. Ramos; typical clinical course of plasmacytoid dendritic cell leukemia, and had Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain. unexplained aberrant karyotype . The proband’s karyotype revealed Spontaneous abortions (SAs) occur in 10-15% of clinically recognised absence of one normal chromosome 13 and 21, additional material pregnancies and chromosomal anomalies account for at least 50% attached to the short arm of chromosome 20 and two copies of marker of first trimester SAs. Recurrent miscarriages (RM) affect up to 3% chromosome . The additional material on 20p was characterized by of couples trying to have children .The frequency of aneuploidy in RM FISH, using chromosome paints, as part of chromosome 13 . The two varies between different studies and has been mostly associated to copies of marker chromosome were identified as two isochromosomes maternal age . for 21q using CGH and FISH . FISH analysis also showed the deletion Here we present six cases with recurrent fetal aneuploidies . Data from of chromosome region 13q14 .3 (D13S25 locus) in 80 % of examined chromosomes implicated, parental origin, parental age and total of interphase nuclei . We ascertained that the proband’s karyotype was gestations are shown in the table . 46,XY,-13,der(20)t(13;20)(q12;p12),i(21q),+i(21q). 1st tris (ori- 2nd tris (ori- Our results illustrate the power of FISH and CGH to detect and 3rd tris Gestations mat/Pat age characterize chromosomal rearrangements that couldn’t be solved gin) gin) solely with classical cytogenetic analysis . 35/37; 39/41; A 47,XY,+7 47,XX,+22 47,XX,+22 G6/P2/A4 41/43 P0396. A de novo partial monosomy 12p and a partial trisomy 18q in a chorionic villus biopsy. I 47,XX,+13 47,XX,+14 G4/P0/A4 36/ ;37/ M. J. V. Hoffer1, J. Knijnenburg2, D. M. Lourens1, A. Stelloo1, D. Oepkes3, E. K. Bijlsma1; 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Dept. of Molecu- MM 47,XX,+22 M-I 47,XX,+7 M-I G3/P1/A2 32/32; 33/33 lar Cell Biology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Dept. of Obstetrics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands. Genomic imbalances can cause mental retardation, congenital MC 47,XX,+21 P-II47,XX,+22 M-I G2/P0/A2 33/39; 34/40 malformations and miscarriages . We report about a healthy 36-year- old G3P2 woman who was referred to our hospital for a chorionic villus N 47,XX,+13 M-I47,XX,+5 M-II G4/P0/A4 33/34; 33/35 biopsy at 13 weeks of gestation . Prenatal diagnosis was performed because of an increased risk for trisomy 21 based on serum screening and nuchal translucency measurement . Cytogenetic analysis of G- Y 47,XX,+16 M-I 47,XY,+7 M-I G6/P1/A5 39/40; 40/41 banded chromosomes showed additional material on the short arm of chromosome 12 . Multicolour FISH and FISH using subtelomeric probes revealed a de novo unbalanced translocation, 46,XX,der(12) Parental karyotypes were normal . In addition, all couples presented t(12;18)(p13.3;q21) resulting in a partial monosomy 12p and a partial heterotrisomy, which discard gonadal mosaicism . As expected parental trisomy 18q . The parental chromosomes were normal . Additional origin was maternal in most cases, but a paternal origin was found in ultrasound screening did not reveal any structural abnormalities . one trisomy 21 case . Maternal age was >35 only in half of them and Because of a large imbalance of genetic material, the pregnancy was reproductive history showed the presence of further miscarriages (not terminated at 19 weeks of gestation . Post mortem examination of the cytogenetically studied) as well as sterility periods in most of them . foetus revealed multiple mild dysmorfological features . Other mechanisms apart from those related to maternal age, like hormonal imbalances, genes involved in chromosomal recombination or environmental exposures might predispose to recurrent trisomic abortions .Cytogenetics 16 P0399. Haematological and cytogenetic studies on Rheumatoid evaluation and chromosome investigation . The phenotypic abnormalities Arthritis in tamilnadu state,india. included CHD, downslanting palpebral fissures, protruding tongue, B. Vellingiri, S. K, L. Kumar; broad thumbs and toes and moderate mental retardation . Chromosome Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. study by high resolution GTG banding showed a partial deletion of Rheumatoid Arthritis is a chronic disease affecting joints and is one short arm of chromosome 10 . The Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization of the leading disease types in Tamilnadu state, south India . In the (FISH) was carried out using BAC probes specific for loci within band present investigation, we analyzed the hematological and Cytogenetic p14 and PCR probes specific for loci within bands p12.2 and p13 on factors in RA patients . Around 340 patients were selected (males: the short arm of chromosome 10 . The resuls indicated an interstial 160,females: 180) in a population based case control study from deletion in the short arm of the abnormal chromosome 10 . The deleted Tamilnadu state . In Haematological parameters, we carried out the region is estimated to be between 6 .5Mb and 15 .5Mb in size . It does RBC count, WBC count, Differential Leucocytes count, Erythrocyte not include the GATA3 and BRUNOL3 genes, deletions of which sedimentation rate(ESR) and total Hemoglobin(Hb) content . The have been associated with phenotypic features similar to Di George results were statistically significant in Haematological tests, when syndrome . So far in 10 percent of Rubinstein Taybi cases, deletion compared to the control samples . Chromosomal analysis was of short arm of chromosome 16 at p13 .3 has been indicated . To our carried out using standard Karyotype procedures in 60 male and knowledge, this is the first reported such case which could introduce female patients independently . Among the male subjects only 8 of new candidate loci for RTS . them (13 .33%) displayed chromosomal aberrations and in females 13(21 .67%) displayed chromosomal aberrations . In the present study, P0402. complex mosaic imbalanced karyotype in prenatal one male subject with deletion of short arm of chromosome 5[46,XY, diagnosis: identification of small supernumerary marker del (5p-)] and a female with a deletion of long arm of chromosome chromosomes using high resolution multicolor FisH approaches 6[46,XX, del (6q-)] was observed .The deletion of the short arm of A. D. Polityko1, E. Abramchik1, O. Khurs1, E. Jaroshevich1, K. Mrasek2, T. chromosome 6[46,XY, del (6p-)] was also noted in two males . We Liehr2; also observed other changes like translocations, inversions, satellite 1Republican Medical Center “Mother and child”, Minsk, Belarus, 2Institute of formation and mosaic types in different chromosomes of both male Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. and female experimental samples as compared to the controls . The The combination of different constitutional chromosomal abnormalities, present investigation clearly showed more females affected than few small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) in high level males . Also, post menopause females in age group of 45 years and mosaic karyotype is rare cytogenetic finding. We report the results of above were affected more when compared to females of lower age prenatal karyotyping (amniocentesis in 17 weeks of gestation because groups . of mother’s age 38 years) where standard GTG-banding analysis revealed mosaic imbalanced karyotype in fetus 47,XY,der(18),+mar[70]/ P0400. meiotic segregation of rare Robertsonian translocations: 48,XY,+mar1,+mar2[20]/47,XY,del(18),+mar[5]/46,XY,-18,+mar[5] . sperm studies of three t(14q;22q) cases. Karyotypes of spouses were normal both . K. Moradkhani1, J. Puechberty1, G. Lefort2, P. Vago3, P. Sarda2, S. Hamamah4, Molecular cytogenetics . We applied M-FISH, high resolution multicolor F. Pellestor1; banding FISH (MCB) and centromere-specific DNA probes for further 1CNRS UPR 1142, Montpellier, France, 2Department of Medical Genetics, CHU clarification of prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis. Using material of Montpellier, France, 3Laboratory of Cytogenetics, CHU Clermont-Ferrand, the next several subcultures of amniocytes the new data of mosaic France, 4Laboratory of Biology of the Reproduction, CHU Montpellier, France. karyotype were shown by M-FISH: 48,XY,del(18),+mar1,+mar2/ The t(14;22) remains one of the rare Robertsonian translocations 48,XY,der(18),+mar1,+mar2/48,XY,+mar1,+mar2/ observed in human, with an occurrence estimated at 1 .2% . Three 47,XY,der(18),+mar1/47,XY,der(18),+mar2/47,XY,del(18),+mar1/ cases of Robertsonian translocation t(14 ;22) were investigated for 47,XY,del(18),+mar2/ meiotic segregation in sperm samples from male carriers using FISH 47,XY,-18,+mar1,+mar2/46,XY,-18,+mar/46,XY,der(18)/46,XY . Mar1 procedure . The 3 carriers included 2 men with an abnormal semen and mar2 were characterized by M-FISH as micro-ring chromosomes analysis (oligoasthenoteratozoospermia and teratospermia) and 16 and 18 correspondingly, and sequent FISH study using cep16 one with normal semen parameters. Both locus-specific probes and D16Z3 SO and cep18 D18Z1 SG (Vysis) confirmed these results. whole chromosome painting probes, specific for chromosomes 14 The next step of diagnosis using MCB allowed to specify precisely and 22, were used in this study . The number of spermatozoa scored the deleted chromosome 18 as del(18)(p11 .1) and demonstrated for each probe set ranged from 3279 to 10024 . In the 3 carriers, the involvement of segments 18p11 .2-11 .3 in mar2 formation . Small similar frequencies were found for normal and balanced spermatozoa unknown segment of additional material on p arm of der(18) was not resulting from alternate segregation (from 78 .53% to 81 .76%) . The originated from chromosome 18 . total proportion of unbalanced spermatozoa resulting from adjacent The mechanisms of de novo formation of the complex mosaic modes of segregation ranged from 17.59% to 20.94%. This finding imbalanced karyotype and algorithm of elucidation of origin and extent confirmed the predominance of alternate segregation over other of chromosomal imbalance in mosaic fetus are discussed . segregation types in all Robertsonian translocations and indicates a higher production of imbalances in the t(14 .22) than in most of the P0403. An unusual finding in couples with 6 recurrent abortions Robertsonian translocations previously analysed . This could be related F. Farzanfar, M. Safavi, C. Azimi; to the variable location of breakpoints in Robertsonian translocations . Dept. of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital, and Dept. of This breakpoint diversity could also play a role in the differences Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, in reproductive status observed in male carriers of Robertsonian Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. translocations . Cytogenetic studies of early spontaneous abortions show a very This study was supported by a French research project PHRC (N° high rate of abnormality, specially those occurring before 12 weeks 7732) from the CHU of Montpellier . of gestation when some 60% show abnormalities .There have been several studies of the chromosomes of couples who have had repeated P0401. Fluorescent in situ Hybridization (FisH) demontrares spontaneous abortions . In more than 10% of such couples one partner an interstitial deletion of short arm of chromosome 10 at is found to have a balanced chromosome anomaly . Chromosome p11.2p12.32 in a patient with Rubinstein taybi syndrome (Rts). studies among the large number of couples with recurrent abortions New candidate loci for Rts? show that about 1 .5% of the cases were due to the structural F. Behjati1, S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, N. Dixon2, C. M. Ogilvie2, Y. Shafeghati1; chromosomal rearrangements . A 30 years old woman was referred to 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation our Department following to six spontaneous abortions, all during the Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cytogenetics Dept., Guy’s & first trimester. Karyotyping was performed by high resolution banding St.Thomas’ Hospital Trust, London, United Kingdom. technique according to standard procedures and showed 46,XY for A seven year old Iranian boy with Rubinstein-taybi syndrome (RTS) her husband, and 46,XX,ins(5;4)(q22;q35q22) for our case. Therefore, features was referred to the Genetics Research center for both clinical karyotyping of her family was carried out consisted of her mother, Cytogenetics 1 father and her only brother and the results are as follows: and eczema which were not observed . The report of the clinical and Mother: 46,XX molecular presentation of similar cases will allow accurate phenotype- Father: 46,XY,ins(5;4)(q22;q35q25)t(4;7)(p15.2;p22) genotype correlation and proper genetic counseling of the family . Brother: 46,XY,ins(5;4)(q22;q35q25)There were 46 chromosomes in all the cells of the father, with an inverted insertion between chromosomes P0406. An unexpected de novo 22q13 subtelomeric deletion - a 5 and 4 . The long arm segments between bands 4q35 and 4q25 has case report been inverted and then inserted in to the long arm of chromosome 5 at K. Kuuse1, U. Vaher2, K. Õunap1,3; the band 5q22 . There was also translocation between chromosomes 1Medical Genetics Center, United Laboratories,Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, 4 and 7 at the band of p15 .2 and p22 . It is not clear that why this Estonia, 2Children’s Clinic of Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 3Depart- translocation was not in our case and her brother . It is worth to mention ment of Pediatrics, Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia. that the mother of our case had 14 spontaneous abortions We report a cytogenetic investigation of a 3-month old boy, to whom an unexpected de novo 22q13 subtelomeric deletion was detected . P0404. instability of genomes with the patients with He was born prematurely at 36 week of gestation by Caesarean streptococcus tonsillitis section due to intrauterine growth retardation and oligohydramnion . I. E. Kravchenco, V. V. Semenov, V. X. Fasilov, R. G. Zaripova, A. V. Semenov; His birth weight was 1740g (-2 SD), length 45 cm (-1 .5 SD), Apgar Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation. score 3/6/7. The mother was first time consulted by geneticist at 18 We defined the level of genomes injury in peripheral blood cells at 179 week of pregnancy due to positive double test (AFP 2,62; HCG 2,94 streptococcus tonsillitis patients . MoM) . Ultrasound investigation revealed bilaterally dilated ureters . The intensity of aneu-clastogenesis in organism of the patients was At the age of 3 months his clinical picture consists of developmental valued on the level of micronuclei in erythrocytes and the quantity of delay, failure to thrive (-2 SD), bilaterally dilated ureters, bilateral aberrations in lymphocytes of peripheral blood . hydrocele, umbilical hernia, hearing impairment from the left ear and It was stated, that the level of micronuclei and reconstructions of persistent foramen ovale . Brain MRI showed hypoplasia of corpus chromosomes in blood cells of most of the patients significantly (p < callosum, cavum septi pellucidi and vergae . 0,001) exceeds the same indexes of the healthy people, both in acute The karyotype was found normal by conventional karyotyping (band period of disease and in the periods reconvalescence (8-10 and 30- level 550) . FISH analysis for CATCH-22 microdeletion was ordered 32 days from the illnesses onset) . The level of genomes injury was due to the operated cleft palate present in mother . FISH analysis correlated with the intensity and frequency of the disease and did not was done according to the protocol suggested by the supplier of the depended on the age and gender of the patients . probes (Cytocell, Aquarius; DiGeorge/VCFS TUPLE1 Region Probe). It is supposed that destabilization of genome is unspecified stage in Surprisingly the analysis demonstrated the absence of the control pathogenesis of streptococcus tonsillitis . signal, which locates to the region 22q13 .3 and thus the terminal The revealed phenomenon from the one hand can reflect the high level deletion on the long arm of chromosome 22 in all metaphases of generation of endomutagens in the patient’s organism and from analyzed . Both parents were normal . the other lead to the reduction of activity of the genome protection 22q13 .3 deletion syndrome may not be rare and is still underestimated . systems . The diagnosis of deletion 22q13 syndrome should be considered To control this suggestion by the method of solution we valued in children with developmental delay and hypotonia in whom other the mutagenic activity of the blood serum, and by the method of common etiologies have been excluded . culonometric titration we valued the oxidant volume of blood . The significant decrease of antimutagenic activity and antioxidant P0407. complete gonadal dysgenesis 46,XY in two sisters and volume of blood serum is indicated with the streptococcus tonsillitis their maternal aunt with a female phenotype patients . G. Bagci1, A. Bisgin1, S. B. Karauzum1, B. Trak2, G. Luleci1; 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Medical Faculty, Akdeniz Uni- P0405. Array-cGH analysis and clinical description of 2q37.3 de versity, Antalya, Turkey, 2Department of Gyneacology and Obstetrics, Medical novo subtelomeric deletion Faculty, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey. P. C. Patsalis1, C. Sismani1, G. Koumbaris1, A. Ketoni1, V. Touliatou2, A. Ko- We report two sisters of both with 46,XY karyotype and normal female lialexi2, A. Mavrou2, E. Kanavakis2, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli2; phenotype (Swyer’s syndrome) . Swyer’s syndrome is a form of pure 1Department of Cytogenetics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, gonadal dysgenesis characterized by a female phenotype, 46 XY Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Medical Genetics Laboratory, University of Athens, Choremio karyotype, hypoplastic gonads, and a normal mullerian system . They Research Laboratory, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece. appear to be normal females; however, they do not develop secondary We report a 13-year-old girl with normal karyotype and a cryptic sexual characteristics at puberty, do not menstruate, have streak submicroscopic terminal deletion of chromosome 2q, detected by gonads in ovarian localisation, and elevated levels of gonadotropins . FISH using Multiprobe-T System (Cytocell Co) . FISH analysis of both These sisters were studied from a clinical, endocrinological and genetic parents using subtelomeric specific probes for chromosome 2 (Vysis. perspective . In 1998, she was at the age of 15 who was presented Inc) revealed that the abnormality is de novo . Further investigation to us with a main complain of primary amenorrhea . Physical and with array-CGH analysis using the 1Mb resolution Spectral Chip gynecological examinations, hormonal and chromosomal analyses 2600 (Spectral Genomics) confirmed the deletion and delineated were performed trying to reveal the etiology . A karyotype revealed the breakpoints (2q37 .3) . Additional FISH studies using bacterial 46,XY in 200 GTG-banded metaphases with no detectable mosaicism . artificial chromosomes (BACs) covering the region 2q37.2-qter, were She underwent laparoscopic removal of bilateral dysgenetic gonads performed and a deletion of all the probes located in 2q37 .3 was due to risk of gonadoblastoma development . Her sister at the age of 15, found, confirming the results of both FISH and array analyses. Based in 2005, was presented to us with primary amenorrhea . Chromosome on FISH and array analyses the breakpoint is located between 236,1 analyses was performed and 200 GTG-banded metaphases were and 238,3 Mb and extends to the telomere. Clinical findings include: analyzed . It revealed a 46,XY male karyotype as same as her elder developmental delay, severe behavioural disturbances, growth-pubertal sister . Close follow-up is planned by adolescent gynecology in order retardation, dysmorphic facial features, excessive joint hypermobility, to have gonadectomy . There is also observed one case in a sibship brachymetaphalangism, abnormal dermatoglyphics and a history of of maternal aunt who has same history of primary amenorrhea but neonatal laryngomalacia, hypotonia and umbilical hernia . Hearing married with no consanguinity and have no children yet . evaluation showed congenital conductive mild hearing loss bilaterally, As a proposition we counsel the family for molecular studies of SRY while growth hormone deficiency and compensate hypothyroidism gene and the reason of their localisation far from our university, this was demonstrated . To date, approximately 60 cases of deletions of study will be made soon . chromosome 2q37 (visible or submicroscopic) have been reported with significant clinical variability. The findings in our proband are in keeping with those of the literature, as well as the facial features with the exception of cardiovascular, urogenital, neurological anomalies Cytogenetics 1 P0408. A case of complete tetraploidy in Amniotic fluid culture, defect ostium secundum and patent ductus arteriosus, cryptoorchidism with normal Karyotype in the repeat and peculiar facial dysmorphisms (microcephaly, prominent forehead, M. Mirzazadeh, A. Kariminejad, R. Kariminejad, H. Jafarieh, A. Rajaee, V. Ha- telechantus, short and upslanting palpebral fissures, small nose, davi, N. Nabavinia, F. Azimi, F. Zeinali, L. Alami, M. H. Kariminejad; severe micrognathia, high arched palate, low set, posteriorly shaped Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic and dismorphic ears) . The clinical phenotype suggests the Toriello- of Iran. Carey syndrome (TCS) . We report a case of complete tetraploidy in amniotic fluid culture The high resolution classical cytogenetic studies and further molecular obtained at 14 weeks of pregnancy . Amniocentesis was performed in characterization (using CGH-array and FISH analyses), revealed this pregnancy because of high maternal age and history of offspring a complex intrachromosomal rearrangement on the long arm of with meningomyelocele . Sonography at that time revealed a single chromosome 4 . fetus with normal fetal activity and heart beat. Amniotic fluid volume The aetiology of the TCS is still unknown, however an autosomal was normal. The amniotic fluid obtained was yellow and clear. It was recessive inheritance seems likely . To date, only three different cultured in 2 flasks. Growth was very slow in one culture with no chromosome abnormalities have been identified in patients with TCS, growth in the other . Harvest was possible after 3 weeks which revealed suggesting genetic heterogeneity . In conclusion, our cytogenetic case tetraploidy in all studied plates. AFP of amniotic fluid was 24.1KIU/ml report disclosed further genetic heterogeneity in TCS . (normal range 11 .1-48 .1 for 15 weeks) . A repeat culture was performed at 18 weeks of gestation and a FISH P0411. Are parents of trisomic offspring at increased risk for analysis was performed using X and Y centromeric probes . Repeat carrying a chromosomal anomaly? culture revealed 46,XY pattern in 89 out of 90 studied plates . Only one K. Keymolen, C. Staessen, I. Liebaers; plate revealed tetraploidy . 200 interphase cells were studied for the University hospital, Dutch Speaking Free University, Brussels, Belgium. FISH analysis and 98% had one single X and one single Y signal . Karyotypes are often performed for parents of trisomic offspring . This Sonography at 18 weeks of pregnancy revealed no abnormality . A is merely done in order to detect structural anomalies which could healthy male infant was born at term and is doing well . increase the risk for aneuploid gametes through interchromosomal We conclude that abnormal karyotypes in poor growth cultures could effect . be misleading and have to be confirmed with repeat cultures. In this retrospective study, we looked at the laboratory files of 316 post- and prenatal cytogenetic analyses with trisomy and registered the P0409. Rertrospective FisH-analysis of tetraploidy in native parental karyotypes . The aim of the study was to see whether these extraembryonic tissues of first-trimester spontaneous parents are more likely to carry a chromosomal anomaly compared to abortions with 4n or mosaic 2n/4n karyotype after conventional the general population . cytogenetics For the 316 trisomic samples, 309 maternal and 275 paternal A. Kashevarova, E. Tolmacheva, E. Sazhenova, N. Sukhanova, I. Lebedev; karyotypes with G-staining were performed . Of these 584 karyotypes, Institute of Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, 577 were normal (98 .8%), 1 was numerically abnormal (0 .17%) and 6 Russian Federation. were structurally abnormal (1,02%) . Three structural anomalies were It has been found that 3-6% of first-trimester spontaneous abortions Robertsonian translocations causing the trisomy in the offspring and with chromosomal abnormalities have tetraploid karyotype . 3 structural anomalies involved other chromosomes than the trisomic Conventional cytogenetic analysis of abortions from Tomsk population chromosome of the offspring (2 reciprocal translocations and 1 has revealed a high frequency of tetraploidy (22%) . In dead embryos pericentric inversion) . If we omit the Robertsonian translocations, this tetraploidy usually present in the mosaic state . This situation is means that a parent of a child with regular trisomy has a risk of 3/581 considered to be an artifact due to increasing ploidy level during cell (0 .51%) of being carrier of a balanced structural chromosal anomaly culturing, therefore a true impact of tetraploidy on prenatal selection and a risk of 1/581 (0 .17%) of having a numerical chromosomal remains unclear . On the other hand, polyploid cells are an obligatory anomaly. When we compare this to figures for the general population element of human placenta . The aim of the present research was to (0.15% reciprocal translocations and inversions; 0.15% for sex determine the level of tetraploid cells in native extraembryonic tissues chromosomal aneuploidy), there seems to be an increase in the risk of first-trimester spontaneous abortions with 4n or 2n/4n karyotype for structural anomalies, however this study only contains a small by dual-colour interphase FISH with centromere-specific DNA probes number of samples and larger studies should be set up . for chromosomes 11 and 17 . The one-sided upper reference limit for tetraploidy detection in the extraembryonic mesoderm of the placenta P0412. three months survival of a patient with non mosaic (1 .0%) was determined in the control group of induced abortions . Thirty trisomy 22 spontaneous abortions with 4n or 2n/4n karyotype after conventional B. Albrecht1, C. Henske2, U. Himbert2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1; cytogenetic analysis were studied . The frequency of tetraploid cells 1Institut fuer Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 2St. Elisabeth, Klinik fuer Kinder- in long-term cultures of mosaic embryos and in non-cultured tissue und Jugendmedizin, Neuwied, Germany. has varied from 4 to 69% and from 0 .3% to 95 .2%, respectively . But We report on a girl who was the fourth child of a healthy, non statistically significance excess of control level was registered for 13 consanguineous German couple . Two elder sibs are healthy . In the embryos only (43%). Thus the verified frequency of tetraploidy among third retarded sister no cytogenetic anomaly was detected . The patient spontaneous abortions with chromosomal abnormalities is 9 .6% in was born at term spontaneously after an uneventful pregnancy out of studied population . Our data indicate that cell polyploidization in vitro breech presentation. Amniotic fluid was green, APGAR score 7/7/8. should be taken into account for analysis of cytogenetic factors of Birth measurements were low normal (weight 2690 g = P3, length 49 prenatal selection in human . This research was supported by RFBR cm = P10-25, OFC 32 .5 cm = P3-10) . Facial anomalies were: marked number 05-04-48129 . hypertelorism, left sided cleft lip and cleft palate and low set ears . Further clinical investigations revealed an ASD II and a stenosis of P0410. toriello-carey like phenotype associated with a complex the pulmonary artery, an agenesis of corpus callosum and a dilated intrachromosomal rearrangements on 4q. renal pelvis . P. Prontera1, S. Palma2, A. Sensi1, V. Aiello1, B. Buldrini1, R. Ortore2, G. Ga- Cytogenetic analysis of lymphocytes showed trisomy 22 in 100 rani3, R. Gruppioni1, E. Calzolari1, A. Martini2; analysed metaphases (karyotpe 47, XX, +22) . Whole chromosome 1Genetica Medica, Università di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2Audiologia, Università di paint 22 confirmed the identity of the additional chromosome 22. Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 3Neonatologia, Università di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. Chromosomal analysis of fibroblasts confirmed the diagnosis of Our Units are involved in the diagnosis and the management of trisomy 22 in all 50 analysed cells . Cytogenetic investigations of the syndromic hearing loss . parents showed normal karyotypes (46, XX, 46, XY) . Here we report on a 3-years-old child who presents conductive hearing The patient needed oxygen supply throughout her life . After intensive loss, evaluated by behavioural audiometry and confirmed by ABR care and hospital treatment for one month she lived at home for 2 (threshold 60dB nHL), associated with bilateral atresia of external months and died of intestinal complications (vomiting and constipation) . auditory canal, global developmental delay, hypotonia, atrial septal Further investigations and surgical treatment were not wanted .Cytogenetics 1 Survival of patients with non mosaic trisomy 22 is rarely reported . The one of these patients the Y chromosome was dicentric . In most cases facial phenotype with marked hypertelorism and cleft lip and palate is of 45,X/46,XY mosaicism, the cause is considered to be the loss of recognizable . We will provide a brief review of the previously published the Y chromosome because of nondisjunction after normal disomic cases . fertilization . In one patient there was apparent nondisjunction of a primary 46,XY conceptus resulting in mosaicism 45,X/46,XY/47,XYY P0413. Non-enzymatic labeling of DNA using the universal (in 43%, 47% and 10% of cells respectively) . In one patient only 47,XYY Linkage system (ULs tm) in arraycGH applications cells were found (only blood culture investigated) . The youngest patient D. Pappaioannou, D. Postma, C. Henriet, S. Snoeijers; was a newborn baby (mixed gonadal dysgenesis was suspected only Kreatech Biotechnology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. for this patient), the oldest was 50 years old . The age of most patients The Universal Linkage System (ULS™) is a (platinum-based) labeling ranged between 15 and 23 years . Mental development of patients was technology that allows labeling of biomolecules like RNA, DNA and corresponding to their age . proteins with a large variety of widely used haptens and fluorophores. Because the ULS™ labeling system is a chemical labeling technology, P0416. De novo X/X translocation in a patient with 46,X,ter rea complete control over the labeling process is achieved . The “no (X;X) karyotype need for enzymes” approach makes the labeling procedure very M. Khaleghian, C. Azimi; reproducible and robust . For arrayCGH applications the ULS™ system Dept. of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital, and Dept. of demonstrates one of its key advantages by the direct labeling of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, genomic DNA samples isolated from both fresh and archival samples . Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. For instance, ULS™ technology makes it easier to obtain high-quality X/X translocations are quite rare in man . The effect of this X chromosome arrayCGH data from old formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) abnormality on the phenotype is variable . It depends on the amount of material.Many arrayCGH applications will require significant amounts deleted material and whether the chromosomes are joined by their of genomic DNA from each sample, the available amount of DNA can long or the short arms . Our case was an 18 years old girl with 157 .5 be limiting and whole-genome amplification (WGA) is a necessity prior cm height and 47 kg weight, who was referred to our Department due to hybridization . ULSTM offers a flexible and reproducible way to label to primary amenorrhea . Her parents were non-consanguineous and this WGA amplified DNA. The WGA amplification technology uses in a good health . She had 4 healthy sibs . In the physical examination, unmodified nucleotides which gives higher yields and better quality she had manifestations of turner’s syndrome, including: low hairline, amplified DNA than with the use of Random Prime methods using short and thickened neck, cubitus valgus, broad and shield-shaped modified nucleotides. ULS technology provides a flexible way to label thorax, small breasts, wide-spaced nipples, infantile external genitalia, the amplified DNA without a second enzymatic step.This results in a scant pubic and axillary hair . Sonography report showed lack of very short labeling procedure with less introduction of bias compared ovaries and hypoplasia of uterus . Her IQ was intermediate level . Her to enzymatic labeling technologies . Here we will report data on the thyroid hormones were normal but her FSH and LH levels were high . performance of the ULS™ technology in arrayCGH experiments on Her heart, kidneys, eyes, and ears were unremarkable . Metaphase genomic DNA, FFPE DNA and WGA amplified DNA. chromosomes were prepared from PHA stimulated lymphocytes . Karyotyping was performed by different banding techniques according P0414. molecular and clinical description of a girl with to standard procedures and showed the end-to-end translocation or 46,X,t(Y;4)(q11.2;p16)[40]/45,X,der(4)t(Y;4)(q11.2;p16)[10] and a terminal rearrangement leading to duplication of nearly the entire X small cryptic 4p subtelomeric deletion. chromosome . This is a new case report of the Turner’s syndrome L. Zahed1, C. Sismani2, M. Ioannides2, M. Saleh1, G. Koumbaris2, A. Abdallah1, which two X chromosomes were joined by their long arms . M. Ayyache1, P. Patsalis2; 1American University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon, 2The Cyprus P0417. case report: early recognition of Werner‘s syndrome Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. (Ws) on the basis of variegated translocation mosaicism and A 13-year-old female with clinical features suggestive of Turner clonal structural chromosomal rearrangements syndrome was referred for chromosome analysis . She had short L. P. Nazarenko, S. A. Nazarenko, S. L. Vovk, I. N. Lebedev, M. N. Filimonova, stature, minimal axillary and pubic hair, and no breast development . A O. A. Puzyreva; CT scan later revealed absence of uterus and ovaries and no masses State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. in the inguinal canal . We report a 21-old female patient who was refered to the Tomsk Lymphocyte cultures revealed the following karyotype: institute of medical genetics with the preliminary cytogenetics 46,X,t(Y;4)(q11.2;p16)[40]/45,X,der(4)t(Y;4)(q11.2;p16)[10]. The loss diagnosis - 47,XX+mar . She had complaints of short stature and of the small derivative Y chromosome in 20% of the cells was also impaired vision . Her examination revealed short stature, bilateral confirmed in skin fibroblast cultures. FISH analyses using Y centromere, ocular cataracts, corneal leukoma on the left eye, generalized caries, SRY, subtelomere XpYp/XqYq, Y and 4 painting probes, confirmed the deformation of hard palate, scoliosis, hypoplasia of thyroid gland, cytogenetic findings. High resolution STS analyses using 40 markers hypocalcemia . Standard cytogenetic analysis showed additional spanning the Y chromosome determined no deletion on the Y . However, small marker chromosomes and multiple translocations involving absence of the 4p subtelomeric region was noted by FISH . Preliminary different chromosomes in 10% metaphases of peripheral blood cells . results with array-CGH analysis using the 1Mb resolution Spectral The following chromosomal rearrangements have been found: 1) Chip 2600 (Spectral Genomics) revealed no obvious deletion of the 4p 47,XX,t(3;12)(12qter→12q1.4::3p1.4→3qter;12pter→12q1.4::3p1.4→ telomeric region, however, the last array clone is 0 .35kb distal to the 4p 3pter),+mar; 2) 46,XX,t(1;9)(1qter→1q1.1;9pter→9qter::1p1.1→ subtelomeric probe used in FISH analysis . Additional array-CGH and 1pter), molecular studies in the region will reveal the exact breakpoint and the t(9;15)(9pter→9qter::15q2.1→15qter;15pter→15q2.1); 3) specific genes deleted and will help correlate findings with the clinical 46,XX,der(19); 4) 48,XX,del(10)(q2.4→qter),+1mar,+2mar; 5) presentation . 46,XX,der(4); 6) 48,XX,del(2)(pter→p1.2),+1mar,+2mar; 6) 46,XX,der(13); 7) 46,XX,t(10;14)(10pter→10qter:: P0415. Y chromosome mosaicism in turner syndrome patients. 14q2.1→14qter;14pter→14q2.1); 8) 46,XX,add(17)(q25.3) ; 9) L. Salomskienė, A. Sinkus, I. Andriuskeviciute, L. Jurkėnienė; 46,XX,der(18); 10) 46,XX,der(22). The cell clone with t(3;12) was Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania. confirmed by CISS with WCP3. The major cell clone was 46,XX. Chromosome anomalies accompanying Turner syndrome were found In view of clinical and cytogenetics findings we considered that our in lymphocyte culture of 230 patients . Chromosomal analysis revealed patient had WS . Further analysis including molecular testing of WRN karyotype 45,X in 117 (50,9%) patients, X monosomy mosaics or and LMNA genes is warranted and are being performed . To date there structural rearrangements of X chromosome was established in are only several cases of comprehensive description of chromosome 104 (45,2%) patients . In 9 (3,9%) patients with typical features of abnormalities in cultured lymphocytes observed in WS . Ulrich-Turner syndrome a Y chromosome was found . In 7 mosaics 45,X/46,XY the proportion of XY clone ranged from 46% to 76% . In Cytogenetics 10 P0418. Derivative X inactivation in a girl with unbalanced X;3 unbalanced segregation of a maternal (X;16) translocation. We translocation and very mild phenotypic abnormalities describe a 2-year-old girl with severe hypotrophy (weight -4 SD, lenght R. Genesio, L. Quagliata, F. Fabbrini, D. Melis, G. Sebastio, A. Conti, L. Nitsch; -1 .5 SD and OFC -2 .5 SD), developmental delay with hypotonia, poor University Federico II, Napoli, Italy. head control, seizures and facial dysmorphism including prominent X chromosome inactivation is a mechanism to compensate gene metopic suture, high forehead, strabismus . Her karyotype was 46,XX, dosage by silencing most of the genes on one of the X chromosomes der(17)t(X;17)(p11.4;p13.3), resulting from the meiotic malsegregetion in mammalian females . It occurs randomly during the early phases of of a balanced maternal reciprocal translocation . The partial trisomy of cell differentiation . The inactive X shows a late replicating behavior . Xp11.4→pter was confirmed using BAC specific probes of the short We have studied the spreading of X inactivation in a case of unbalanced arm of chromosome X . The additional Xp segment translocated to 17p X;3 translocation presenting very mild phenotypic alterations. The is not subject to inactivation due to its physical separation from the proband was a girl with a partial trisomy of the q arm of chromosome X-inactivation center at Xq13 .2 . Thus, the proband presents an Xp 3, including the 3q25-qter region, translocated to the p arm of one trisomy with a functional Xp disomy . Further studies with subtelomeric chromosome X . Xp subtelomeric region of the der(X) chromosome was 17p probe (Totelmix8, Vysis), with DNA Miller-Dieker probe (Vysis) and deleted . The translocation was of maternal origin . The girl presented with BAC probes specific for the 17p13.3 region showed a deletion of with mild abnormalities such as short stature, relative macrocrania, the 17p telomeric region without deletion of the Miller-Dieker region . limb shortening, pelvis malformation and cholestasis, but no mental The size of the deletion on the der(17) was evaluated at 1 Mb . The retardation . comparison of clinical features observed in the present case and in the Methylation analysis at the androgen receptor locus showed completely cases reported in the literature reveals common phenotypic features skewed X inactivation in the proband lymphocytes. A fluorescent BrdU but the involvement of the 17p deletion in the phenotype can also be assay combined with in situ hybridization using whole chromosome 3 discussed . painting demonstrated that the der(X) chromosome was late replicating in 100% of the analyzed metaphases and the late replicating region P0421. An XX male with the sRY region inserted in the long arm extended from the X chromatin across quite all the autosomal fragment of chromosome 16 excluding only the 3q29 band . J. G. Dauwerse1, K. B. M. Hansson1, A. A. M. Brouwers2, D. J. M. Peters1, M. The pattern of gene silencing on the translocated chromosome H. Breuning1; correlates well with the attenuation of the clinical phenotype associated 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Gelderse Vallei with 3q25-qter trisomy . Short stature and limb shortening in this case Hospital, Ede, The Netherlands. might be ascribed to SHOX haploinsufficiency more than to the We here present a case of an infertile 46,XX male, who has normal trisomy . masculinization of the external genitalia . With FISH, using a SRY (Sex-determining Region Y chromosome) gene containing clone, P0419. Unique an X;Y insertion in infant 45,X male we observed the presence of the SRY gene at the telomere of the V. B. Chernykh1, V. G. Antonenko1, S. V. Vyatkina2, L. F. Kurilo1, A. L. Chukhro- long arm of chromosome 16 . Further investigation using FISH with va1, N. V. Komarova1, O. A. Sh’agina1, A. V. Polyakov1; BAC and PAC clones revealed insertion of a fragment of 600 Kb of 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci- the Y chromosome containing the SRY gene and part of the pseudo ences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology of autosomal region, at 16qter . The majority of classical XX males have Russian Academy Medical Sciences, St. Peterburg, Russian Federation. the SRY gene, despite the fact they lack the Y chromosome . In these XX The X-Y translocations are rare cytogenetic findings. We report males the SRY gene, which is located close to the pseudo autosomal a unique case with X;Y insertion in 45,X male. He is an infant boundary on Yp11 .3, is transferred from Yp to Xp . This is the result of with prominent congenital progressive hydrocephaly associated an abnormal exchange during paternal meiosis I between the pseudo with lobar holoprosencephaly, ichthyosis and severe mental autosomal region of the Y chromosome and the PAR1 region of the X retardation . Conventional chromosome investigation performed on chromosome . In our patient most probably an insertional translocation cultured lymphocytes with GTG- and QFH-staining revealed mos between Yp and 16q during parental gametogenesis gave rise to the 45,der(X)ins(X;Y)[41]/45,X[9] karyotype. FISH analyses were performed aberrant chromosome 16. As far as we know this is the first report of a on lymphocyte metaphase spreads using standard protocols with 46,XX male with the SRY gene transferred to an autosome . following DNA probes: X-chromosome (DXZ1), Y-chromosome (DYZ3) centromeres, heterochromatic region Y (Yqh), whole painting probes P0422. XYY in mentally retarded boy with tall stature, of Y-chromosome (WCPY), X-chromosome (WCPX) and short arm prognathism, hypoplastic toe nails and malformations of the of X (PCPX) . In 82% metaphases in situ hybridization demonstrated hands presence of X-derivate inclusive Y-chromosome material in locus Xp22 F. Mahjoubi1, S. Tootian2, S. Karymee2, M. Akbary3, M. Khalegian2; and not revealed any numerical gonosome mosaicism . Molecular 1National centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology. ANDIranian blood analysis was performed using multiplex PCR amplifications of SRY, Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic AMG/AMGL, ZFY/ZFX loci and fifteen Y-specific STSs. Presence of Republic of Iran, 2Iranian blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, SRY, AMG, ZFY/ZFX, sY2062 and sY1248 have been demonstrated . Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Iranian blood Transfusion Orga- Yp breakpoint has been localized between sY1248 and sY211 (intervals nization Research Center, Tehran, Iran. ANDDepartment of Genetic, Faculty of 1B-2A) . X-chromosome hemizygoty have been confirmed by analysis Medicine, Tarbiat Modaress University, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of AR gene CAG-repeats in exon 1, and six additional X-chromosome of Iran. markers: DXS1062, DXS1192, STR44, STR45, STR49 and STR50 . Here we report a 25-year-old man referred to our laboratory for Apparently, the insertion of Y-chromosome material has been occurred evaluation of possible Fragile X syndrome on the basis of mild mental in Xp22 .3 nearby STS gene . retardation . He was tall (194cm) . His face was mildly dysmorphic . Prognatism was detected . He often showed excess negative mood P0420. Partial Xp trisomy with functional Xp disomy due to an and aggressiveness. He could finish his primary school. He worked unbalanced translocation between chromosome Xp and 17p as a mechanic . He suffered from Spasm and muscle cramp . He had N. Marle1, P. Callier1, P. Khau-Van-Kien2, A. Mosca1, C. Thauvin3, L. Faivre3, F. hypoplastic toe nails and short hands . Although he had a hydrocoele Mugneret1; repaired, his genitalia were otherwise normal . The patients found to 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU le Bocage, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de be negative for Fragile X . However, He was found to be 47 XYY from Génétique Moléculaire, IURC, Montpellier, France, 3Centre de Génétique, Hôpi- chromosomal examinations .Our case is the second reported case of tal d’Enfants, Dijon, France. a XYY boy with malformations of the hands. We could find just one Functional Xp disomy due to an unbalanced translocation between previous article concerning XYY males with hands malformation . This the short arm of the X chromosome and an autosome is uncommon . combination of XYY male and nails and hands deformities may be Seven cases have been reported . Most of them result from additional fortuitous . However, we think it is important to report the patient . segment Xp joined to the proximal short arm of an acrocentric In summary, it is apparent that the mental and physical characteristics chromosome (13, 15 or 22) . Only one observation is related to of the average XYY boy are yet to be determined . This is very important Cytogenetics 11 to help the parents who are seeking prenatal diagnosis and whom stature (151 cm) and some other Turner stigmata: hypersthenic, found to have a fetus with XYY karyotype to make the right decision . mandibular hypoplasia, broad shield-shaped chest with wide-spaced nipples, moderate short legs and arms . In anamnesis patient had P0423. cytogenetic and molecular characterization of Y penal hypospadia that was corrected by surgery . The cytogenetics chromosome abnormalities coupled with infertility examination was carried out on leukocyte metaphases from peripheral O. Bellovits1, A. Rusz2, B. Csókay3, F. Fodor3, E. Csonka4, G. Hadlaczky4, I. blood using GTG- and C-staining according to a standard method . Romics2, P. Sótonyi1, G. M. Bujdosó1; Dual-color FISH was performed with CEP X Spectrum Green and CEP 1Hungarian Academy of Sciences-Semmelweis University, Institute of Forensic Y Spectrum Orange labeled DNA probes . DNA was extracted from Medicine, Budapest, Hungary, 2Semmelweis University, Department of Urology, peripheral leukocytes. DNA amplifications of SRY, ZFY/ZFX and 12 Budapest, Hungary, 3Prodia Molecular Diagnostics, Budapest, Hungary, 4Insti- Yq-specific STSs: sY86, sY84, sY615 (AZFa); sY127, sY134 (AZFb); tute of Genetics, Biological Research Center, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, sY142 (proximal AZFc border); sY254, sY255 sY1197, sY1192, sY1206, Szeged, Hungary. sY1291 and sY1125 (AZFc) were performed using two multiplex PCR . Infertility affects approximately 15% of all couples . The male partner Patient’s karyotype revealed by conventional chromosome analysis is is involved in about half of the cases . Chromosomal abnormalities mos45,X[20]/46,XY[3]/47,XYY[1] . Fluorescence in situ hybridization are frequently observed in infertile men . Among infertile men, the had show that the percentage of interphase cells with only X-signal was prevalence of microdeletions of the Y chromosome is approximately 72% [645], XY - 18%[170], XYY - 9%[80], XYYY - 1%[5] . All analyzed 7% . Most of the Y chromosome microdeletions occur on the long (q) AZFc region specific markers were absent. Molecular analysis not arm and involves the azoospermic factor (AzF) regions: AzFa, AzFb revealed any Y-chromosome microdeletion in patient’s father . Evidently and AzFc . that in proband AZFc region was deleted in all Y-bearing cell lines . To The aim of this study was to estimate the incidence of Y chromosomal our knowledge, this case is first report with AZF deletion in mosaic Y alterations in patients enrolled for assisted reproduction . Preoperative chromosome polysomy . evaluation includes andrological investigation of the semen, testicular ultrasound, and analyses of hormone levels . To establish the Y P0426. Y/autosome translocation involving satellite region of chromosome abnormalities, cytogenetic analyses were also performed, unknown acrocentric chromosome in a case with oligospermy in one female, and in 38 infertile men either with azoospermia or with A. Linev1, A. Savov2, T. Krastev1, L. Grozdanova1, M. Stefanova1; severe oligozoospermia . In order to establish an exact diagnosis, 1Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. the traditional and modern cytogenetic methods were combined with Y/autosome (Y/A) translocations have been described in association molecular genetic techniques . with male infertility . Here we report a case of 38 years old man with We found patients with 48,XXYY, 47,XYY-syndrome, a female with oligospermy and a rare Y/autosome translocation, involving satellite 46,XY partial gonadal dysgenesis with bilateral dysgenetic testis . Two region of unknown acrocentric chromosome . Routine cytogenetics men with Y chromosome microdeletions were found . One of them was found an abnormal chromosome Yq consisting proximal to distal of i) an mosaic 45,X/46,XderY, where the Y chromosome was missing in more euchromatin region, CBG negative; ii) a satellite region of acrocentric than 90% of the cells . In the rest of the cells deletions were detected in chromosome, CBG positive; and iii) satellite fibbers stained positive the AzFb and AzFc regions of the Y chromosome . In the other case, a by Ag-NOR . The origin of the acrocentric chromosome involved in this non-mosaic Y chromosome was observed with deleted AzFc region . Y/A translocation was not found . Molecular analysis of the genes ZFY The incidence of chromosomal anomalies among infertile patients (Zing Finger Protein, Y-linked) and SRY (Sex Determining Region Y) strongly suggests the necessity of genetic investigation and counseling as well as the polymorphic markers sY254, sY84, sY127, sY86, sY134, prior to the ICSI treatment . sY255 showed no deletion, pointing out that chromosome loci Yp 11 .3, Yq 11 .1, Yq11 .21, Yq11 .222, Yq 11 .223 were present . However, a very P0424. Use of chromosome microdissection for Preparation small deletion of Yq euchromatin, distal to Yq11 .223 was suspected of bandicoot Y chromosome-specific FISH paint: a tool for the because of the clinical data of oligospermy . This case report further study of sex chromosome elimination in mammals contributes to the clinical and genetic delineation of Y/A translocations F. Mahjoubi1, R. Hill2, P. Johnston3; and the rare aberrations involving satellite regions of acrocentric 1National centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic chromosomes . It could be an useful source for future studies aimed at Republic of Iran, 2Div. of Molecular Science, CSIRO, North Ryde NSW. Sydney, the identification of novel gene(s) for spermatogenesis. Australia, Sydney, Australia, Australia, 3School of Biological Sciences, Macqua- rie University, NSW, Australia, NSW, Australia, Australia. P0427. turner phenotype and a male pseudohermaphroditism in Sex chromosome elimination is rare among mammals . X chromosome a girl with 45,X/45,X,t(Y;13)(q11;p13) karyotype. elimination occurs in some species of eutherians, but Y chromosome T. Krastev, D. Marichkov, S. Djambazova, E. Dimitrova, B. Anavi, M. Ste- elimination from somatic tissues has been seen only in marsupials . fanova; Among marsupials, the bandicoot Isodoon macrourus, is of particular Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria. interest, since this animal is very immature at birth, and during pouch The presence of chromosome Y is found in about 6% of cases with life sex-chromosome loss occurs at different stages of development mosaic form of Turner syndrome . Here we report a 16 years old girl with in different tissues . In the present investigation, the technique of a typical Turner phenotype, features of a male pseudohermaphroditism chromosome microdissection and linker-adaptor PCR was developed and a chromosomal mosaicism including Y chromosome in one of to produce Y specific paint from bandicoot Isoodon macrourus . By the clones . Routine cytogenetics performed on lymphocytes found employing Y-specific paint it should now be possible to examine a karyotype 45,X/45,X,t(Y;13)(q11;p13) with a clone proportion of interphase nuclei and precisely determine the proportion of cells that 84% / 16%. Fluorescent in situ hybridization analyses confirmed the eliminate the Y chromosome from different tissues of this animal . The Y presence of chromosome Y . Surgery carried out for gonadoblastome specific paint prepared here would be particularly useful for studying Y revealed a presence of both male and female internal genitalia . This chromosome elimination in haematopoietic cells from different tissues case report further contributes to the clinical and genetic delineation of and blood during early bandicoot development . the rare chromosomal mosaicism of monosomy X with a second cell line containing abnormal chromosome Y . P0425. AZFc deletion in 45,X/46,XY/47,XYY/48,XYYY male V. A. Galkina, V. B. Chernykh, T. G. Tsvetkova, N. V. Shilova, T. V. Zolotukhina, P0428. Long-term survival in infant with triploidy - a case report L. F. Kurilo, S. V. Gudzenko, A. V. Polyakov; R. Smigiel1, K. Stempniewicz2, A. Ziemba2, W. Walas2, H. Busza1, M. Sasi- Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci- adek1; ences, Moscow, Russian Federation. 1Genetic Department Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 2Intensive Yq deletions are common cause of X/XY mosaicism owing to Y Care Unit for Children, Provincial Hospital, Opole, Poland. chromosome instability . We report on the Y-chromosome long arm Triploidy is one of the most common chromosomal aberrations deletion in a 15-year-old mosaic 45,X/46,XY/47,XYY/48,XYYY male . characterized as a complete extra set of chromosomes that may be He had male external genitalia with sufficient masculinization, short maternal or paternal in origin . Triploidy usually results from one out of Prenatal diagnosis 1 two main mechanisms: aberrant segregation of chromosomes during syndrome risk was calculated by using the Fetal Medicine Foundation meiosis leading to a diploid egg or the fertilization of one egg by two software. Karyotyping was offered to women with risks ≥ 1 in 300. On sperms. Triploidy occurs in 1−3% of conceptuses, but about 99,99% the bases of maternal age of the screened population, 6 .5 Down’s are lost as first−trimester miscarriages or second−trimester fetal syndromes and 6 .5 other chromosomal abnormalities were to be death in utero . It is estimated that the incidence of triploidy is about detected . Ten out of the expected 7 Down’s syndromes and 8 out of 1:10 .000 in live born, but in most patients diploid/triploid mixoploidy the expected 7 other chromosomal abnormalities were found resulting is diagnosed . Most patients with full triploidy have died in the early in a detection rate of 100% with a false positive 5% (109/2092) . neonatal period . The main clinical symptoms of triploidy are as follows: The population screened showed 16% aged 35 and more . After the severe intrauterine disproportional growth retardation, body asymmetry, introduction of the first trimester screening to our clinic, the number of dysmorphic features and additional congenital defects . We report a invasive genetic testing decreased from 16% to 5% . In our experience very rare case of a triploid newborn with multiple congenital defects who first trimester screening for trisomy 21 and other aneuploidies has a survived to 56th day of life . The triploidy was diagnosed by cytogenetic high sensitivity with a low false positive rate and can be delivered in an examination in three type of cells: trophoblasts, lymphocytes and efficient manner in a one-stop multidisciplinary clinic. fibroblasts (69,XXY). The patient presents characteristic pattern of triploidy such as: intrauterine hypotrophy, body asymmetry and P0431. maternal serum screening for Down and Edwards disproportion between growth of the skeleton and cephalic region, syndromes and for neural tube defects. importance of a- thorax, cardiac and kidney defect, plenty of dysmorphic face features fetoprotein and hands and feet abnormalities . The mechanic ventilation was R. Sereikiene; applied, but patient didn’t require breathing stimulation from the 42nd Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania. day of life . His clinical status was stable until the 52nd day of life when Α- fetoprotein (AFP) is one of serologic markers for 21 and 18 trisomies the severe deterioration occurred with renal and liver insufficiency. The and neural tube defects screening . patient died on the 56th day of life . The purpose of the study was to analyse the reliability of this marker between pregnant woman of different age . Po03. Prenatal diagnosis Material and method: the analysis was retrospective . The data of 82 patients were reviewed during 2004 year . The age of woman was P0429. Reporting on the outcome of more than 2000 β- between 16 and 43 years. The α-fetoprotein quantity in IU/ml and µ/µ0 thalassemia prenatal diagnosis in iran. was evaluated from 14 to 20 week of pregnancy and a comparison S. Zeinali1,2, S. B. Azimifar1, M. Masrouri1, V. Lotfi1, P. foulady1, A. Abdolhos- with newborn diagnosis was made . According to data from Merkatz seini1, F. Ehterami1, S. M. Eram1; and others in 1984 AFP µ/µ0 is about 0 .70 in case of Downe and 0,65 1Medical Genetics Laboratory of Dr. Zeinali., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, in case of Edwards syndrome . 2Department of Biotechnology, Pasteur Institute., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Results: in 65 cases results of AFP were normal and newborns were Iran. healthy . In 13 cases AFP was lower than normal (µ/µ0 < 0,75) . But Objective: Beta-thalassemia is the most common hereditary blood newborns were healthy too . In 4 cases AFP was higher then normal disorder in Iran . More than 1500 prenatal diagnosis had been (µ/µ0 > 2,0) . 3 newborns were healthy and in 1 case a left-sided completed by our lab since mid 2000 .material and methods: Besides cheilognatoschisis and cleft palate was diagnosed . routine ARMS-PCR methods, which were used for screening the most Conclusion: AFP correctly predicted normal outcome in 79% of cases . common Iranian β-globin gene mutations, more rigorous molecular Normal AFP values are adapted to pregnant woman more than 35 analyses were performed for the 75 unresolved cases (75/1524 or years old . A younger age was observed In 13 out of 17 women with 5%) using DNA sequencing . Results: The total of 21 rare β-globin AFP results higher or lower than normal . Normal AFP values for this gene mutations was found, including: 5’UTR -101 (C>T), 5’UTR -88 group of women might be different . Whether cheilognatopalatoshisis (C>A), 5’UTR -87 (C>G), 5’UTR -30 T>A, 5’UTR -28 (A>C), 5’UTR associated with higher AFP needs further study . +22 (G>A), Cd 15 TGG>TAG, Cd 15 TGG>TGA, Cd 16 (-C), Cd 25/26 (+T), IVSI nt128 (T>G), IVSI nt130 (G>C), Cd 37 TGG>TGA, Cd 37/39 P0432. comparison of multiplex PcR and real time PcR for the (-GACCCA), Cd 44 (-C), Codon 80/81 (-C ), Cd 82/83 (-G), IVSII nt848 noninvasive determination of fetal gender from maternal plasma (C>A), IVSII nt850 (G>C), IVS-II nt850 (G>T) and Cd 126 GTG>GGG . J. Wagner1, D. Pavan-Jukic2, G. Lauc1; There were 5 new rare mutations [i .e . -30 T>A, Cd 37/39 (-GACCCAG), 1J.J.Strossmayer University, School of medicine, DNA laboratory, Osijek, Croa- Cd 37 (G>A), Cd 44 (-C), IVS-II nt850 (G>T) and IVS-II nt850 (G>C)] tia, 2General Hospital Karlovac, Department of Gynecology, Karlovac, Croatia. which had not been reported in Iran, previously . Also, we found codon Reliable gender determination in early pregnancy generally requires 2 CAC>CAT (His>His) and IVS-II nt666 T>C -the two beta-globin gene sampling of fetal cells via invasive procedures that are associated with SNP sites- which the frequencies of rare alleles in these sites were low, but definite risks for fetus and mother. In families with X-linked approximately 5% (Cd 2 “T” allele) and 12% (IVS-II nt666 “C” allele), recessive genetic disorders it is important to early determine fetal respectively . Discussion: Knowing mutation types, their frequencies gender, thus the development of safer methods is needed . and hematological data, which were found by us here, could be useful The purpose of this study was to compare reliability of miltiplex PCR for developing β-thalassemia molecular screening plan in Iran and and real-time PCR methods for the determination of the presence other neighbor‘s countries . of fetal Y-chromosome DNA in maternal plasma . Cell-free DNA was isolated from 43 maternal plasma samples and analyzed using AmpFl P0430. Screening for chromosomal abnormalities in the first STR® Identifiler™ kit (15 STR loci and gender-specific amelogenin) and trimester using ultrasound and maternal serum biochemistry in Quantifiler Y Human Male real-time PCR kit. Gender of fetuses was a one-stop clinic: a two years review prospective experience in a confirmed by cytogenetic analysis. Amplification of paternal STR alleles single center in the czech Republic was expected to serve as a positive control for the presence of fetal J. Santavy, I. Dhaifalah; DNA in maternal plasma in case of female fetuses, but unfortunately Dept. of Medical Genetics and Fetal Medicine, Olomouc, Czech Republic. in vast majority of samples amelogenin was the only fetal locus that Last years has intensified the effort to develop early non-invasive was successfully amplified. Out of 26 male fetuses, the presence of Y- methods to screen for trisomy 21 and other main chromosomal chromosome DNA in maternal plasma was successfully determined in abnormalities in prenatal diagnosis . In so-called OSCAR clinic, 25 of them using both methods (96,2%) . There were no falsely positive maternal age, fetal nuchal translucency, as well as maternal levels of detected Y-chromosomes in female fetuses, but the results were partly ß-hCG and PAPP-A are used as screening markers . Absence of the inconclusive because we were not able to eliminate the possibility that nasal bone and tricuspid regurgitation have been introduced as a new the lack of male amelogenin was simply due to inadequate amount of ultrasound markers in the first trimester that will increase the detection fetal DNA . Further work on this method should consider use of different rate of trisomy 21 up to 97% for a false positive of 5% . We report markers that will be more confirmative of the presence of fetal DNA in our experience of combining these biochemical and ultrasonographic maternal plasma . markers in 2110 pregnant women in our center. The specific Down Prenatal diagnosis 1 P0433. Development and application of PcR-stR method for this process and it is related to decreased oocyte pool in ovaries for rapid prenatal diagnosis of chromosomes 21 and 18 of older mothers . There are differences among women of the same aneuploidies chronological age: it means risk of trisomic conception depends on K. Crkvenac Gornik1, Z. Grubic2, K. Stingl2, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic1, L. Letica1, biological age of the woman . Aging and premature aging hypothesis D. Muzinic1, V. Brkljacic Kerhin2, D. Begovic1; has supposed the range of internal and external causes but no of them 1Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University has been certified. Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2National Referral Organ Transplan- We present a family in which one healthy son was born and then only tation and Tissue Typing Centre, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, unsuccessful pregnancies followed: one termination after prenatal Croatia. diagnosis and three spontaneous abortions . Three times cytogenetic The aims of the present study were: (I) to investigate the heterozygosity examinations were provided, every time with abnormal fetal / embryonal and informativeness of six Short Tandem Repeat (STR) loci among karyotype, at maternal age 34,35, 36 years respectively; the father Croatians: 3 loci are located on chromosome 21 (D21S1435, was 12 years older . The origin of supernumerary chromosomes was D21S1411, D21S1414) and 3 loci on chromosome 18 (D18S51, studied to help the family because there is a possibility to undergo IVF D18S858, D18S535); (II) to evaluate diagnostic power of these 6 STRs using donor gametes . and efficacy of using PCR-STR method for rapid prenatal detection of Supported by grant of Health Ministry Nr 00064203 . trisomies 18 and 21; (III) to compare results obtained with PCR-STR method with those obtained by classical cytogenetic analysis . P0436. combined 1st trimester screening with aneuploidy risk DNA was isolated from blood (N=205) or amniotic fluid (N=699) by evaluation according to the degree of analyte deviation Nucleospin isolation kit. After PCR amplification by Cy5 labeled primers M. Macek Sr.1, M. Simandlová1, S. Vilímová1, M. Libik1, J. Camajová1, A. St- samples were run on a 6% polyacrylamide gel in an automated DNA ambergová1, R. Vlk1, H. Cuckle2, I. Spálová1, B. Houbová1, A. Lashkevich1, B. sequencer (ALFexpress, Pharmacia-Biotech) . Fragment sizes were Cardová1, M. Turnovec1, J. Diblík1, M. Havlovicová1; analyzed with AlleleLocator software . 1University Hospital Motol, Praha, Czech Republic, 2Leeds Screening Centre, The results indicate that all 6 tested loci are informative and useful University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. in prenatal detection of aneuploidies in our population . Observed The possibility to increase the efficacy of combined 1st trimester heterozygosity was in the range 0 .65 - 0 .85 . In total of 699 samples of screening by aneuploidy risk evaluation according to the degree uncultured amniotic fluids chromosomal abnormalities were observed of analyte deviation was tested . PAPP-A and free beta-hCG were in 22 (3.15%) samples (16 samples with trisomy 21, five samples with examined by Kryptor system with LifeCycle Elipse software with our trisomy 18 and one sample with triploidy) . All results were consistent NT/analytes MoMs . Results were arranged into 4 categories according with conventional cytogenetic analysis . to MoMs: I . (0 .6-1 .9) in 46 .2%, II . (0 .5-0 .6 and / or 1 .9-2 .0) in 11 .7%, Results from this study clearly demonstrate the high diagnostic value III . (one analyte/NT 2 .0) in 31 .6% IV . (both analytes abnormal with/ of PCR-STR method with this particular set of STRs for the prenatal without abnormal NT) in 10 .7% . Altogether 1415 pregnancies were detection of numerical disorders on chromosomes 21 and 18 . karyotyped . No aneuploidy (0/688) was found in I . In II . were only heterochromosomal aneuploidies(2/163 - 1 .23%) . In III . 3 autosomal P0434. clinical evaluation of the Devyser QF-PcR kit for prenatal and 2 heterochromosal aneuploidies (5/468 - 1 .1%) and in IV . 9 diagnostics of chromosomal aneuploidies aneuploidies (9/96 - 9 .4%) were found . F. Lonardo, C. Cafasso, G. Cantalupo, M. De Mattia, M. Maioli; Severe aneuploidy risk corresponded to the analyte deviation A.O.R.N. “G. Rummo” - U.O.C. di Genetica Medica, Benevento, Italy. (for category IV . p= 0 .00001) . The software revealed 6/10 of In an effort to improve pregnancy management and soothing maternal aneuploidies (3/5 of +21, 2/3 +13, 1/1 triploidy without trisomy 10 anxiety, Quantitative Flourescent PCR (QF-PCR) amplification of Short mosaicism detection) . Analyte deviations disclosed 8/10 of autosomal Tandem Repeat (STR) markers has successfully been introduced as a aneuploidies, while NT 5/10 aneuploidies . No autosomal aneuploidy rapid technique for aneuploidy testing of the most common disorders was missed by this strategy . Only analyte deviations revealed all (7/7) in prenatal samples . heterochromosomal aneuploidies and FraX A syndrome with 4 .5 MoM The Devyser QF-PCR kit is a new CE-labelled product for prenatal of beta-hCG. Combined first trimester screening with evaluation of diagnosis facilitating aneuploidy testing of the most common disorders analytes deviations revealed all pregnancies with severe autosomal in prenatal samples . and all heterochromosomal aneuploidies . Genetic counselling is The kit contains ready-to-use reagents necessary for the complete recommended for categories II-IV with second trimester screening, analysis . Seven markers each for chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and 10 ultrasound and obstetrical controls to improve the screening efficacy markers for chromosomes X and Y are included and tested in the and prenatal care . AmnioPCR with 100% diagnostic reliability is standard kit configuration. The high number of markers used in the kit performed in categories III-IV to minimise the parental anxiosity . minimises the need for costly and time consuming re-runs of samples Supported by MZCR-VZFNM00000064203 . This clinical evaluation of the Devyser QF-PCR kit for prenatal diagnostics was performed in order to assess the clinical usefulness . P0437. Prenatal Diagnosis of autosomal recessive polycystic Archival samples and a prospective series of amniotic fluid samples kidney disease (ARPKD) without DNA from an index patient were collected and analyzed according to instruction for use . The data H. Gaspar1, L. Michel-Calemard2, Y. Morel2, J. Wisser3, T. Stallmach4, A. obtained from the Devyser kit was compared to corresponding data Schinzel1; from karyotyping for all samples in order to determine the sensitivity, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzer- robustness and usefulness of the kit . In addition, a cohort of blood land, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie Endocrinienne et Moleculaire, Hopital Debrous- donor samples were also tested in order to further establish the se, Lyon, France, 3Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hos- informativity of the different markers used in the kit . pital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Department of Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. P0435. Dysfertile couples with recurrent aneuploidies Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is associated D. Novotna1, M. Malikova1, T. Lomickova2, M. Libik1, M. Macek1, D. Chudoba1; with poor outcome in affected children . Therefore, prenatal diagnosis 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, University Hospital Motol, Prague, is of great importance . Mutational analysis is not a routine analysis Czech Republic, 2Dept.of Gynekology and Obstetrics, University Hospital in prenatal diagnosis: because of the large size of the PKHD1 gene, Kralovske Vinohrahy, Prague, Czech Republic. linkage analysis is the preferred method . Two families were reported There have been published articles in recent scientific literature with prenatal diagnosis of ARPKD based on PKHD1 mutation analysis concerning cases of recurrent aneuploid or polyploid embryos without analysis of material of the affected child . Absence of material and fetuses in the same couples . Most of studied supernumerary from the index case or unclear diagnosis prompted mutation analysis chromosomes were maternal meiotic origin; only seldom they were of the parents . Detection of a mutation in both parents offered the ascertained as paternal or postzygotic . The association between possibility for prenatal diagnosis in subsequent pregnancies . increasing maternal age and the frequency of aneuploid embryos or We report on a consanguineous Iraqi couple (niece and uncle) fetuses has been known for years - the term “ovarian aging” is used referred for genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis of ARPKD Prenatal diagnosis 1 at the 12th week of gestation. The first child died 20 minutes after had different RFLP pattern (2cases) or they had different RFLP pattern spontaneous premature delivery at 36th week of gestation . Autopsy (2 cases) or they had different sexes or VNTR result (1 case each) . showed characteristical signs of ARPKD . No biological material was preserved . P0440. cell-surface-bound fraction of cell-free fetal DNA in Molecular analysis by sequencing of the PKHD1 gene in both parents maternal blood as a new marker for non-invasive prenatal was initiated with the purpose to perform prenatal diagnosis in gender detection following pregnancies if the result indicated a heterozygous mutation A. Tokareva, I. Lebedev, S. Nazarenko; in both parents . The couple was advised that, unless mutations would Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk Scientific Center, Siberian Divi- be found in both parents, ultrasound may be the only diagnostic tool in sion of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation. the current pregnancy . It was detected that cell-free fetal DNA circulates in the plasma and Following the detection of the same novel heterozygous nonsense serum of pregnant women . This discovery served as incentive to mutation p .S976X (c .2927C>G) in exon 27 in PKHD1 gene in both development of new approaches for noninvasive prenatal diagnosis . parents at the 16th week of gestation, prenatal diagnosis was performed One of the first such studies was directed to Y-chromosome sequences in the current pregnancy without index-patient (with the result of revealing in maternal blood to diagnose X-linked disorders . It has been heterozygosity) . shown that sensitivity of Y-chromosome loci detection in maternal plasma by conventional PCR varies from 50 to 95% in different studies P0438. Autosomal trisomies - a very important cause of early in the first trimester of pregnancy. It was recovered recently that there spontaneous abortions are cell-surface-bound nucleic acids that form the main part of cell-free I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, K. Crkvenac Gornik, D. Muzinic, L. Letica, R. Lasan, DNA and RNA besides free circulating fraction in blood . In the present D. Begovic; study we realized the PCR analysis of fetal SRY gene in maternal Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University plasma and in cell-surface-bound fraction of cell-free DNA as well as Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. estimated possibilities of using this new marker as additional source of Spontaneous abortion is defined as the termination of pregnancy fetal DNA for early noninvasive diagnosis of fetal gender . In our study before 20th weeks of gestation or below a fetal weight of 500 grams . A the sensitivity of fetal SRY locus detection in maternal blood amounted total of 321 cases of first trimester spontaneous abortions between 4 100% in 10 cases of male fetus carrying and 2 false-positive signals and 13 weeks of gestation were analyzed cytogenetically by the direct have been registered in the blood of 5 pregnant women who carried - preparation method using chorionic villi . A total of 172 (54%) of the female fetuses. It is significant to note that in 2 women carried male specimens were chromosomal abnormal, and 91% were numerical fetuses SRY locus was revealed only in the cell-surface-bound fraction chromosomal abnormalities . The most common abnormalities are of cell-free DNA while no signal was found in maternal plasma . Thus the trisomies, arising de novo as a result of meiotic non-disjunction use of cell-surface-bound fetal DNA allowed raising the informativeness during gametogenesis in parents with a normal karyotype . Gonadal of fetal gender prenatal detection approach up to 20% . mosaicism for trisomies can contribute to recurrent trisomy . Autosomal trisomies comprise 34% of karyotyped spontaneous P0441. Prenatal diagnosis and normal outcome of a 46,XX/46,XY abortions, and the vast majorities were single trisomies . Trisomies for chimera all chromosomes, with the exception of chromosomes 1, 5, 11, 17 and V. Malan1, R. Gesny2, N. Morichon-Delvallez1, M. Aubry3, A. Benaki3, D. Sanla- 19 were observed. Double trisomies [48,XX,+2,+16; 48,XX,+16,+18; ville1, C. Estrade1, J. Bonnefont2, C. Fekete-Nihoul4, M. Vekemans1, C. Turleau1; 48,XX,+21,+22] and mosaic trisomy [46,XY/47,XY,+7; 46,XX/ 1Service de Cytogenetique, Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 48,XX,+7,+16; 47,XX,+20/48,XX,+7,+20; 47,XY,+14/48,XXY,+14] were 2Service de Genetique Moleculaire, Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, rare . The most frequent was trisomy 16 (34%), followed by trisomy France, 3Service de Gynecologie Obstetrique, Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, 22 (11%) and 21 (9%). When abortions were stratified by maternal Paris, France, 4Service de Chirurgie Viscerale, Hôpital Necker Enfants-Mala- age, 23% of cases were trisomic in women younger than 35 years of des, Paris, France. age, and 57% were trisomic in women 35 years or older . This study Here, we report on a new case of chimerism (46,XX [90%]/ 46,XY[10%]) confirms that the incidence of trisomy increases with maternal age. diagnosed at 17 weeks’ gestation on amniocentesis performed because The mean gestational age was 8-9 weeks . of advanced maternal age. The diagnosis was confirmed by karyotype A trisomyc karyotype in chorionic villi from a spontaneous abortion analysis of fetal lymphocytes . Ultrasound examination revealed normal explains the reason for the loss and does not place the couple at female genitalia . At term, a healthy baby girl was delivered, without any higher risk for repeated chromosomal trisomy and pregnancy loss . abnormality of the external genital organs . By definition, chimerism is produced by fusion of two different zygotes P0439. Prenatal diagnosis of the twins at risk of Beta- in a single embryo, while mosaicism results from mitotic errors in a thalassemia major in iran. single zygote . Several mechanisms of production of chimera have M. Masrouri1, S. B. Azimifar1, S. M. Eram1, V. Lotfi1, P. Foulady1, A. Abdolhos- been proposed in literature . Stricto sensu, chimerism occurs from the seini1, S. Zeinali1,2; postzygotic fusion of two distinct embryos leading to a tetragametic 1Medical Genetics Laboratory of Dr. Zeinali., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, chimera . In addition, there are two other entities which are by extension, 2Department of Biotechnology, Pasteur Institute., Tehran, Islamic Republic of also referred as chimera: parthogenetic chimera and chimera by Iran. fertilization of the second polar body . Objective: Beta-thalassemea is the most common hereditary blood We used polymorphic markers spanning chromosome X and several disorder in Iran . Prenatal diagnostic (PD) of beta-thalassemia is one of autosomes in order to identify the genetic mechanism involved in our the most effective means for preventing the birth of affected children . case . Mosaicism was excluded because of the presence of three More than 1256 PNDs have been performed in this laboratory, since alleles at 12 loci . The origin of this third allele was maternal for one mid 2000 . The Beta-globin gene analysis of dizygotic twines (fraternal marker (located on band 8p11 .2) and paternal for the other markers . twines) is one of the complexes of PD since there is problem in CV Thus, two different paternal haploid sets were observed . These results sampling and PD should be performed for two fetuses . materials are compatible either to a tetragametic chimera or to the fertilization and methods: Prenatal diagnosis has been performed for 9 cases of of the second polar body after 8p crossing-over . The strategies and twins so far . We used combined ARMS and RFLP methods to detect difficulties to study mechanisms leading to the production of chimeras mutations . Results: Of these, in 8 (8/9 or 89%) cases both ARMS will be discussed . and RFLP methods could help us to detect the pattern of mutation inheritance . In the remaining case the mutation was detected by P0442. Prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 17 mosaicism identified in ARMS method, but RFLP analysis was semi-informative (only one amniotic fluid cell cultures. Case report of the parental mutant alleles could be traced by PFLP analysis) . D. Locmele, Z. Krumina, L. Kornejeva, I. Micule, I. Balode, J. Bars, I. I. Kalke, I. Discussion: Three out of 10 cases were most probably identical twin Grauduma, I. Teilane, G. Kalnberza, A. Lapsa; since they had similar mutation and RFLP pattern . In the rest the twins State Medical Genetic Clinic, Riga, Latvia. were not identical since they had either different PD result (5cases) or We have found 10 cases of trisomy 17 mosaicism detected in amniotic Prenatal diagnosis 1 fluid reported in the literature. 9 of them had resulted in normal offspring conditions were used according to Contini et al .( Int J Parasitol 2005) . with no postnatal evidence of trisomy 17 cells . The 10th case was Results: The real-time PCR using fluorescence energy transfer terminated and pathological examination showed intra-uterine growth hybridization probes has the sensitivity to detect one parasite in the restriction and some minor dysmorphism . Complete trisomy 17 has sample . We detected 6 T. gondii positive samples from the studied 70 never been reported in a live birth . amniotic fluid samples. Our patient 33 years old pregnant woman, healthy, no bad habits . This Conclusions: The quantitative real-time PCR based methods is a was her 1st pregnancy, expected . She consulted State Medical Genetic sensitive, simple and easy to perform method for the prenatal diagnosis Clinic, Prenatal Diagnostic Unit due to concerns about pregnancy in of intrauterine toxoplasma infection . her age . Biochemical results: AFP 24 .23 Sv/ml (25 .5-50 .9) (AFP MOM 0.68), free βHGT 29.85Sv/ml (5.3-15.8) (free βHGT MOM 2.32), ARISK P0445. cytogenetic analysis of cystic hygroma detected at 1:574, DRISK 1:134 . During pregnancy twice (15th and 24th week) prenatal diagnosis: a report of 16 cases ultrasound investigation was done - no pathology of fetus was found . M. L. V. C. Pinto Leite, M. D. Souto, B. L. Carvalho, O. Moutinho, O. Carmo, Due to results of biochemical analysis diagnostic amniocentesis was E. Ribeiro; performed in the 16/17th week of pregnancy . Karyotype 47,XX+17[2]/ Centro Hospitalar de Vila Real-, Vila Real, Portugal. 46,XX[18] . Cystic hygroma is an anomaly of the vascular lymphatic system, which The baby was born on 17 Nov, 2005, weight 3620g, length is commonly, saw in the neck region . It occurs at a rate of 1:6 000 55cm, Apgar score 8/9, without any phenotypic pathology . pregnancies . Neurosonography, echocardiography, chest X-ray showed no clues In approximately 60% of cases, it is associated with an abnormal fetal of disturbed development . Fundus oculi without pathology . Abdominal karyotype, including Turner syndrome, trisomies 13, 18 and 21 . ultrasonography revealed dystopy of the left kidney (located behind During July 1998 to December 2005, sixteen cases of cystic hygroma bladder), hydronephrosis . Karyotype analysis was repeated in were studied in our Prenatal Diagnosis Center . peripheral blood - 46,XX . Unfortunately we have no possibility to check Maternal ages at the time of the diagnosis ranged from 20 to 42 years . for the karyotype in fibroblast culture. Amniocentesis was performed between 13 and 23 week’s’ gestation As a result this case of prenatal trisomy 17 mosaicism resolved in and chromosomal abnormalities were diagnosed in 62% of the normal kariotype . It still remains a question of discussion if the kidney pregnancies . Turner’s syndrome was found in 3 cases and trisomies in ectopy would be associated with the chromosomal abnormality . 5 (three trisomy 21, one trisomy 13 and one trisomy 18) . Despite the number of cases study were small the results obtained P0443. Genetic screening of embryos and foetuses. should we were like the previous reports: the majority of cases (62%) had restrict the tests available and how could that be achieved by abnormal karyotype and in 80% were aneuploidies . law? L. Skene; P0446. Fluorescent probe detection of deltaF0del cystic University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. fibrosis allele in different tissues. The community might decide that it is socially or morally desirable to B. Nagy, Z. Bán, L. Lázár, G. R. Nagy, Z. Papp; prevent women trying to “choose” the child they want, either by pre- 1st Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, implantation genetic tests; or by a prenatal test followed by termination Hungary. of pregnancy (TOP) if the foetus has a genetic abnormality . But would Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal the law be effective in implementing such a policy? recessive genetic disorder in the Caucasian population . The molecular A law that prevented TOP for relatively minor foetal abnormalities diagnosis is difficult since there are about 1000 mutations in the cystic would seem inconsistent with other grounds on which pregnancy may fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene (CFTR) . 64% of the CF cases currently be lawfully terminated, in practice if not according to the strict have ΔF508del in Hungary . Determination of ΔF508del is one of the letter of the law . most commonly performed genetic analysis in prenatal diagnostic Alternatively, a new law that penalised the conduct of genetic tests centers in Central Europe . except for certain “serious” conditions would be difficult to draft. What method: 121 DNA samples isolated (using High Pure PCR Template conditions would be included? One might state the prohibited conditions Isolation kit, Roche, Germany) from different tissues (87 blood samples, in broad terms, such as those that involve an essentially “cosmetic” 18 chorionic villus samples and 14 amniotic fluid samples) were condition like cleft lip, rather than a medical one . Or, having agreed involved in the study . Quantitative real-time PCR with melting curve on broad principles to be included in legislation, a committee could analysis was performed to detect ΔF508del (LightCycler FastStart be established to determine periodically the conditions to be included . DNA Master Hybridization Probes kit, Roche) . The primer-probe set That approach would have the benefit of flexibility - the conditions for and the PCR conditions were used according to Gundry et al (Gene which testing is prohibited could be changed fairly simply as new tests Test 3;365-370,1999). become available . However, the decisions would be made without Results: 69 healthy normal samples, 44 heterozygous samples, public knowledge and without having to seek legislative amendments, 6 ΔF508del homozygous samples and two ΔF508C homozygous which seems undesirable, especially in such a contentious area . samples were detected by quantitative real-time PCR combined with This paper discusses and assesses these legal options for regulation . melting curve analysis conclusions: The quantitative real-time PCR with melting curve P0444. Detection of toxoplasma infection from amniotic fluid analysis is a reliable and fast method for the detection of ΔF508del . samples with quantitative real-time PcR method The results are ready in one hour following the DNA isolation . The Z. Ban, B. Nagy, L. Lazar, G. Nagy, Z. Papp; applied primer-probe set with melting curve analysis gives additional I. Dept. of Ob./Gyn., Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. information for the presence of other mutations in the ΔF508del Background: The postnatal infection caused by the intracellular region . parasite Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii) is often asymptomatic or has mild symptoms . The prenatal toxoplasma infection can cause serious P0447. Prenatal screening of Down’s syndrome in Estonia congenital malformations in the affected fetuses . As serological (1995-2004). methods can not detect directly the active fetal infection, the analysis M. Sitska1, T. Reimand1, K. Muru1, T. Ilus1, K. Kuuse1, P. Ilisson1, P. Tammur1, of the amniotic fluid with PCR based methods is essential for the A. Ehrenberg2; diagnosis of intrauterine toxoplasma infection . According to the 1Tartu University Clinics, Medical Genetics Center, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu Univer- literature quantitative real-time PCR is the most sensitive and reliable sity Clinics, Women’s Clinics, Tartu, Estonia. method of the molecular biologic methods . We decided to introduce Basic statistics . Area: 45214 km2 . Population: 1,46 million . Birth rate and to test the method with our prenatal samples . in 2004: 13 868 newborns . Maternal age at delivery > 35… .11,4 % Methods: We tested 70 amniotic fluid samples obtained from women (1580 women) . Since1995-1998 screening was done for advanced showing seroconversion during pregnancy for the presence of T. gondii maternal age only, since1999-2004 screening for advanced maternal using quantitative real-time PCR . Primer-probe design and the PCR age and maternal serumscreening (women < 35) .Prenatal diagnosis 16 screening for advanced maternal age (> 35) . During the whole efficiency based only on levels of the serum’s markers. We have found period when prenatal diagnosis has been used (1995-2004) 64 cases out higher sensitivity β-hCG in comparison with PAPP-A, AFP. Highly (63,4%) SD of advanced maternal age risk group have been diagnosed efficiency of the screening at estimate of the combined risk for Down’s prenatally . During the last three years 78% of the SD cases have been syndrome was reached by the serum markers in a combination with detected . In 2004 , 52% of women > 35 had fetal karyotypes . the data of ultrasound scan determination . maternal serum screening (double test) started in autumn 1998 in Tartu and only in 2002 in the whole of Estonia . In 2004, 84% of P0450. Assessment of fetal sexing and RhD genotyping using pregnant women in Estonia were monitored . The proportion of cell free fetal DNA in maternal plasma on clinical samples pregnancies screened varies: 29% in Eastern Estonia, 90-95% in Tartu E. Ordoñez1,2, M. Lozano3, C. Fuster2, V. Cirigliano1,2; and Tallinn, the two biggest cities in Estonia . Over the period of six 1Dept. Genetica Molecular, General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Departament de years (1999-2004) 17 cases of DS have been diagnosed prenatally . Biologia Cel•lular Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain, 3Servi- During this period, only 19,3% of DS born women < 35 were diagnosed cio de Transfusión, General Lab. Institut Universitari Dexeus, Barcelona, Spain. prenatally Background: The finding of cell free fetal DNA (ffDNA) circulating in conclusion. During 15 years (1995-2004) when PND has been used maternal blood has opened new applications in non-invasive prenatal in Estonia, 37,6% of DS were diagnosed prenatally . During the last two diagnosis . Measurable amounts of ffDNA are present in maternal years 62% of all DS cases have been detected prenatally circulation and increase throughout pregnancy . This makes possible Incidence of Down Syndrome in Estonia after prenatal screening was detecting paternally inherited sequences such as RhD and SRY . Real- started has decreased: provisional incidence of DS in Estonia is 1: 646 time PCR detection of fetal DNA in plasma is easy to automate allowing and after prenatal screening (1995-2004) the incidence of DS is 1: 945 high throughput that simplify its large scale clinical application . in live birth . We aimed at developing a multiplex assay for detection of both genes in a single reaction evaluating its sensitivity and specificity on clinical P0448. The first and the second trimester Down syndrome samples . screening in saint-Petersburg Methods: Blood samples were collected from 45 RhD negative women T. K. Kascheeva1, N. V. Vohkmyanina2, Y. A. Nikolaeva1, M. V. Krechmar2; between 13 and 28 weeks of gestation (mean 14w) . Four different DNA 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sankt-Petersburg, Russian Fed- extraction procedures were evaluated on few selected cases before all eration, 2City Medical Genetic Center, Sankt-Petersburg, Russian Federation. samples were processed . Total screening for Down’s syndrome (DS) and neural tube defects Real-time PCR assay was developed to amplify RhD and SRY has been used as a double test (AFP & total HCG) since 1997 . More sequences using differently labelled Taqman probes . Results were than 85 % of all pregnancies were tested per year since 2000 . Over than compared with those obtained on newborns . 190000 pregnancies were tested in the second trimester (test systems Results: SRY sequence were detected in 25 plasma samples, RhD “Alkor-Bio”, Saint-Petersburg) . Since 2000, homemade software was was detected in a total of 35 fetuses (22 males and 13 females) . The accomplished and applied for risk calculation (“Medinformatika”, Saint- absence of both products in 7 cases was considered evidence of Petersburg). Combined first trimester screening is launched since 2003 female RhD- fetuses . . It includes measurements of nuchal translucency (NT), nasal bone, Newborn analysis confirmed all results without false positive or false serum markers (PAPP-A and free beta-HCG) . Efficiency of others US negatives . markers such as maxillary, femur and humerus lengths and thickness Conclusion: Real Time PCR detection of RhD gene has proved to be is under inspection. Biochemical screening in the first trimester is efficient and reliable allowing prompt identification of RhD+ fetuses performed with Wallac equipment, risk calculation is made by Life without false negative results . Simultaneous assessment of fetal sex Cycle software . Serum of more than 2000 patients was investigated . was also possible in all cases . The procedure proved to be sensitive Detection rate with cut off 1:250 was 88 .9% in the 1 trimester (16/18 enough to be applied on clinical cases . cases of DS) . False positive rate (FPR) was 9 .1% in routine screening and was about 4 .7% in patients younger than 35 . Altogether 31 of 40 P0451. Fetal hydrops: a retrospective survey over a 5-years time fetuses with different chromosomal aberrations were revealed by 1st period. trimester biochemical screening . Since 1997 186 cases of DS were D. Marcus-Soekarman1,2, I. van Adrichem1, J. Offermans3, J. Engelen1,2, M. detected on 15 - 22 weeks of pregnancy . Detection rate in the second Baldewijns4, A. L. M. Mulder5, C. Schrander-Stumpel1,2, J. Nijhuis3, C. de Die- trimester with cut off 1:360 was 74 .2 % with FPR about 6 .8 % . Smulders1,2; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Hospital, Maastricht, The Nether- P0449. Prenatal serum screening for fetal Down syndrome lands, 2Institute for Growth and Development (GROW), University of Maastricht, M. S. Kirikbayeva; Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The Republican scientifically research center of child and maternity health pro- Academic Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4Department of Pathology, tection, Almaty, Kazakhstan. Academic Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 5Department of Pediatrics, We conducted study levels of serum markers used in screening for Academic Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands. Down’s syndrome, using PAPP-A, AFP, β-hCG measurements. Fetal hydrops is a serious complication during pregnancy, with an Combined risk Down’s syndrome of fruit estimated of the levels serum incidence of ca . 1 in 3000 . Since antibody screening against blood markers by the Life Cycle program (Wallac, Finland), in view of age groups has been introduced on a routine basis, most cases are due to and weight of the women . The term of pregnancy had an estimate other causes than blood group antagonism and belong to the group of gestational age based on ‘dates’ (time since the fist day of the last non-immunological hydrops foetalis (NIFH) . A wide variety of causes menstrual period) and an estimate based on an ultrasound scan are held responsible in the latter such as cardiac abnormalities, examination . The risk of Down’s syndrome was - 1:220 . chromosomal aberrations, twin to twin transfusion syndtrome (TTTS), We have screened 839 pregnant women for Down’s syndrome (I infections, monogenic and metabolic diseases, anemia, anatomical trimester - 197, II trimester - 642). In the first trimester of a deviation in abnormalities of various organ systems, and skeletal dysplasias . biochemical markers are revealed at 36 women, in second trimester Detection of fetal hydrops during pregnancy should be followed by - at 94 pregnant . In the risk group for chromosome pathology was standardized procedures to obtain a diagnosis which is essential included 87 pregnant . The invasion diagnostics have revealed 10 for accurate counselling of the parents . Therefor, we reviewed pregnant women with the chromosome pathology: 5 - trisomy 21; 1 experiences in our “Perinatal Group”, Academic Hospital Maastricht, - trisomy 18; 3 - structural chromosome aberration. Is marked, that The Netherlands, during a 5-years time period . This was before the from these 10 pregnant at 3 pregnant women had deviations serum of introduction of the first trimester screening in combination with nuchal markers were combined with ultrasonic markers, at 4 pregnant women translucency measurements . Our observations in 61 cases are - with the age factor . The median levels for Down’s syndrome were reported and a protocol for multidisciplinary use is proposed in the PAPP-A -1,4 MoM, AFP - 1,3 MoM, β-hCG -1,96 MoM, at norm from case that a fetal hydrops is detected . 0,5 up to 2,0 MoM . The preliminary results of screening for Down’s syndrome show low Prenatal diagnosis 1 P0452. Prenatal diagnosis of t(7;10)(p22;p12.1) inherithed from absent in 12 (7%) and was uncertain in 46 (25%) cases, while in the mother 161 cases with normal karyotype the NB was present in 119 (74%) C. Gug, T. Cioata; absent in 4 (2%) and uncertain in 38 (24%) cases . “Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. In trisomy 21 (n=11) the NB was absent in 5 cases (46%), present in A 32 year old Caucasian female pregnant for the forth time was referred 3 (27%) and was uncertain in 3 (27%) . This gives a sensitivity of 63% for genetic counselling at 18 gestational weeks . She presented the and a specificity of 95% and false positive rate of 5.6 for the absence following family history: two female children from the first and third of NB in trisomy 21 . pregnancy with mental retardation and the second pregnancy ended In remaining 9 chromosomal abnormalities the NB was present in 1 with a stillborn male fetus (with no karyotype) . The karyotype for neither case absent in 3 and uncertain in 5 cases . This gives a sensitivity one of the members of the family had been previously established . The of 67% and a specificity of 98% and false positive rate of 3% for the ultrasonographic examination of the fetus was normal . The cytogenetic absence of NB in other chromosomal abnormalities . Absence of the analysis with GTG banding of amniotic fluid cells revealed the NB is an important marker of trisomy 21 . However, an appropriate existence of a balanced chromosomal translocation: 46,XX,der(7),der( training of operators is mandatory . 10),t(7;10)(p22;p12.1). Peripheral blood samples were taken from the mother, father, and second child for karyotyping, in order to establish P0455. Free foetal DNA detection in maternal plasma using stR the translocation producing mechanism, “de novo” or inherited . The loci. father’s karyotype was found to be normal, the mother had a balanced R. Vodicka, R. Vrtel, M. Prochazka, E. Schneiderova, D. Svabova, A. Santava, rearrangement involving the same region of these chromosomes, and E. Krejcirikova, I. Zabojova, J. Santavy; the second child presented partial 7p trisomy . As a result, we considered University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub- the unborn child’s karyotype anomaly to be inherited from the mother . lic. After extensive genetic counselling, the parents decide to keep the Background: The foetal genotype recognition in maternal plasma in pregnancy. At the present time, this pregnancy is not finished. pregnant women is solved mostly by real-time systems . In this case Conclusions: The fetal karyotype granted us with the possibility to take the Y- chromosome specific probes from male specific region (MSY) the correct decision involving this pregnancy . These tests allowed us are used to distinguish male fetus . This work supported by IGA MZCR to determine the etiology of the mental retardation of the second child NR 7817-3 describes possibilities in free foetal DNA detection and as well . quantification by STR. Methods and Results: Artificial genotype mixtures ranging from 0,2 P0453. multiple fetal malformations in diabetic pregnancy % to 100 % to simulate maternal and paternal genotypes and 27 D. F. Albu, C. Albu, E. Severin; DNA samples from pregnant women in different stage of pregnancy “Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. were used for DNA quantification and detection. Foetal genotype Background: Diabetes during pregnancy is associated with a high risk was confirmed by biological father genotyping. The detection was state for both mother and her fetus . Spontaneous abortion, preterm performed in STR from 21st chromosome Down syndrome (DS) labor, preeclampsia, birth injury, macrosomia, birth defects and future responsible region by innovated refined (R) QF PCR which allows to metabolic abnormalities are more common in pregnant diabetics . reveal and quantify even very rare DNA mosaics . The pregnancy outcomes in diabetic women are related to glycemic The STR quantification was assessed in artificial mixtures of genotypes control during pregnancy. Identification and careful management of and discriminability of particular genotypes was on the few percent diabetes during pregnancy can avoid or minimize the complications level . Foetal DNA was detected in 74 % of tested samples . associated with diabetic pregnancy . Objectives: To describe and Conclusions: The RQF PCR application in quantification and analyze the severity of congenital malformations associated with differentiation between maternal and foetal genotypes by STR loci diabetic pregnancy . Patients and methods: A 23-year-old pregnant could have importance in noninvasive prenatal diagnostics as another diabetic female was referred at 18 weeks’ gestation for a routine possible marker for DS risk assessment . prenatal ultrasound . Fetal monitoring was made by ultrasound scans for fetal growth, congenital malformations, and amniotic fluid volume. P0456. molecular and expression analysis extends the We also collected information about family medical history . Amniotic phenotypic spectrum of GLI mutations to agnathia and fluid samples were taken to perform prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis. oligosyndactyly Results: Ultrasound examination revealed a singleton pregnancy S. Mougou-Zrelli1, S. Audollent1, J. Martinovic1, M. Le Merrer1, A. Delezoide2, with multiple congenital malformations: craniofacial defects, cardiac C. Ozilou1, C. Esculpavit1, G. Goudefroye1, O. Boute3, L. Devisme3, F. Encha- defects, gastrointestinal defects, renal agenesis, undescended testis Razavi1, A. Munnich1, M. Vekemans1, T. Attie-Bitach1; and anomalies of the limbs . Many of the same malformations are 1Département de Génétique et Unité INSERM U-781, Paris, France, 2Biologie also seen in trisomy 13 but karyotype analysis indicated a normal du développement, Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Génétique et foetopa- cytogenetic male: 46, xy . The pregnancy was terminated at 28 weeks thologie, Lille, France. of gestation. Autopsy findings confirmed the ultrasound diagnosis. GLI3 mutations result in Greig cephalopolysyndactyly (GCPS), Postpartum radiologic examination showed missing ribs and absent Pallister-Hall (PHS) and isolated polydactyly (PD). PHS first described lumbosacral vertebrae . conclusions: unplanned pregnancy and as a lethal condition associates hypothalamic hamartoblastoma (HH), inadequate glycemic control of diabetic women before and during post axial PD and imperforate anus (IA) .GCPS combines PD and pregnancy increase the risk of congenital malformations . craniofacial features . Recently, phenotype-genotype correlation have been shown for both the location and the nature of GLI3 mutations . P0454. Absence of nasal bone in fetuses with trisomy 21 and Here we report on a molecular study of GLI3 in 18 patients and 23 other chromosmal abnormalities at 11-14 weeks of gestation: a fetuses selected for i) HH and PD (10), ii) IA plus 2/5 features of the retrospective study PHS spectrum (13) i .e . growth retardation (IUGR), micropenis, limb, I. A. Dhaifalah, J. Santavy, D. Vrbicka; heart, or renal anomalies, most were VACTERL cases . Palacky universtiy, Olomouc, Czech Republic. We identified a heterozygous GLI3 mutation in 12 cases (7 GCPS, Several studies have demonstrated a high association between absent 4 PHS, 1 PD) . In all GCPS cases with corpus callosum anomaly in nasal bone (NB) at the 11-14 wk scan and trisomy 21 . Evaluation our series (3) and previous reports (3), the truncating mutation was in of the presence or absence of the NB for screening for trisomy 21 the C terminal domain of the protein suggesting a further genotype- was retrospectively assessed in 181 pregnant women at 11-14 wk phenotype correlation . In one fetus, the association of IUGR, PD, gestation . renal agenesis without IA led first to the suspicion of Smith-Lemli- Of the 181 pregnant women that underwent invasive test, 161 had Opitz . Another fetus had a severe and unusual phenotype including normal karyotype . Of the 20 chromosomal abnormalities, trisomy 21 agnathia, absence of oral orifice and oligosyndactyly of 4 limbs. In situ was in 11 cases, trisomy 18 was in 6 cases, and in 3 cases other hybridisation confirmed GLI3 expression in human pharyngeal arches abnormalities were found . then mandible. No mutation was identified in cases with HH and PD as In the whole study group (n=181) the NB was present in 123 (68%), part of another syndrome or in VACTERL cases .Prenatal diagnosis 1 All mutations but one were novel and consistent with the genotype- Reviewing the literature, severe neonatal hyperparathyroidism can also phenotype correlation . Our results emphasise on the possible lethality be secondary to maternal hypoparathyroidism or type II mucolipidosis . of GLI3 mutations and extend the PHS spectrum to severe craniofacial We discuss the management of femoral incurvation during pregnancy and reductional limb defects . and the clinical evolution of this case after 6 months of treatment . P0457. Prenatal diagnosis in late-onset neurological disorders in P0459. Chromosome abnormalities identified in the population Portugal: experience with 83 requests, since 1996 of Eastern Ontario (canada) found to be at increased risk for J. Pinto-Basto1,2, T. Coelho1,3, J. Leal Loureiro1,4, J. C. Rocha1,5, A. Lopes1,6, J. Down syndrome by integrated prenatal screening Sequeiros1,7; R. Ray1,2, N. Lepage1,2, G. E. Graham1,2, J. McGowan-Jordan1,2; 1IBMC, Univ. Porto, Portugal, 2IGM, Porto, Portugal, 3HGSA, Porto, Portugal, 1Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2University of 4Hosp. S.Teotónio, Viseu, Portugal, 5ISCS-N, Paredes, Portugal, 6Hosp. Magal- Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. hães Lemos, Porto, Portugal, 7ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Portugal. Objective: To evaluate the chromosomal abnormalities detected in PND in adulthood-onset disorders presents several specific issues, addition to Down syndrome by amniocentesis through referrals based namely the possibility of several decades of a (physically) healthy life on integrated prenatal screening (IPS) in the Ottawa-Gatineau region and the need for the decision-making process regarding termination of Ontario . of pregnancy (TOP) to be completed before disclosure of the results, methods: In the first trimester, women had an ultrasound (between to avoid performing a presymptomatic test (PST) in an unborn child 11 and 13+6 weeks of pregnancy) to obtain a nuchal translucency for an incurable disease (precluded by ethical and, sometimes, legal measurement and provided a blood sample to determine PAPP-A reasons) . levels . In the second trimester, a second blood sample was drawn at Since 1996, we received 83 requests for PND, in familial amyloid 15+3 weeks until 18+6 weeks of pregnancy to measure biochemical polyneuropathy (FAP-I) ATTRV30M (53), Huntington disease (11), markers AFP, estriol and hCG . The results of the nuchal translucency Machado-Joseph disease (4), SCA2 (2), Friedreich ataxia (11), and and the four biochemical markers were combined to calculate a risk others (2) . for Down syndrome for the second trimester. Women identified to PND was requested for the first pregnancy of 32 couples, while be screen positive (≥1/200 term risk) were managed according to 20 already had one or more children; 5 couples had 2 requests, standard practice . and one had 3 . The affected/carrier/at-risk parent gender ratio was Results: Between July 2002 and December 2005, 19 175 women 1,2F/1M. Only 5 inquired about PND before actual pregnancy; about provided a first and second trimester sample. The total number of 2/3 requested PND before 12W gestation (mean=10 .2W) . Only 34 IPS screen positive cases for Down syndrome was 645 (3 .36%) and invasive procedures (15 amniocenteses and 19 chorionic villous for trisomy 18 was 55 (0 .3%) . Amniocentesis was performed in 488 samplings) were actually performed (often, parents at-risk, tested (73 .6%) cases . The abnormalities detected include the following: during pregnancy, were ‘non-carriers’) . Down syndrome (6 .6%), trisomy 18 (1 .0%), trisomy 13 (0 .6%), other About 1/3 of cases were simultaneous requests for PST, a rather autosomal trisomies (0 .2%), triploidy (0 .4%) and sex chromosome stressful situation, given time constraints, and the potential for three aneuploidy (0 .6%) . Other abnormalities included inherited balanced distressful events in a short period (PST, PND, TOP) . Of the 20 ‘carrier’ rearrangements (0 .8%), de novo unbalanced rearrangements (0 .4%) foetuses, only 19 underwent TOP . One pregnancy was not terminated and sex chromosome mosaicism (0 .2%) . despite a ‘carrier’ result, due to a late reversal of the couple’s decision; conclusions: IPS has been successfully implemented in the non-termination of this foetus implied the birth of a child whose parents Eastern Ontario region . The study described herein shows that other know will become affected . chromosomal abnormalities are also detected . Taken together, these PND in late-onset diseases demands tactful counselling, acute findings are important considerations when offering IPS as a screening sensibility and intensive psychosocial evaluation and support . strategy . P0458. Femoral incurvation and intra uterine growth retardation P0460. the meaning of informed consent for congenital : which diagnosis ? anomalies after iVF P. Truffert1, J. Weill2, V. Rouland1, A. Dieux-Coeslier3, M. le Merrer4, A. Lien- E. Butkeviciene1, N. Krasovskaja1, V. Kucinskas1,2; hardt5, C. Magedelaine6, O. Boute3, S. Manouvrier-Hanu3, V. Houfflin-Debarge7, 1Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, M. Holder-Espinasse3; Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius Univer- 1Service de médecine néonatale, Lille, France, 2Service d’endocrinologie pédia- sity, Vilnius, Lithuania. trique, Lille, France, 3Service de génétique clinique, Lille, France, 4Service de Every year more and more couples are engaged in vitro fertilization génétique clinique, Paris, France, 5Service d’endocrinologie pédiatrique, Limo- all over the world. But recent scientific publications ( American Journal ges, France, 6Service de biologie moléculaire, Limoges, France, 7Maternité, of Human Genetics, 2004,Vol 75 ., Congenital anomalies, 2005,Vol Lille, France. 45) suggest that there is an elevated risk of imprinting defects and When femoral incurvation and intra uterine growth retardation are syndromes connected with IVF e .g . Wiedemann-Beckwith, Angelman, diagnosed antenatally, finding the proper aetiology is difficult and Prader - Willy . In Lithuanian Centre for Medical Genetics we have leads to various hypothesis . We report on a bi- chorial, bi-amniotic observed several congenital anomalies (including fatal) in children twin pregnancy, during which a «short femur» was noticed at 26 conceived after IVF . There is no register of how many IVF procedures WG on one of the twin . Fetal chromosomes were normal, maternal are performed every year, because these procedures have been infection was ruled out, and fetal intrauterine x-rays confirmed femoral performed only in private clinics for few years . Approximately there incurvation and osteoporosis . At birth, at 37 WG, intra uterine growth may be 300 children born after IVF in Lithuania . retardation and rhizomelic shortening of the limbs were present . Only part of woman after IVF, were consulted by clinical geneticists in Skeletal x-rays, performed at 3 days of life, revealed osteoporosis, Centre for Medical Genetics . We report six cases of anomalies after IVF, enlarged irregular metaphyses of the long bones, and bilateral femoral diagnosed prenatally . Diagnosis of fetuses were: holoprosencephaly, incurvation . Assessment of phosphorus and calcium metabolism egzencephaly, hydrocephaly, hydrops fetus universalis (2 cases), showed severe hypercalcemia and increased alkaline phosphates . thoracopagus . All these anomalies in general population are not Parathyroid hormone was at the upper limit of normal . There were no frequent and the rate is sure less than 1 in 300 . We have come to clinical sign of hypercalcemia and no lithiasis was identified. Treatment the conclusion that it is necessary before IVF procedure to inform by bisphosphonate was started, allowing a rapid decrease of the the couples about an increasing possibility of having a child with calcemia . Since hyperparathyroidism was suggested, a molecular malformations . It would seem that the gametes of people with sterility analysis of the Calcium Sensor Receptor gene was performed, which problems are more likely to develop genetic errors . revealed a heterozygote mutation responsible for the synthesis of a truncated protein . This mutation had been previously reported in cases of familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, and, when associated with another mutation, in one case of severe neonatal hyperparathyroidism . Molecular analysis in the parents and the other twin are pending . Prenatal diagnosis 1 P0461. the approach to fetuses with microcephaly in the Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Neuroradiology Unit - Ospedale Buzzi-ICP Milano multidisciplinary fetal neurology clinic Italy, Milan, Italy, 3Neuroanatomy laboratory National Institute for Neurological D. Lev1, T. Lerman- Sagie2, C. Vinkler3, M. Yanoov-Sharav3, G. Malinger4; Diseases “C. Besta”, Milan, Italy, 4Cytogenetic Laboratory - Fondazione Osped- 1Wolfson Medical Center, Fetal Neurology Clinic, Medical Genetics, Holon, ale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 5II Obstetric Israel, 2Wolfson Medical Center, Fetal Neurology Clinic, Pediatric Neurology and Gynecology Clinic - Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangia- Unit, Holon, Israel, 3Wolfson Medical Center, Medical Genetics, Holon, Israel, galli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy. 4Wolfson Medical Center, Fetal Neurology Clinic, Department of Obstetrics and Norman Roberts syndrome was firstly described in 1976 in a male Gynecology, Holon, Israel. infant affected by lissencephaly born to consanguineous parents . In Microcephaly is defined postnatally as low brain weight and a small head the family other two children, a brother and a sister, showed the same circumference (HC) more than two standard deviations (SD) below the clinical spectrum (Norman et al ., 1976) . Aside from the neuradiological mean or below the 3rd percentile. Such a broad definition obviously sign, the condition differed from the other forms of lissencephaly includes normal individuals . The smaller the head circumference, the (syndromes and isolated) having specific facial dysmorphisms (sloping higher the chances of associated mental retardation . The prenatal forehead, broad and prominent nasal bridge and widely set eyes) . The diagnosis of microcephaly, particularly in cases of primary microcephaly, authors hypothized an autosomal recessive inheritance . Subsequently is usually difficult before the 3rd trimester. five cases were described. (Iannetti et al, 1993 ; Sergi et al 2000 ; The etiologic heterogeneity and variability of microcephaly in genetic Caksen et al 2004) . syndromes are among the more difficult issues in prenatal ultrasound We report on three new cases of Norman Roberts syndrome . All cases in pregnancies either with an incidental finding of this anomaly, or in were suspected prenatally and the diagnosis was performed after cases with a recurrence risk, thus the counseling for fetuses with a termination of pregnancy . small HC is difficult. The first case is a female fetus for whom a diagnosis of microcephaly Mental retardation can safely be predicted in cases with associated US was made at 22nd week of gestational age, while the second and the findings, abnormal karyotype or positive test for intrauterine infection. third case were two female fetuses from a couple of unrelated and In fetuses with isolated small HC an effort should be made to determine healthy parents . Microcephaly was detected at 33rd and 22nd week of gyral normality in utero by US or MRI . gestation respectively . The main tasks of the multidisciplinary clinic are to try to give the The combined data from US studies, MNR, autopsy and histological most accurate diagnosis and prognosis and to counsel and escort the finding allowed us to diagnose Norman Roberts syndrome. parents through this time of crisis and crucial decisions . To illustrate To the best of our knowledge only one other prenatal case has these difficulties we will present our experience with 38 fetuses that been described (Sergi et al, 2000); together with our cases a better were referred to our clinic with suspected microcephaly (2001-2004), characterization of the prenatal phenotype of the condition can be including neuro-developmental follow-up of these babies . delineated, completed with a detailed histological study . A flow chart for prenatal investigation of fetuses with microcephaly will be displayed . P0464. A new osteochondrodysplasia resembling OPD2 in a severely affected female fetus with negative FLNA mutation P0462. Use of the multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe analysis Amplification (MLPA) as a complementary technique for the M. Colombani1, N. Laurent2, M. Le Merrer3, A. Delezoide4, C. Thauvin-Robi- assesment of a structural chromosomal mosaicism in prenatal net1, F. Huet1, P. Sagot5, T. Rousseau5, S. Robertson6, L. Faivre1; diagnosis 1Departement de Genetique, Dijon, France, 2Foetopathologie, Dijon, France, M. Rodriguez de Alba, D. Diego-Alvarez, J. Plaza-Arranz, A. Bustamante-Ara- 3Departement de Genetique, Paris, France, 4Foetopathologie, Paris, France, gonés, C. Sanchez-Jimeno, F. Infantes, C. Ayuso, C. Ramos; 5Centre pluridisciplinaire de diagnostic prenatal, Dijon, France, 6Pediatrics, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. Dunedin, New Zealand. The presence of a structural chromosomal mosaicism in prenatal Otopalatodigital syndromes (OPD) are allelic X-linked disorders diagnosis is a rare event that may represent a major diagnostic characterized by skeletal abnormalities including hands and feet problem since they most often occur during cell culture . abnormalities, facial dysmorphism and cleft palate in males, OPD We describe a case of a pregnant woman who underwent an type 2 representing the severe end of the spectrum . We report the amniocentesis due to maternal age . At that time the fetus had no first pregnancy of non-consanguineous parents. Ultrasound survey at apparent sonographic markers . The karyotype resulted to be 46,XX 12 and 17 WG showed nuchal translucency and severe micromelia (35%)/46,XXr(22)(p11;q13.1)(65%). with bowing of long bones . Cytogenetic study performed on amniotic Once the presence of the mosaicism was diagnosed, and confirmed fluid revealed a normal female karyotype. Post-mortem study after by FISH with the use of the Di George probe (QBIO-gene), the couple termination of pregnancy at 19 WG showed severe growth retardation was suggested a cordocentesis in order to confirm the results. with short and bowed limbs, facial dysmorphism with cleft palate, The cytogenetic analysis of the fetal cord blood confirmed the presence preaxial polydactyly of both feet, severe hypomineralisation with of the mosaicism . The percentage of both cell lines in this tissue was cranial vault hypocalcification. Although many clinical and radiological 50% . features were in favour of OPD2 syndrome, the severity of micromelia, In parallel to cord blood culture, MLPA technique with subtelomeric early lethality, the presence of generalized osteopenia instead of probes was performed in order to test its accuracy in the assesment hyperostotic bones and the female sex of the foetus with random X- of terminal deletions/duplications for this kind of diagnosis . To discard inactivation studies ruled out this diagnosis . In addition, sequencing the occurrence of the event during cell culture, DNA samples from analysis did not reveal any pathogenetic mutation in the FLNA gene . In both the original sample and culture were analysed . The structural conclusion, we postulate that this female foetus presents a new entity chromosomal mosaicism was detected in both samples using MLPA . of the OPD spectrum disorder . The MLPA technique was not able to detect the mosaicism in a DNA sample obtained from the cord blood due to the presence of maternal P0465. A severe overgrowth foetal syndrome of unknown origin, cell contamination . detected at 28th week of gestation The MLPA technique has shown to be a good tool for the assessment B. Gentilin1, M. F. Bedeschi1, P. Castorina1, F. Natacci1, G. Bulfamante2, A. of structural chromosomal mosaicism involving the terminal deletion Righini3, E. Ferrazzi4, F. Lalatta1; of a chromosome . However, the interpretation of the results has to be 1Medical Genetics Unit Department D.B.N. - Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore done carefully when a cell contamination is suspected . Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Pathology Unit - DMCO Ospedale San Paolo, Milan, Italy, 3Neuroradiology Unit - Ospedale Buzzi - ICP, P0463. Norman Roberts syndrome: further delineation of the Milan, Italy, 4Obstetric and Gynecology Unit - Ospedale L. Sacco, Milan, Italy. phenotype in prenatal life A 37 years old pregnant woman at her third pregnancy, come to our F. Lalatta1, M. Bedeschi1, P. Castorina1, U. Cavallari1, A. Righini2, C. Frassoni3, attention for a counselling after several ultrasound examinations at 28th S. Guerneri4, A. Kustermann5, F. Natacci1; week . A prenatal ultrasound at 13th + week was performed to program 1Medical Genetics - Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e drawing of AL for maternal age and showed an increased foetal nuchal translucency (NT=4,1mm) . Cytogenetic analysis revealed Prenatal diagnosis 00 normal female karyotype (46XX) . Ultrasound examination at 20th week detected in cytogenetic studies prenatally and referral indications in showed a hydronephrosis without ureteral dilatation . Repeated US 4438 pregnant cases in Izmir between the period of 1998-2005 . The scan disclosed progressive macrosomy, macrocephaly, shortening of overall chromosomal abnormality rate was found to be 157/4438 (3 .53 long bones (<5th centile), hepatomegaly, mild left ventricle hypertrophy, %) . Eighty-eight out of 4438(1 .98%) cases had common triosmies bilateral hydronephrosis, redundant skin, course facial features and which were 1 .48% (trisomy 21), 0 .29% (trismoy 18) and 0 .2% (trismoy polyhydramnios . NMR of CNS showed no other malformations except 13) . The structural chromosomal and sex chromosome abnormality macrocephaly with an increase of liquoral pericerebral spaces . rates were found to be 1 .19% and 0 .4% respectively . Among referral The pregnancy terminated with intrauterine foetal death at 30th week . indications, the proportion of pathological ultrasonographic findings At post-mortem examination, the foetus was macrosomic and has been significantly increased in recent years. This shows that macrocephalic for gestational age . Furthermore anatomopathological improvements in the ultrasonographic techniques and ultrasonographic evaluation revealed craniofacial dysmorphisms (hypertelorism, flat examinations positively effects the prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal and large nose, macroglossia, thick lips), low-set ears, short neck abnormalities . Careful genetic counseling by expert geneticists with redundant skin, thick skin and hydrocephalus . No evidence regarding the patients indications is essantial for determining the cost- of omphalocele or diaphragmatic hernia or nephroblastomatosis . effective prenatal diagnostic test for each patient . Epatomegaly, hypertrophic cardiomiopathy and bilateral hydronephrosis associated with mild bilateral ureteronephrosis were also present . The P0468. Biomedical Research Centre: the first laboratory in external genitalia were female and hypertrophic . Lithuania started to use FisH for prenatal diagnostics Samples were taken to exclude metabolic diseases . K. Auguliene, D. Jakiuniene, I. Gulbinovic, D. Ambrasiene; The parents are Caucasian, healthy and non consanguineous . Family Biomedical Research Centre, Vilnius, Lithuania. history is unremarkable . Biomedical Research Centre was the first one in Lithuania started to The foetus is affected by a constitutive syndromic condition, whose perform prenatal diagnosis of aneuploidy by using FISH procedure . diagnosis is not yet clear . FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) procedure may be effectively The cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic analysis for subtelomeric used to perform preliminary screening of numerical abnormalities regions of the parents is in progress . The possible differential diagnoses involving chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y in human cells . are here discussed . Methods: FISH was performed by using commercial reagent kit AneuVysion Multicolor DNR Probe Kit (CEP 18, X Y-alfa satellite, LSI P0466. Genetic indications for Preimplantation Genetic 13 and 21), VYSIS, USA . This kit allows investigating chromosomal Diagnosis compared with Prenatal Diagnosis abnormalities in very early pregnancy - from 10 weeks . K. R. Neas1,2, D. Mowat2,3, D. Challis3,4, G. Morgan3, A. Turner2,3; Results: Patient’s amniotic fluid samples have been collected from 1Central and Southern Regional Genetic Service, Wellington, New Zealand, private clinics of Lithuania . The FISH procedure has been was performed 2Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney, Aus- on 10 samples of amniotic fluid (in 10-16 weeks of pregnancy). The tralia, 3School of Women’s and Child Health, University of NSW, Sydney, Aus- chromosomal aneuploidy was detected only in one patient: nuc ish tralia, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Royal Hospital for Women, 13q14×2, 18p11 .1-q11 .1(D18Z1×2), 21q22 .13-q22 .2(D21S259×2), Sydney, Australia. Xp11 .1-q11 .1(DX21×2),Yp11 .1-q11 .1(DYZ3×1) . The obtained Prenatal genetic diagnosis technology is widely used to identify the chromosomal aneuploidy determines Klinefelter syndrome in fetus . genetic status of an at-risk embryo or foetus . This clinical audit aimed We are very happy to perform early prenatal diagnosis in our to review and compare the clinical indications and demographic laboratory . Women have a possibility to do that examination from characteristics of couples undergoing prenatal genetic testing by 10 week of pregnancy, while standard cytogenetic analysis might be pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) with a private service and performed only from 14 weeks . Prenatal diagnosis by FISH let to know by standard prenatal genetic diagnosis (PND) in a public hospital real situation about fetus health, would vanish worry about coming new . In addition we collected information about the efficacy of each child into our world . technique . The principle positive finding of this audit was an increased uptake P0469. The Influence of Bioethics and Religious Ruling in of PGD for predictive testing/adult onset disorders . This was not Prenatal Diagnosis and Abortion unexpected, but is of importance for future service provision . In addition F. Mahjoubi; we found that the birth rate per PGD cycle in this cohort was 26 .4% National centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic This study is a preliminary examination of limited data . Future studies Republic of Iran. should focus on couples’ reasons for seeking PND or PGD services, “Bioethics” means the study of ethical issues arising from human their religious and cultural beliefs and the financial factors affecting involvement with life . Many concepts of bioethics can be traced their decisions . in religions and cultural patterns that may or may not share some universal ideals . This is especially true when we talk of reproduction P0467. the evaluation of chromosomal abnormalities diagnosed and genetics, prenatal diagnosis, abortion etc . prenatally in izmir Decisions to undertake prenatal diagnosis, with more emphasizes H. Akin1, A. Alpman2, F. Ozkinay1, D. Ercal3, O. Cogulu1, H. Kirayoglu1, B. on Iran, involve a complex assessment of the best interests of the Durmaz2, C. Gunduz4, S. Sagol5, C. Ozkinay1; fetus and parent’s interest . Parents often accept a recommendation for 1Ege University Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Tur- prenatal diagnosis that is approached collaboratively, especially if the key, 2Ege University Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of test is of proven efficiency and have a low maternal/fetus risk and also Genetics and Teratology, Izmir, Turkey, 3Dokuz Eylul University Medical Faculty, low cost . The prenatal diagnosis poses a potential conflict between Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University the parent’s own best interests, ideology, and very importantly faith on Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 5Ege University one side and perception of the best interests of the fetus . In addition, if Medical Faculty, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Izmir, Turkey. prenatal diagnosis is linked to selective abortion then the autonomy of Prenatal diagnosis for chromosomal disorders is performed routinely in the fetus plus religious faith of the parents could lead to a conflict. populations since most of these disorders have severe consequences From the prenatal diagnosis experiences in Iran several other such as major malformations and mental retardation . Chromosomal concerns have also been noticed by geneticists . These concerns abnormalities are observed approximately 0 .5% to 1% of infants born were as follows: fairness of access to genetic services, indications for with multiple anomalies and cause 4-7% of perinatal deaths . The vast prenatal diagnosis, confidentiality problems, counseling incapacitated majority of chromosomal abnormalities detected in prenatal samples are persons etc . One of the extremely important items to be concerned trisomy 13,18, 21 and sex chromosome aneuploidies . Since advanced for the parents found to be abortion choices and legal restrictions due technologies in rapid diagnostic tests have been developed to detect to Islamic faith and Islamic low practicing in Iran . Considering these common trisomies prenatally it is essential that each laboratory should factors, a code of ethics practical in Islamic countries such as Iran evaluate their own prenatal diagnosis profile. In this study we aimed seems very necessary to be proposed to investigate the type and proportion of chromosomal abnormalities Prenatal diagnosis 01 P0470. Bioethical problems of fertility awareness and prenatal markers and the identification of potential drug targets. In the present diagnostics study 6 amniotic fluid supernatants (AFS) from pregnancies with Down D. Simanaviciute1, D. Serapinas2, R. Sereikiene2; Syndrome (DS) fetuses and 12 from chromosomally normal fetuses 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Kaunas University of Medicine, in the 17th week of gestation were analysed by two-dimensional Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania. electrophoresis. Gel comparison revealed significant differences in Postponing childbirth is becoming increasingly common in Western the two groups . Spots with different expression levels were excised countries, especially among groups with higher education qualifications. and proteins identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization This increases the risk of involuntary infertility in this group and time-of-flight mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry. reproductive problems connected with age . In November 2005 Splicing factor arginine/serine-rich 4 (Q08170) was present only in European Commission publicized results of two surveys on science AFS from DS fetuses and completely absent in the control group . and technology and their related values . One of the issues examined Quantitative differences were detected for AMBP (P02760), CO1A1 was prenatal life . 53% of Europeans think it is “very important” to (P02452), CO3A1 (P02461), CO5A1 (P20908) and PGBM (P98160) . protect the dignity of the foetus . The countries most concentrated on These proteins were increased in cases with DS, while protein IBP1 this issue (73%) are Malta, Greece and Ireland . Hungary, Denmark (P08833) was decreased by 40% compared to chromosomally normal and Lithuania are at the bottom of the list (only 37%) . These attitudes fetuses . Four proteins (CO1A1, CO3A1, CO5A1 and PGBM) appeared are important from the medical point of view, because every elective as fragments . abortion has aggravating effect for future pregnancies . After abortion Our data suggest the feasibility of proteomic approaches in identifying future pregnancies appears to be in elderly age, when there is elevated proteins differentially expressed in AFS obtained from cases where the possibility to chromosomal defects . Also there are risks for preterm fetus has trisomy 21 and allow further research to be conducted in the birth and delivery complications . area . Since differentially expressed proteins and small peptides are An important aspect of prenatal diagnostics (PD) is to discuss with a likely to cross the placenta barrier and be detected in maternal serum, couple about advantages and disadvantages of PD . proteomic analysis carries the potential to enhance research in the We report some cases: study of noninvasive techniques for prenatal diagnosis of aneuploidies . case1 .36 aged woman came to genetic counseling clinic with fertility However, for protein biomarkers to be of any clinical utilit, extensive problems: in anamnesis second and third pregnancies ended in validation in human trials is essential . . miscarriages at 6-7 weeks, after first pregnancy ended in miscarriage at 17 weeks, after amniocentesis ( answer of karyotype was normal P0473. Prenatal diagnosis in turkish pregnants on 46XY) . chromosomes 21, 18, 13, and XY with quantitative fluorescent case2. 42 aged woman, who previouslly had 6 abortions, delivered PcR methods child with Patau syndrome . B. Dölek, B. Eroğlu Kesim, G. Gültekin, A. Dağdemir, S. Eraslan, S. Eroğlu, G. case3. 37 aged woman, who conceived and used oral contraceptives, Karataş, Z. Candemir, A. Yalçıner, Y. Laleli; not realising about pregnancy, till third month of pregnancy, came for Duzen Laborotories, İstanbul, Turkey. PD . Quantitative Fluoresent-Polymerase Chain Reaction (QF-PCR) method gives rapid prenatal diagnosis for chromosomal aneuploidies . P0471. Weight and ethnic adjustment factors for chinese women Common chromosomal aneuploidies, 21, 18, 13, and XY, in 262 Turkish undertaking prenatal screening for Down syndrome prenatal cases at risk were evaluated . We tested four Short Tandem A. M. Summers1, T. Huang1, C. Meier1, F. Wang2; Repeats (STR) sequences for the chromosomes 21, 18, 13 and five 1Genetics Program, North York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Health for sex chromosomes in this study . Multiplex PCR assays based on Surveillance, Alberta Health and Wellness, Edmonton, AB, Canada. amplification of STR sequences which are tetra nucleotides by using Ethnic differences in the concentrations of maternal serum markers flourescent primers, and visualization and quantification of STR peaks have been reported in previous studies . The major differences were by using automated DNA sequencer with a software were carried found in Afro-Caribbean and South Asian women . We conducted a out. All findings obtained from QF-PCR method were confirmed with study to investigate the levels of serum markers and to estimate ethnic traditional karyotyping analysis . As a result, detemining of common and weight correction factors in Chinese women . Our study population trisomy abnormalities with QF-PCR methods has a great impact for consisted of 400,650 Caucasian and 30,960 Chinese women who were rapid, accuracy, and simple prenatal diagnosis . non-diabetic, had an unaffected singleton pregnancy and who were screened in the Ontario Multiple Marker Screening Program between P0474. Rapid prenatal diagnosis of common aneuploidies in a 10/1993 and 8/2004. Chinese women were identified from the ethnicity amniotic fluid QF-PCR category of Asian using a published Chinese surname list . The median H. Onay1, T. Ugurlu2, A. Aykut1, G. Itirli3, S. Pehlivan3, M. Inal2, S. Tinar2, C. maternal weight was 66 .3 kg for Caucasian and 54 .5 kg for Chinese . Ozkinay4, F. Ozkinay4; Using the current weight correction factors derived from Caucasian 1Ege University Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege women, the median MoMs of AFP, uE3, total hCG and PAPP-A were Maternity and Gynecology and Obstetrics Teaching Hospital, Izmir, Turkey, 3%, 14%, 19% and 16% higher in Chinese women . The increase in uE3 3Ege University Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege and total hCG in Chinese women were consistent across most of the University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey. weight groups . The increase in PAPP-A was largely due to inadequate The quantitative fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR) has successfully been weight correction for Chinese women . Quadratic weight correction used for prenatal diagnosis of common chromosomal aneuploidies formulas based on analyte levels in Chinese women were derived, in the last few years . This method allows us to diagnose common allowing correction for ethnicity and weight . Ethnic correction will have aneuploidies in a short space at time after sampling combined with a variable effect on the false positive rate (FPR) for Down syndrome high throughput, very low error rates and low cost . QF-PCR technique for Chinese women depending upon marker combinations as the is based upon the amplification of fetal DNA extracted from uncultured influence of hCG is offset by the influence of uE3, AFP and PAPP-A. amniotic fluid cells using fluorescent labeled primers. Size separation As nuchal translucency is probably increased in Chinese women, this and allele peak measurements are performed on a semi-automated marker correction is expected to reduce the FPR when included . genetic analyzer. In this study 400 amniotic fluid samples, 3 CVS and 3 cord blood were analyzed for trisomies 13, 18, 21 and sex chromosome P0472. The amniotic fluid proteome in pregnancies with Down aneuploidies using QF-PCR . Test results were compared with those syndrome obtained by conventional cytogenetic analysis . A. Kolialexi1, G. T. Tsangaris2, P. Karamessinis2, S. Garbis2, A. Antsaklis1, A. Six cases of trisomy 21 (1,5%), 1 case of trisomy 13 (0,25%), 1 case Anagnostopoulos1,2, M. Fountoulakis2, A. Mavrou1; of Trisomy 18 (0,25%), 1 case of Turner Syndrome (0,25%), 1 case 1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Division of Klinefelter’s syndrome (0,25%), and 1 case of triploidy (0,25%), 1 of Biotechnology, Center of Basic Research, Foundation of Biomedical Re- case of XXX (0,25%) were detected by QF-PCR . QF-PCR results were search of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece. consistent with the results of cytogenetic analysis . Proteomic analysis is widely used for the detection of diagnostic This is the first study in which QF-PCR has been used to diagnose the Prenatal diagnosis 0 chromosomal aneuploidies prenatally in a large series of fetal samples a now case of prenatal diagnosis of 15q26.1◊qter deletion due to a in the Turkish population . It is considered that a QF-PCR method is de novo ring chromosome 15 . Amniocentesis and foetal karyotyping an appropriate choice for rapid aneuploidy testing in our population as was performed because of the discovery of oligoamnios, intauterine has been reported in other populations . growth retardation, bilateral plykistic kidneys and diaphragmatic hernia on ultrasound examination at 18 weeks of pregnancy . Conventional P0475. QF-PcR testing for trisomy 21, trisomy 18 and trisomy 13 cytogenetic study detects a ring chromosome 15 in all analysed on 1300 prenatal samples foetal cells . FISH was performed for detailed characterisation of this S. Andonova, R. Raynova, I. Kremensky; chromosomal anomaly . Whole chromosomic painting, centromeric Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria. and locus specific probes of chromosome 15 confirm that rearranged We have evaluated the applicability of 10 STR markers on chromosome was a ring chromosome 15 inducing a pure partial chromosomes 13, 18 and 21 for prenatal diagnosis of the common monoasomy 15q26.1◊qter autosomal aneuploidies . DNA samples (n=1300) were extracted from Diaphragmatic hernia and intrauterine growth retardation and kidneys amniotic fluid cells, chorionic villi and fetal tissue after abortions. PCR malformations are frequently described in cases of different 15 amplifications of 4 markers located on chromosome 21 (D21S11, chromosome deletions; this study contributes to a better delineation of D21S1411, D21S1440, D21S1435), 3 - on chromosome 18 (D18S535, the critical region implicated in these developmental anomalies . D18S51, D18S858) and 3 - on chromosome 13 (D13S631, D13S258, D13S256) were performed in four multiplex assays in a combination P0478. molecular diagnosis of Russell-silver syndrome in a with 4 markers on the sex chromosomes . newborn with asymmetric prenatal growth restricition. In 235 prenatal samples only QF-PCR analysis was performed; other G. McGillivray1, A. Sampson2, E. Algar3, A. Lee2, D. Johnston2; samples were analyzed both by QF-PCR and conventional cytogenetics 1Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Royal Womens - in 73 only DNA diagnosis was available because of culture failures . Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 3Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Austra- All samples with trisomy 21 (n=32), trisomy 18 (n=9), trisomy 13 (n=3) lia. and triploidy (n=1) were correctly detected with QF-PCR . For exclusion The pre- and postnatal findings are presented in an infant with of maternal contamination and submicroscopic duplication DNA from Russell-Silver syndrome confirmed by methylation analysis of the parents were analyzed when necessary . A polymorphic duplication was H19 imprinting centre in the newborn period . The 18 week fetal detected in one prenatal sample and maternal origin was revealed . morphology scan showed asymmetric intrauterine growth restriction Our experience showed that QF-PCR technique could be used for with long bone measurements on the 5th percentile for age compared detection of certain chromosomal numerical anomalies, especially with cranial measurements on the 50th percentile for gestation . The when ultrasound or biochemical analyses are abnormal, or culture umbilical artery Doppler profile was mildly abnormal. A chromosomal failures arise, or cytogenetic analysis is impossible . However the use abnormality was excluded . The male infant was delivered at 38 weeks of this analysis as the only method of diagnosis should be estimated gestation with weight and length significantly restricted compared with considering the advantages of the technique together with its a head circumference on the 75th percentile for gestation . He had limitations . retrognathia, clinodactyly of the fifth fingers, and proportional limb shortening . Methylation analysis of the H19 imprinting centre showed P0476. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis in two couples with a reduced methylation ratio in keeping with Russell-Silver syndrome . balances reciprocal translocations The typical Russell-Silver phenotype was readily apparent at 3 months V. Baltaci1, H. Satiroglu1, E. Unsal2, O. Uner2, M. A. Ergun3, S. Batioglu4, M. of age . Russell-Silver syndrome should be considered with these Sonmezer1, C. Kabukcu2, B. Aydinuraz2, Y. Aktas2; findings on the antenatal scan. The diagnosis may be confirmed 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology IVF Unit, Ankara, Turkey, 2GenART through molecular studies after birth . Further research is required to Women Health and Reproductive Biotechnology Institute, Ankara, Turkey, 3Gazi establish normal methylation ratiosof the 11p15 .5 critical region in the University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Tur- second trimester . It will then be possible to test whether the diagnosis key, 4Dr. Zekai Tahir Burak Women Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. of Russell-Silver syndrome can be established at the time of the fetal Pre implantation genetic diagnosis is a technique based on the transfer morphology scan . process of only those embryos tested to be normal . In this study we aimed to transfer the balanced embryos by means of IVF-PGD in two P0479. severe skeletal malformations detected by prenatal couples carrying balanced reciprocal translocations of 46,XY,t(12;17) ultrasound: estimation of recurrence risk (p11;q11) and 46,XX,t(6;11)( q15;q22). The oocytes were fertilized by A. Kaasen1, T. Prescott1, A. Heiberg1, G. Haugen2; means of intra cytoplasmic sperm injection . The resulting embryos 1Rikshospitalet University Hospital, 0027 Oslo, Norway, 2Rikshospitalet Uni- were biopsied 3 days after fertilization and the blastomeres were versity Hospital; Rikshospitalet Faculty Division, University of Oslo, 0027 Oslo, analyzed with fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH) where telomeric Norway. and centromeric probes were utilized . Balanced and unbalanced Objective: To evaluate estimation of recurrence risk following embryos were evaluated in two cases. In the first case, 6 out of the 9 sonographic detection of severe skeletal anomalies resulting in embryos (15 blastomeres) analyzed, revealed unbalanced constitution . pregnancy termination . Only one of the remaining three that revealed balanced constitution methods: We performed a retrospective chart review for a 17 year was transferred . In second case, some 3 out of the 5 embryos (7 period at our tertiary referral centre. Twenty-five pregnancy terminations blastomeres) analyzed, revealed unbalanced constitution and one were done at a gestational age of 17-23 .9 weeks after sonographic was not conclusive . Another embryo with balanced constitution was detection of skeletal malformations . Two medical geneticists and one transferred. The PGD results were confirmed by amniocentesis in genetic counsellor reviewed all charts independently . both cases, which resulted in uncomplicated birth of healthy babies, Results: All three investigators agreed upon which investigation: 1 . one being a baby boy, the other girl, both with balanced (normal) constituted the best basis for diagnosis at the earliest point in time karyotypes. As a result, we conclude that, in cases identified as and 2 . provided the best basis for estimation of recurrence risk . All translocation carrier, resorting to PGD-supported IVF cycle will reduce diagnostic investigations are shown in Table 1 . down the abortion risk and has a key role in enabling the delivery for Recurrence risk categories were: <1% (n=9), ≤5% (n=9), ≤25% (n=3), healthy babies . ≤50% (n=2). Inter-observer discrepancy in recurrence risk estimation occurred in 2 of 25 cases (one category apart) . P0477. Prenatal diagnosis of 15q26.1◊qter deletion due to a ring conclusions: Recurrence risk estimates for skeletal malformations chromosome 15. detected by prenatal ultrasound examination were in reasonable H. Elghezal1, M. Ben Reguaya1, W. Denguezli2, S. Mougou1, A. Saad1; agreement among the 3 investigators . In 16 of 25 cases a more 1Cytogenetics and reproductive biology department. Farhat Hached university definitive diagnosis could be reached with the help of additional teaching hospital, sousse, Tunisia, 2Gynaecology and obstetrics department . studies . Fattouma Bourguiba university teaching hospital, monastir, Tunisia. Terminal deletions of chromosome 15q are rare events . Here we report Prenatal diagnosis 0 table 1: investigation(s) giving the most precise diagnosis amplify normal α2 is located in the same site of PA;16-bp del , which results in misinterpretation that the person is homo for α2, though the Ultra- Autopsy History (n=25) Diagnosis sound Autopsy X-ray and X-ray Karyotyping (n=10), reality is single deletion plus PA;16bp deletion. In comparison with the (n=24) (n=25) (n=25) (n=24) DNA-analysis (n=1) other multiplex PCR methods, ours amplify short fragments which are easy to amplify and the band sizes are good enough to be separated Osteogenesis imperfecta (n=9) 6 3 on the gel . Thanotophoric dysplasia (n=4) 1 1 2 P0482. molecular Analysis of individuals With Low mcV, mcH, and Normal Hemoglobin A2 Sacrococcygeal teratoma (n=2) 2 E. Shafieiyeh, Z. Moghaddam, B. Zarbakhsh, M. Mohammadi, B. Azimifar, S. Dehghanizadeh, S. Zeinali; Other (n=10)* 4 1 2 3 Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. total 9 4 2 7 3 Objective: We tested 30 Iranian individuals with low MCV, MCH and normal HbA2 who had been referred to us by different Primary Health * Multiple congenital anomalies (n=2), trisomy 18 (n=1), Care centers involved in National Premarital Screening for thalassemia . osteochondrodysplasia (n=1), rhizomelia (n=1), Kniest dysplasia (n=1), The aim of the present study was to determine presence or absence of Larsen’s syndrome (n=1), ectrodactyly (n=1), cerebrocostomandibular mutations in the alpha or beta globin genes in these Individuals . syndrome (n=1) and spinal muscular atrophy (n=1) . Background: Thalassemias are inherited disorders of hemoglobin production characterized by absence or reduction in globin chain P0480. Prenatal diagnosis of spinal muscular atrophy i synthesis leading to an imbalance of the globin chains . (Werding-Hoffman disease) Material & Methods: DNA were extracted from blood samples and S. A. Kocheva1,2, M. Kuturec2, S. Vlaski-Jekic3, G. D. Efremov1; used to perform gap-PCR for α- thalassemia deletions (i.e: -α3 .7, -α4 .2, 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Macedonian -α20 .5, --Med) and sequencing to determine possible mutation in β globin Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of gene . Macedonia, 2Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Results: 11 of these were heterozygote for 3 .7 kb deletion and one Republic of Macedonia, 3Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Skopje, was compound heterozygote for 3 .7kb and 4 .2 kb deletions .One The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. showed a SNP at IVS-II-nt711 A◊T in β -globin gene and the other one Spinal muscular atrophy I (SMA I) is the second most common lethal a hemoglobin variant at Cd: 127A◊G. We can conclude that among autosomal recessive disorder of childhood, affecting 1 in 6000 - 10000 these 30 individuals none had mutation in their β-globin gene to births, with carrier frequency of 1 in 40-60 . It primarily affects the anterior warrant prenatal diagnosis after marriage . horn cells of the spinal cord and motor cranial nerve nuclei, leading to Discussion: Molecular analysis of β and α globin gene in 30 individuals progressive paralysis with atrophy . The symptoms of the disease start suspicious of being β-thal carriers demonstrated that all of them were before the age of six months and death generally occurring within the normal for β-globin mutation and therefore no PND was needed. first two years. The gene for SMA has been mapped to chromosome Although the sample size was not Large enough it can be concluded 5q11 .2 -q13 .3 . The molecular analysis of SMN gene in Macedonian that individuals with low MCV (mean: 75 ± 4 .2), low MCH (24 .3 ±3 .6) patients showed that SMA is associated with high frequency of with normal HbA2 (2.51± 0.6) may not be carrier of β-thal. deletions in exon 7 and 8 of the SMN gene (91 .6%) Prenatal diagnosis is most frequently requested by families with SMA P0483. Rapid testing of Embryo, cVs And Amniotic Fluid I . In this paper we present the direct DNA analysis of SMN gene samples For Beta thalassemia mutations By Real time PcR And performed in eighth families with SMA I . DNA obtained from chronic melting curve Analysis villi or amniocytes were analyzed for deletions in the SMA gene . The S. Yüksel1, F. Taylan1,2, I. Ünsal3, E. Altıok1,2; results showed that six fetuses were normal and two fetuses were 1Acibadem Genetic Diagnosis Center, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Boğaziçi University, homozygote for a deletion of exons 7 and 8 . After genetic counseling, Dept. Molecular Biology &Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Acibadem Labmed, Is- parents of the six normal fetuses decided to continue the pregnancy . tanbul, Turkey. The results were confirmed after birth. Beta thalassemia is one the most common genetic disorder . Rapid, Direct DNA deletion analysis of the SMN gene in affected families cost effective and reliable tests for prenatal, carrier and preimplantation represents a highly reliable and fast method for prenatal diagnosis of genetic diagnosis is of great importance for effective fight against this SMA . public health problem . Real Time PCR technology is widespread, sensitive and has low running cost . We have developped protocols P0481. Differential Detection of α or β-Globin Gene Deletion by and studied 11 CVS, 25 amniotic fluid and 126 blastomers for beta Rapid triplex PcR thalassemia mutations: IVS I:110, IVS II:745, Codon 15 , IVS I:6, S. Dehghanizadeh Baghdadabad, M. Karimi, E. Shafieye, M. Zeinali, R. CD39, CD8/9, CD44, IVS I:5, IVS II:1 and IVS I:1 . As low as 1 single Habibi, Z. Moghaddam, M. Mohammadi, S. Zeinali; villus from CVS; 200 microliter amniotic fluid or single blastomers were Pasteur Ins of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. sufficient for analysis. The samples were tested in parallel by DNA Exact determination being carrier of α-thal or β-thal at the molecular sequencing . Turnaround time for prenatal samples was 90 min . An level is crucial for counseling and prenatal diagnosis . initial amplification was required before Real Time PCR set up and Ten milliliters blood sample was taken from 10 normal and 50 individuals therefore the turnaround time was 3 hours for blastomers . Real time referred to us as being possible carrier of α- or β-thal. DNA extraction PCR by hybridization probes followed by melting curve analysis is a by standard protocols, salting out, phenol-chloroform, and magnetic fast, reliable and economic method for prenatal and preimplantation beads were tested. Primers for α-globins were taken from literature genetic diagnosis of beta thalassemia mutations . and primers for β-globin were designed. Triplex PCR was optimized testing different conditions . Crucial parameters were found to be DNA P0484. Results of 102 Prenatal Diagnosis Performed at Pasteur extraction method, dNTP concentration, and presence of DMSO and institute of iran glycerol. After electrophoresis quantification of the bands were done Z. Kaini Moghaddam, E. Shafieye, S. Delmaghani, M. Mohammadi, M. Zeinali, by Photocapt software . PCR products with intact (no deletion) gene S. Zeinali; showed band densities different from persons having deletion in globin Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. genes . Several repeated tests with samples known to have deletion in Objective: The aim of this study is giving information to high-risk β- or α-globin genes proved our quantitative method being accurate carriers, establishing a genetic counseling program and prevention and useful . of birth of Thalassemic children through carrier testing and prenatal This method reduces the number of specific tests required to identify diagnosis . the type of mutations in globin genes . Non-deletion mutation studies Background: Thalassemia is an inherited disorder of hemoglobin can be facilitated by following these results . In usual multiplex PCR production characterized by a reduction in globin chain synthesis methods used to identify alpha deletion, the reverse primer which is to Prenatal diagnosis 0 leading to an imbalance of the globin chains . The most clinically sever 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The form of B-thalassemia is called Thalassemia major . Netherlands, 2Department of Perinatology and Gynaecology, University Medical Material and Methods: Prenatal diagnosis was performed for 102 Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands. couples carrier for β-thalasemia referred primary health care (PHC) In chorionic villi discrepancies between the prenatal and fetal karyotype centers between 2002- 2005 . CVS was obtained at 10-12 weeks of are a well-known phenomenon, occuring in 1-2 % of all pregnancies . gestation by a specialist . The karyotype seen in amniocytes, though, usually well represents the After characterizing parental mutations by ARMS and performing fetus proper . linkage analysis by polymorphic markers (RFLP), Chorionic villus We present a case with discrepancies between amniocytes and fetal samples were collected and tested by above methods in duplicates . cells as well as different findings with karyotyping of cultured fetal cells Results: Prenatal diagnosis revealed 102 fetuses with 21 (%20 .5) and FISH on uncultured cells of the same tissue . affected 54 (%54 .9) heterozygotes and 27 (%26 .4) healthy fetuses . A 22-year-old woman (G1P0) was referred in the 22nd week of The most common mutation observed in affected fetuses was IVSΙΙ- pregnancy because of ultrasound abnormalities which were suspect of Ι(G”A) with frequency %42.8, Fr8-9 (-AA) %23.8, IVSΙ-5 (G”C) %14.2, a chromosomal aberration . Ι110 (G”A) %9.5, Codon 44 (-C) %4.7, IVSΙ-25del %4.7, respectively. Interphase FISH on uncultured amniocytes with probes specific for the Discussion: All of the target population had requested for PND and chromosomes 13, 18 and 21 (LSI-13, L1 .84 and LSI-21) showed three were willing to accept prenatal diagnosis as a means for control of signals for chromosome 18 in 15 out of 34 nuclei . thalassemia . A nationwide thalassemia control program is in progress The pregnancy was terminated at 23+ weeks . The fetus with a birth and our work is a part of that program .We have to admit that the weight of 335g showed the typical facial features of the trisomy 18 number of PD performed is not large but the primary role of our center syndrome . Cultured amniocytes showed a double trisomy . In one cell is to act as National Reference Center for the whole country when they line a male chromosomal pattern with an extra chromosome 3 was seek our help . seen and a second cell line showed a trisomy 18 . A discrepancy was seen between the results of cultured cells from P0485. Detection of toxoplasma gondii in amniotic fluid using ear cartilage (trisomy 18 in all metaphases) and the FISH-results on fluorescent-PCR method uncultured cells of this tissue . An extra signal for chromosome 3 only L. Levente, N. Bálint, B. Zoltán, N. Gyula Richárd; was seen in 52 nuclei, for chromosome 18 only in 21 nuclei and 17 Semmelweis University, I st. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Buda- cells showed a normal signal pattern . pest, Hungary. A number of issues will be raised regarding the reporting and Background: Intrauterine toxoplasma infection can cause serious interpretation of this case . congenital malformation . As active fetal infection occurs only in a few percent of pregnancies showing seroconverison during pregnancy, the P0488. A case of true mosaicism for trisomy 22 during first detection of the infective agent from the amniotic fluid is important to trimester prenatal diagnosis diagnose affected fetuses and determines the further management . S. Sifakis1, A. Konstantinidou2, V. Velissariou3, E. Papadopoulou4, O. Kouk- Methods: We tested 64 amniotic fluid samples for the presence oura1, N. Mantas1, E. Koumantakis1; of Toxoplasma. gondii using fluorescent-PCR and DNA fragment 1Department of Obstetrics-Gynecology, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, analysis. DNA was isolated from the amniotic fluid samples by using Greece, 2Department of Pathology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 3De- silica adsorption method . We determined the sensitivity of the method partment of Pediatrics, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, 4Cytoge- too . netics Laboratory, Mitera Hospital, Athens, Greece. Results: The fluorescent-PCR and DNA fragment analysis has the Introduction: Trisomy 22 mosaicism is characterized by growth and detection limit of 10-100 parasites . We detected 5 toxoplasma positive developmental delay, and a variety of malformations, the severity of samples from the studied 64 amniotic fluids. which correspond to the percentage of the affected cells with the extra Conclusions: Fluorescent-PCR and DNA fragment analysis is a reliable chromosome . We present a case of a fetus with mos 47,XY,+22[3]/ method for the detection of congenital toxoplasmosis, and can be used 46,XY[30] detected during the 1st trimester . in diagnosis of acute toxoplasma infection during the pregnancy . Case Report: A CVS was performed at 13th week to a 30 years-old healthy primigravida woman after the detection of increased levels of P0486. Global up-regulation of genes on the trisomic β-hCG (6.5 MoM) in the combined screening test. Nuchal translucency chromosome in the developing human was normal (1 .0 mm) . The results from QF-PCR were normal for O. Altug-Teber, M. Bonin, A. Dufke, U. Mau-Holzmann, H. Stappert, O. Riess; 13, 18 and 21 trisomies . Trisomy 22 was detected in 50 cells using Department of Medical Genetics, University of Tuebingen, Germany. conventional GTG banding (47,XY,+22) . At 16 weeks’ gestation the Human autosomal trisomies remain a common cause of early pregnancy sonogram revealed intrauterine growth restriction and echogenous loss, neonatal death and multiple congenital anomalies . Among bowel, and an amniocentesis was performed . In two different cultures all the autosomal trisomies, only trisomies of the chromosomes 21 3/30 colonies with trisomy 22 were detected using the in situ culture (Down syndrome), 18 (Edwards syndrome) and 13 (Pätau syndrome) method . The pregnancy was terminated after genetic counseling . are compatible with postnatal survival . Autosomal trisomies are Post mortem examination showed dysmature and small placenta, characterized by mental retardation, neurological changes, intrauterine histologic signs of hypoperfusion, fetal hypoxia, asymmetrical growth growth retardation, congenital heart defects, and characteristic facial restriction, and increased head circumference . Micropenis and simple and skeletal features though with considerable variability in the severity (nonscrotal) hypospadias were the only malformations seen . Typical and pattern of associated malformations . The variability in each case abnormalities of trisomy 22, such as optic coloboma and preauricular cannot be predicted by the karyotype alone . There are currently two pits were absent . major hypotheses to explain the phenotypic variability . It is unclear Discussion: Autopsy findings were consistent with the low percentage whether the entire transcriptome is disrupted, or whether there is a (5%) of trisomic cells in the fetus, taking into consideration the known more restricted increase in the expression of genes assigned to the phenotypic variability of trisomy 22 . It is remarkable that the invasive trisomic chromosome . Both hypotheses are not necessarily mutually prenatal diagnosis was undertaken after the detection of extremely exclusive . high levels of β-hCG at 12 weeks’ gestation, before the presence of Using Affymetrix microarray technology, we examined gene expression any sonographic findings. in amnion and chorion villus cells of pregnancies with trisomy 21, 18 and 13, and observed chromosome-wide up-regulation in transcription P0489. is the role of ultrasound in prenatal diagnosis of levels for genes assigned to the trisomic chromosomes . aneuploidy crucial? - four cases M. Simandlova1, M. Malikova1, A. Puchmajerova1, Z. Vlckova1, D. Novotna1, R. P0487. Prenatal diagnosis in amniocytes of a mixoploid Vlk2, I. Spalova2, R. Kodet3, K. Kamaradova3, M. Macek, sr.1, M. Havlovicova1; karyotype involving trisomy 3 and trisomy 18 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetic, 2 nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles G. H. Schuring-Blom1, C. v.d. Sijs-Bos1, J. B. Derks2, M. van der Ham1, J. M. University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Clinic of Obstetric and Adult de Pater1; and Paediatric Gynaecology, Charles University Prague, 2nd Faculty of Medi- cine, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Pathology and Molecular Medi-Prenatal diagnosis 0 cine, Charles University in Prague, 2 nd Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech system (CNS) malformations, including spina bifida, agenesis of the Republic. corpus callosum . In addition to congenital infections, chromosomal The role of ultrasound imaging techniques in the detection of abnormalities are possible causes, and the prognosis depends on the aneuploidy risk estimation has notably improved over the past primary aetiology . years . The ultrasound revealed not quite typical features for certain From July 1998 to December 2005, all cases of ventriculomegaly at chromosomopathies . our institution were reviewed . Ventriculomegaly was assumed to be We present four cases of chromosomal aneuploidy syndromes present when atrial width was equal or greater than 10mm . diagnosed on the basis of ultrasound investigation . A total of 18 singleton pregnancies with sonographically determined First case was presented by giant cystic hygroma, hydrops universalis fetal ventriculomegaly at 20-28 week’s gestation were identified. The , anhydramnion and ascites at the 18 th week of gestation . The age of the pregnant women ranges from 21 to 32 years . cytogenetic investigation revealed karyotype: 47, XY,+21 .At the second Fifteen cases were isolated ventriculomegaly and 3 were concomitant case large frontal encephalocele was detected by the ultrasound at the with other CNS malformations, 14 were unilateral and 4 showed 13 th week of gestation, the cytogenetic analysis confirmed trisomy bilateral enlargement of lateral ventricle . 18 . At the third case( also trisomy 18- detected postnatally), congenital The incidence of chromosomal abnormalities was 5 .5% and this was in heart defect ( TOF) and bilateral aplasia of the radius was discovered an unilateral isolated ventriculomegaly . by the ultrasound at the 20 th week of gestation . The forth case showed According to our data, a careful ultrasound evaluation and a chromosomal on the ultrasound (19 th week of pregnancy) large omphalocele, sandal analysis should be offered to patients with ventriculomegaly . gap, genital defect and on the fetal echocardiography hypoplastic left heart . Cytogenetic analysis approved the karyotype: 47,XY,+13 . The P0492. Familial dicentric Y;22 translocation with no phenotypic parents of three mentioned cases decided to terminate the pregnancy . effect At the third presented case parents refused amniocentesis and decided A. Soler1,2, J. Bruguera1,3, C. Morales1,3, E. Margarit1,2, M. Alsius4, I. Ribas5, A. to continue the pregnancy . The proband was born at the 34 th week Sánchez1,2; of gestation, her karyotype was: 47,XX,+18 .The upper limbs were 1Servei de Genètica. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2IDIBAPS, Barcelona, severely malformated and congenital heart defect was confirmed. The Spain, 3Fundació Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Dr. Josep Trueta, Girona, girl died 7 days after birth . Spain, 5Centro de Patología Celular, Barcelona, Spain. Imaging techniques have been critical in the diagnostics of aneuploidies, In the most common form of Y/autosome translocation, the they can provide clinically useful information for the genetic counselling heterochromatic portion of Yq is translocated onto the short arm of an guidiance . acrocentric chromosome, and it is observed in phenotypically normal supported by MZO OOOOOO642O3 individuals with normal fertility . Very rarely, the same translocation can result in an unbalanced karyotype with 45 chromosomes . In these P0490. Prenatal diagnosis of hereditary vitamin D dependent cases, the fusion of the Y chromosome and the acrocentric produces rickets type i a dicentric chromosome . We describe a new case with a familial L. Simjanovska1, V. Tasic2, J. Miyamoto3, Y. Hasegawa3; dicentric Y;22 translocation. An amniocentesis was performed on the 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The second pregnancy of a 28-year-old woman because her husband was former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Pediatric clinic, Faculty of Medicine, carrier of 45,X,dic(Y;22)(q12;p11.2) karyotype. This translocation had Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 3Endocrinology, Metabo- been identified by chance during chromosome analysis on a previous lism and Genetics Units, Tokyo Metropolitan Kiyose Children’s Hospital, Tokyo, pregnancy referred for positive maternal serum screening . Cultured Japan. amniocytes showed 45,X,dic(Y;22)(q12;p11.2)pat.ish dic(Y;22)(SRY+, Vitamin D dependent rickets type I (VDDR-I) is an autosomal DYZ1+,D14Z1/D22Z1+) karyotype . The dicentric chromosome included recessive disorder caused by mutations in the 25-Hydroxyvitamin the Y heterochromatic region . In all the metaphases examined (n=118) D3, 1α-hydroxylase gene. Clinically it is characterized by hypotonia, the Y chromosome centromere was inactivated and the chromosome weakness and growth failure from early infancy . The affected child 22 centromere constricted . Ultrasound examination showed a male was a homozygous for the mutation Pro112Leu (CCC->CTC) in the fetus with normal phenotypical appearance and the pregnancy is going 1α-hydroxylase gene. Here we present a prenatal diagnosis for the on . This translocation seems to be of no phenotypic or reproductive second pregnancy in this family . effect in this family, since the healthy father has transmitted it to his Material and methods . Genomic DNA from the fetus was isolated both sons . However, it represents an alternative sex-determining from chorionic villus obtained at 10th week of pregnancy . DNA from mechanism, which will depend on the segregation of the normal the affected child and parents was isolated from the peripheral white chromosome 22 and the dicentric as well as the transmission of the X blood cells. Part of the 1α-hydroxylase gene was PCR amplified using chromosome, with a theoretical risk of sex aneuploidy in offspring . specific primers. Second PCR was performed using nested specific primers. PCR products were purified and sequenced using Big Dye P0493. 18 Years struggle to introduce the PND as a Practical and Terminator v1 .1 Cycle Sequencing kit, analyzed on ABI Prism 310 Reliable tool for Prevention of Genetics Disease and congenital automated sequencer . The chorion DNA purity was analyzed by abnormalities. Report of the result of 5270 PND tests AmpF1 STR identification kit, on ABI Prism 310. M. H. Kariminejad, H. Najmabadi, R. Kariminejad, Y. Shafeghati, F. Afroozan, Results . The sequencing analyses of fetal DNA showed that the fetus N. Almadani, M. Zangeneh, N. Nabavi-Nia, F. Azimi; is a heterozygous for the mutation Pro112 Leu (CCC->CTC) in the 1α- Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, hydroxylase gene, or only a carrier for the VDDR I . We also performed Islamic Republic of Iran. sequencing analyses of the affected child that showed presence of Progress of hygiene and life style has resulted in a remarkable the mutation on both chromosomes . The STR analyses excluded a decrease of mortality and morbidity caused by environmental factors possible contamination of the fetal with maternal DNA, and confirmed and have led to the pronounced influence on hereditary disorders. the paternity, as well . New strategies and approaches were necessitated to deal with the Conclusion . Although the necessity of the prenatal diagnosis is new order . Prenatal diagnosis has become an instrumental preventive controversial in this setting, our experience suggests that it is technically technique in the management and control of Genetic disease and possible and it might help for earlier treatment if necessary . congenital malformations . After the efforts of Iranian geneticists and in spite of major limitations P0491. Prenatal diagnosis of ventriculomegaly: Experience in caused by the imposed war; the first amniocentesis for chromosomal the prenatal center chvrpr aberration in Iran was performed in 1987 (20 year delay), followed by R. Pinto Leite, B. Carvalho, M. Souto, O. Moutinho, O. Carmo, E. Ribeiro; CVS in 1988; first molecular analysis for hemoglobinopathy was first Centro Hospitalar de Vila Real-, Vila Real, Portugal. done in 1990 and enzyme analysis for metabolic disorders in 1991 . Ventriculomegaly is a nervous system malformation characterized by Major other obstacles remained more, namely: the dilatation of cerebral lateral ventricles, with an incidence of 0 .3 to legal approval of therapeutic abortion, obtained in 1997, the ethical 1 .5 in 1000 births . and moral issues regarding abortion, overcome after clerical approval The ventriculomegaly may be associated with other central nervous Cancer genetics 06 in the same year, and insurance coverage for PND, obtained a couple , AML , polycythemia vera and in a subset of nontherapy-related of years later . acute myelocytic leukemia . Del (9q) is a known recurrent cytogenetic Removing legal, ethical and financial barriers along with increased abnormality in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) . The co-occurrence of public awareness in regards to the hereditary disorders have these two, recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities is reported here for the been extremely inductive in increasing the demand for PND and first time. We suggest this combination may confer a poor outcome. establishment of several PND centers over the country . We are reporting the results of 5860 PND tests that have been P0496. Diagnostic value of fluorescence in-situ hybridization performed at our center for various indications as follow: (FisH) for detection 11q23 rearrangements in childhood acute Chromosomal Aberration: 4298(Amniocentesis: 4074, CVS: 203, myeloid leukemia Blood Cord: 21), Hemoglobinopathies (α & β Thalassemia):1255, I. V. Stasevich, R. I. Utskevich, O. V. Aleinikova; Myopathies (DMD: 57, SMA:84):141, Metabolic disorders:127, Triple Research Center for Paediatric Oncology and Haematology, Minsk region, Nucleotide Repeats:24, Skin Lesion:9, Miscellaneous:6 . Belarus. Childhood acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease Po04. cancer genetics the prognosis of which is depends on spectrum of genetic abnormalities detected in tumor cells . The aberrations of MLL gene located on 11q23 P0494. cytogenetic study in acute lymphoblastic leukemia - are associated with unfavorable prognosis of AML . Effective revealing preliminary results of 11q23 rearrangements is important for treatment correction and N. Berbec1,2, A. Arghir2, S. Chirieac2, S. Angelescu1, S. Crintea3, A. Lungeanu2; outcome prediction . 1”Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, The aim of the study was the evaluation of diagnostic significance of 2”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 3Coltea Clinical Hospi- fluorescence in-situ hybridization for detection of 11q23 rearrangements tal, Bucharest, Romania. in childhood acute myeloid leukemia . Cytogenetics plays an essential role in diagnosis, prognosis and Total 95 children with de novo AML treated in Research Center for treatment outcome prediction in lymphoid malignancies . Paediatric Oncology and Haematology (Minsk, Belarus) from 1999 to We report the results of a cytogenetic study including 23 cases with 2004 were enrolled in the study . Standard cytogenetic analysis using acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) at onset . Karyotype analysis has G-banding was carried out in all cases . FISH analysis was performed been performed in 65% of the total cases . using two kinds of probes: LSI MLL dual-colour DNA probe (11q23) There were no microscopically visible chromosomal rearrangements (VYSIS, USA); WCP for human chromosomes 10 and 11 (Oncor in 33% of the cases, while 67% of them exhibited chromosomal Appligene, France) . abnormalities: The 11q23 rearrangements were detected in 17 patients (18%) -numerical changes in 33% of cases (hypodiploidy -20%-; hyperdyploidy with AML. FISH confirmed the finding of standard cytogenetics in 8 -13%-), cases (47%), revealed cryptic translocations t(10;11)(p12;q23) in -structural cytogenetic anomalies in 20% of cases, two patients with no evidence of 11q23 aberration by G-banding, -both numerical and structural aberration in 13% of cases . defined the ambiguous chromosomal abnormalities in one case with The most frequent structural rearrangement was t(9;22)(q34;q11) t(9;11)(p22;q23),one case with t(6;11)(q27;q23) and in one case (13%). Translocation t(8;14)(q24;q32) have been identified in one ALL with deletion of 11q23 region . Moreover, FISH with WCP probes type 3 case, associated with: trisomy 9, inversion 15, chromosome Y for chromosomes 10 and 11 disclosed the complex mechanisms of loss and deletions 3q21, 5p12, 9p11 . translocation t(10;11)(p12;q23) in four children with AML. The relatively high incidence of chromosomal aberration identified in So, FISH method is essential tool for revealing of cryptic 11q23 our patients group (67%), in concordance with literature data, highlights rearrangements and allows to increase the efficiency of detection once more the value of chromosomal studies in ALL management . prognostically valuable chromosomal abnormalities . Acknowledgements: National Program VIASAN, Project no. 439; CEEX National Program, Module III . P0497. Interaction of isoform products of the RIL gene with α- actinin and its potential role in actin cytoskeleton rearrangement P0495. treatment-related AmL characterized by t(11;20)(p15;q11) O. A. Guryanova1,2, P. M. Chumakov2,3, E. I. Frolova1; and del(9)(q22) 1Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Rus- M. Haimi1, I. Avivi2, R. Gershoni-Baruch1; sian Federation, 2Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 1Departement of Human Genetics, Rambam Medical Center,Technion faculty Cleveland, OH, United States, 3Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Mos- of medicine, Haifa, Israel, 2Hematology departement,Rambam Medical Center, cow, Russian Federation. Technion faculty of medicine,, Haifa, Israel. Adapter proteins participate in regulation of cell growth, adhesion, and With the advent of oncologic therapeutic regimens, cancer is being malignant transformation . The gene for reversion-induced LIM domain treated with greater effectiveness, allowing patients to live longer . adapter protein RIL expresses several alternative transcripts . The major However, for some patients, oncologic treatment has come with a transcript encodes a PDZ-LIM protein implicated in actin stress fiber price, namely, therapy-induced malignancies . dynamics . Minor transcripts lack certain exons resulting in either LIM domain Chromosomal aberrations are considered causal events in the process substitution by a 23aa peptide due to a frame shift or loss of PDZ domain . of leukemic transformation . They are frequently associated with We overexpressed Flag-tagged alternative proteins and a truncation therapy-related myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myelogenous mutant lacking LIM domain . RIL variants with alternative C-terminus could leukemia and are thought to result from exposure to cytotoxic drugs . not be detected by immunoblotting due to rapid turnover while there was no We report on a 53-year-old woman, who developed treatment-related difference in mRNA and translation levels . Fusion of the C-terminal 33aa secondary acute meyloid leukemia (AML), two years after being treated alternative peptide to EGFP reduced fluorescence intensity and protein for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with the CHOP-R protocol half-life some 10-fold . Thus, the alternative C-terminus confers instability (Cyclophosphamide, Hydroxydoxorubicin, Oncovin, Prednison+ to the whole RIL protein . It was previously shown that RIL interacts with Rituximab) . The leukemia was quite resistant to chemotherapy and α-actinin via its PDZ domain. We performed co-immunoprecipitation was characterized by a unique, previously unreported combination of assays with Flag-tagged RIL variants . As expected, RILdeltaPDZ did not two cytogenetic abnormalities, namely, t(11;20)(p15;q11.2) and del(9q) bind to, while full-length RIL only weakly coimmunoprecipitated with α- . actinin . Nevertheless, RIL variant with the alternative C-terminus and RIL The precise mechanism by which alkylating agents induce leukemias truncation mutant exhibited dramatic increase in interaction with α-actinin. is unclear, but it is possibly related to chromosomal damage causing We speculate that loss or modification of LIM leads to greater affinity of mutations or translocations of genes implicated in cellular growth PDZ domain to α-actinin. Moreover, in case of RIL with alternative C- and differentiation. Specific DNA alterations may lead to a survival terminus two additional bands of 27 and 55kD recognized by anti-α-actinin advantage of a pluripotent cell that eventually encourages expansion antibody were detected . These data suggest a role for RIL alternative of the malignant clone. Translocation t(11;20)(p15;q11.2) is a rare but splice variant in regulation of α-actinin degradation. By this mechanism recurrent translocation that has been reported in patients with MDS RIL might regulate cytoskeleton rearrangement in cancer .Cancer genetics 0 P0498. Identification of new mutations of the APC gene and p53 . We hypothesized that this gene polymorphism might be a critical analysis of the mYH gene in FAP and colorectal cancer patients predisposition factor for bladder cancer, as MDM2 molecule is an S. P. Perdomo1, K. Harkova1, R. Salazar2, E. M. Sanchez1, A. Ocaña2, J. J. important player in bladder cancer pathogenesis evidenced by its over- Cruz2, R. Gonzalez1,3; expression in 30% of urothelial carcinomas . Bladder cancer is a major 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Laboratorio 14, Universidad de Sala- cause of morbidity and mortality . In the Turkish population it is the third manca-CSIC, Spain, 2Servicio de Oncología Médica, Hospital Universitario de most common cancer in men and eighth in women . We studied the Salamanca, Spain, 3Unidad de Medicina Molecular, Departamento de Medicina. effect of T309G polymorphism of the MDM2 gene on bladder cancer Universidad de Salamanca, Spain. susceptibility in a case control study of 75 bladder cancer patients and The Familial Adenomatous polyposis (FAP) in an autosomal inherited 103 controls of the Turkish population . Genomic DNA was isolated syndrome characterized by numerous colorectal polyps at a very from 200 µl blood by standard phenol-chloroform extraction . MDM2 young age which normally confers a high risk for colorectal cancer T309G polymorphism was determined by polymerase chain reaction development . APC is also mutated in >85% of sporadic colorectal and restriction digestion . The G/G genotype exhibits an increased tumors . Germline mutations in the APC gene (located in chromosome risk of 2 .68 (95% CI, 1 .34-5 .40) for bladder cancer compared with the 5q21) result in FAP . Inactivation of the APC protein by increased mutation combination of low-risk genotypes T/T and T/G at this locus . These rate and chromosomal instability determines both tumor formation and results show an association between MDM2 T309G polymorphism progression . Recently, It has been found that germ-line mutations in and bladder cancer in our study group . To the best of our knowledge, the MYH gene (located in chromosome 1p34) are responsible for a this is the first study reporting that MDM2 T309G polymorphism could FAP-like condition and that biallelic germ-line mutations could increase be a potential genetic susceptibility factor for bladder cancer . the risk for colorectal cancer development . In the present study we have identified nine novel mutations in the P0501. molecular genetic alterations in human bladder APC gene in 36 FAP and 26 sporadic colorectal cancer patients: Five carcinoma. polymorphisms (silent transitions in exons 11, 13 and 15 of the gene), O. A. Kuznetsova1,2, S. V. Bashkatov3, O. B. Karyakin3, M. V. Nemtsova1,2; one missense mutation in exon 15, two insertions in exon 15 and two 1Institute of Molecular Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research deletions in exons 7 and 15 . Most of these mutations are located within Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences., Moscow, the ß-catenin binding and downregulation domains which are invloved Russian Federation, 3Medical Radiology Research Center, Obninsk, Russian in adhesion and cellular migration and favour tumor development and Federation. progression . Additionally, we found a FAP patient who carries a biallelic Bladder cancer is one of the most common malignacies in developed mutation in the MYH gene with no APC mutation . countries . Although it is potentially curable in the majority of cases, the prognosis for patients with advanced disease at presentation is P0499. PAX8 expression in human bladder cancer poor . Molecular genetic tests increse the sensitivity of tumor detection L. Pellizzari1, C. Puppin2, L. Mariuzzi3, F. Saro3, A. Franzoni2, M. Pandolfi3, R. and diagnostics . We investigated 25 pT1 transitional cell carcinomas Di Lauro4, C. A. Beltrami3, G. Damante2; DNA sample pairs (15 samples with initial cancer, 10 with relapses) of 1Istituto di Genetica - Azienda Policlinico Universitario a Gestione Diretta, bladder cancer (tumor and normal tissue) for loss of heterozygosity Udine, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche - Università di (LOH) at p53 region (chromosome 17p), FGFR3 (7th, 10th exons) Udine, Udine, Italy, 3Istituto di Anatomia Patologica - Azienda Policlinico Univer- mutations and the abnormal methylation of p16 and CDH1 genes . sitario a Gestione Diretta, Udine, Italy, 4Stazione Zoologica “A. Dohrn”, Napoli, In a group of initial cancer samples FGFR3 mutation (s249c, 7th exon) Italy. was found in 33% (5/15) cases, hypermethylation of p16 in 20% (3/15) The transcription factor PAX8 is an important determinant for and of CDH1 27% (4/15), p53 loss of heterozygosity was identified in thyroid development and its role has been also demonstrated in the 6% (1/15) cases . In the second group the same typical FGFR3 mutation ontogenesis of kidney . Aim of this study was to investigate expression was detected in 20% (2/10) cases, p16 and CDH1 were methylated in of PAX8 in normal bladder and in non invasive urothelial tumours . 40% (4/10), 50% (5/10) accordigly; p53 LOH was detected in 30% Several cases of normal urothelial mucosa and non invasive papillary (3/10) cases . Molecular genetic alterations were more characteristic urothelial carcinomas of low and high grade were investigated by for the cases with often relapses, except the FGFR3 mutations, which immunohistochemistry . PAX8 mRNA expression was evaluated by might be associated with more favourable prognosis . RT-PCR in a different set of normal bladder mucosa and tumours . In addition, by RT-PCR, PAX8 expression was evaluated in bladder P0502. BRcA1 and BRcA2 germline mutations in male breast from human embryos and in several continuous cell lines derived cancer patients in the czech population from bladder tumours (5637, RT-112, TCC-SUP, HT 1376) . In M. Lukesova, E. Machackova, P. Vasickova, M. Navratilova, L. Foretova; immunohistochemical studies, PAX8 was expressed in 26 out of 28 Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Department of Cancer Epidemiology and non invasive urothelial tumours, but never in normal adult bladders . Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic. In RT-PCR studies, PAX8 was expressed in 13 out of 13 bladder Breast cancer is a rare disease in men . The proportion of male breast tumours but not in 6 normal bladder mucosa . Differently than in adults, cancers attributable to BRCA mutations has not yet been determined PAX8 was expressed in 2 cases of bladder mucosa from 16 week-old with accuracy . The estimated mutation carrier frequencies varied from embryos . PAX8 was expressed in all cell lines from bladder tumours . 4% to 40% . Both in bladder tumours and cell lines PAX8 expression was highly We have determined the contribution of germline mutations in the heterogeneous in terms of splicing isoforms . Treatment of cell lines BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes to the pathogenesis of male breast cancer with Sodium butyrate (NaB) induced several changes of the splicing in Czech republic by screening a series of 14 unselected male breast isoforms . These data indicate that PAX8 is expressed in most non cancer patients . The average age at diagnosis was 61 years . invasive bladder tumours but never in normal bladder mucosa . The entire coding regions and intronic splice sites of both BRCA1 Moreover only subsets of molecular events that determine the PAX8 and BRCA2 were screened using heteroduplex analysis and protein mRNA splicing heterogeneity are sensitive to NaB treatment . truncation test, followed by direct sequencing of abnormalities . Four of the 14 male breast cancer cases (29%) were observed to carry P0500. MDM t309G polymorhism is associated with bladder pathogenic mutations . One in BRCA1 (frameshift mutation c .5385dupC) cancer and 3 in BRCA2 (frameshift mutations c .8138_8142delCCTTT, E. O. Onat1, M. Tez2, T. Ozcelik1, G. A. Toruner3; c .9631delC and splice site mutation c .7235G>A) . The average age at 1Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara Numune Research and Teaching diagnosis of mutation carriers was 69,5 years and three of the mutation Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 3Center for Human and Molecular Genetics, Newark, carriers reported a positive family history of breast or prostate cancer . NJ, United States. We also identified rare variants of unknown significance in four patients Recently a functional T to G polymorphism at the nucleotide 309 - 2 in BRCA1 gene and 2 in BRCA2 gene . in the promoter region of MDM2 gene has been identified. This Our results provide evidence for a strong genetic component of male polymorphism has an impact on the expression of the MDM2 gene, breast cancer in Czech republic and support the recommendation that which is a key negative regulator of the tumor suppressor molecule male breast cancer patients should be offered genetic counseling and Cancer genetics 0 testing . exon 11 of BRCA1 was detected . The carrier status of the parents was Contract grant sponsor: Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: assessed and revealed that the mutation was of maternal origin . The MZ00020980501, mother, aged 67, had never suffered from breast- or ovarian cancer . Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, Strikingly, DGGE analysis of mother‘s DNA from peripheral blood contract grant number: NR/8213-3 leukocytes showed an imbalance between normal and mutant alleles, with a minority of mutant alleles . A similar ratio of normal and mutant P0503. Ocurrence of ten unclassified variants of BRCAs genes alleles was found by direct sequencing . Subsequently we investigated in spanish control population DNA isolated from a mouthwash and from cultured skin fibroblasts. M. Rubio Rodrigo1,2, E. M. Sánchez Tapia1, R. Salazar Saez1,3, J. J. Cruz The ratio between normal and mutant alleles from the mouthwash Hernández1,3, R. González Sarmiento1,2; was comparable to the ratio observed in peripheral blood leukocytes . 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Unidad de Medicina However, in the skin fibroblasts hardly any mutant alleles were Molecular-departamento de medicina, Salamanca, Spain, 3Servicio de On- detected . In conclusion, the mother of our index patient is mosaic for cología del Hospital Clínico Universitario, Salamanca, Spain. the c .784C>T mutation, and hence this mutation must have originated A great number of germ-line mutations in the breast cancer de novo in the mother. To our knowledge this is the first report of a susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 have been identified in breast mosaicism for a BRCA1 mutation . We will look for further proof for cancer families . Besides the disease-causing germ-line mutations a the mutation being de novo and a possible germcell mosaicism by great deal of variants of unknown pathological significance have been assessing the inheritance of BRCA1 alleles in siblings and children of found in both genes . The functional consequences of this variants the mosaic woman respectively . remains unclear . Our aim was to determine the presence or absence of ten of these unclassified missense mutations in control population P0506. BRcA1 intragenic rearrangements in patients with from Spain . One of them appeared in the BRCA1 gene: G1201S, and hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome in the czech the rest in the BRCA2 gene: H150R, D244N, P357S, S384F, W395G, Republic D935N, K1057R, R2034C, I2840V. Samples were obtained from fifty P. Vasickova1, M. Lukesova1, O. Horky2, H. Pavlu1, J. Kuklova1, V. Urbankova1, healthy unrelated individuals of the general population who never had M. Navratilova1, E. Machackova1, L. Foretova1; developed any kind of cancer . DNA from blood samples was isolated 1Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Center of Molecu- using standard procedures . Mutational screening was performed by lar Biology and Gene Therapy, Faculty Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic. CSGE, restriction endonucleases and automated sequencing to confirm Germline mutations in highly penetrant cancer susceptibility genes the alterations . Only one of the 10 variants (R2034C) was detected in BRCA1 and BRCA2 cause genetic predisposition to breast and healthy population and should be considered a polymorphism . More ovarian cancer . Absence of pathogenic mutations in BRCA1 and studies are needed to confirm and enlarge these results. BRCA2 genes in some high-risk families can be due to the presence of intragenic rearrangements as deletions, duplications, alternatively P0504. Detection of two novel genomic rearrangements in insertions of one or more exons in these genes . Methods used for BRCA1 gene in Greek breast/ovarian cancer families using mutation screening of BRCA1/2 genes based on PCR of genomic DNA quantitative multiplex PCR of short fluorescent fragments enables the detection of point mutations, small insertions or deletions, (QmPsF) but difficulties arise in detecting of large intragenic rearrangements. S. Armaou1, I. Konstantopoulou2, E. Razi3, I. Boukovinas4, N. Xenidis4, G. There are no available data relating to the type and frequency of Fountzilas5,6, D. Yannoukakos1; genomic rearrangements in BRCA1 gene in patients with hereditary 1Molecular Diagnostics Lab, National Center for Scientific Research Demokri- breast and ovarian cancer syndrome in the Czech Republic . Multiplex tos, Athens, Greece, 2Biogenomica, Center for Genetic Research & Analysis, Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) has been applied for Athens, Greece, 3Diagnostic & Therapeutic Center of Athens HYGEIA, Athens, examination of BRCA1 rearrangements . Using Salsa P002 BRCA1 Greece, 4Theagenio Cancer Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece, 5Papageorgiou MLPA kit (M .R .C . Holland) DNA from 152 high-risk patients with no Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece, 6Hellenic Cooperative Oncology Group, Athens, previously found BRCA1/2 mutation was investigated . Six different Greece. deletions were identified: exon 1A/1B and 2 deletion, partial deletion The identification of genomic rearrangements in breast/ovarian of exon 11 and exon 12, exon 18 and 19 deletion, exon 20 deletion, cancer families has widened the mutational spectrum of the BRCA1 exon 21 and 22 deletion and deletion of exon 5 to 14 . These deletions gene, thus increasing the number of informative patients who can represent almost 6% of all BRCA1/2 mutation-negative cases and nearly benefit from molecular screening. Up to date a total of more than 30 8% of all detected BRCA1/2 mutations . The precise determination of different BRCA1 genomic rearrangements with mapped breakpoints, the change on DNA and mRNA level is ongoing . in all exons of the gene with the exception of the last exon 24, have contract grant sponsor: Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of been reported . The proportion of BRCA1 mutations due to genomic Health of the Czech Republic, contract grant number NR/8213-3, rearrangements in different populations vary from 8 to ~30%, probably Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: MZ00020980501 . due to both ethnic diversity and the technical approach employed . In order to estimate the contribution of BRCA1 genomic rearrangements P0507. Haplotype and linkage disequilibrium analysis of BRcA1 to hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC) predisposition in Greek and BRCA2 genes: identification of a hemizygous region of families we screened 95 families negative for point mutations or small BRcA2 in a German high risk breast cancer familiy insertions/deletions in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes using Quantitative W. Hofmann1, M. Nothnagel2, V. Gimmel1, S. Scherneck1; Multiplex PCR of Short Fluorescent Fragments. We identified two large 1Department of Tumor Genetics, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, deletions of 4 .2 and 4 .4 kb in exons 20 and 24 respectively . This is the Berlin, Germany, 2Institute for Medical Informatics and Statistics, University first report of an exon 24 deletion. On the basis of previous and present Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Christian Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany. analyses, rearrangements represent 5% (2/40) of all mutations in our As a member of the “German Consortium for Hereditary Breast and set of BRCA1 Greek families . Ovarian Cancer” we were interested in understanding the linkage disequilibrium (LD) pattern and the haplotypic structure of the BRCA1 P0505. A case of constitutional mosaicism for a BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes among German women who were previously tested mutation. by direct sequencing of all exons and exon-flanking intronic regions A. H. van der Hout, K. Zwarts, A. Vrieling-Kooistra, J. C. Oosterwijk, Y. J. Vos; of both genes . We therefore performed a haplotype-based study of Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, Gronin- BRCA1 and BRCA2 based on 22 single nucleotide polymorphisms gen, The Netherlands. (SNPs) spanning 80 .78 kb of the BRCA1 gene and 25 SNPs spanning A 31 year old woman visited our family cancer clinic because she 83.01kb of the BRCA2 gene. Out of five different BRCA1 haplotypes suffered from breast cancer . There was no family history of breast- or with a frequency of > 5%, two common BRCA1 haplotypes accounted ovarian cancer on either the maternal or paternal side . We screened for two thirds of all chromosomes in our collective . In contrast, analysis BRCA1 and BRCA2 by DGGE in DNA isolated from peripheral blood of BRCA2 haplotypes revealed a higher haplotypic diversity where leukocytes . A novel pathogenic mutation c .784C>T (p .Gln262X) in the most abundant haplotype reached a frequency of 17% . We Cancer genetics 0 also assessed the pattern and the extent of LD between the SNPs risk for the breast cancer (BC) development . The estimated lifetime in BRCA1 and BRCA2 and compared the results to data from the risk of developing BC is from 60 to 85% for BRCA1 and from 60 to International HapMap Project . While most methods agreed on a single 80% for BRCA2 mutations . The CHEK2 1100delC variant, by contrast, coherent region of elevated LD that spanned most of BRCA1, BRCA2 is associated with much lower (2-4 fold) risk of BC . In Russia, the showed low levels of LD in general and only a single area of strong LD . contribution of BRCA1/2 and CHEK2 mutations in unselected BC Furthermore, an unusual BRCA2 haplotype was detected in a German population is largely unknown because only few and limited surveys high-risk breast cancer familiy . This haplotype is characterized by the have been carried out up to now . The aim of the study was to characterise loss of a high-LD area in BRCA2 and represents a hemizygous region the BRCA1/2 and CHEK2 mutations frequencies in unselected BC that results from a disease-causing intragenic deletion . In conclusion, patients from Russia using hybridization with oligonucleotide biochips . SNP-based haplotype analysis can be an effective approach for The following mutations were selected for the analysis: 185delAG, identifying intragenic deletions leading to hemizygosity . 300T>G, 4153delA, 4158A>G, 5382insC in BRCA1gene, 695incT, 6174delT in BRCA2 gene and 1100delC in CHEK2 gene . 480 woman P0508. BRCA2 variant associated with modification of ovarian diagnosed with BC and unselected for family history of the disease have cancer occurrence among Russian carriers of BRcA1 mutations. been studied. The following mutations were identified: in BRCA1 gene, N. I. Pospekhova1, T. Y. Smirnova1, L. N. Lyubchenko2, R. F. Garkavtseva2, E. 185delAG in 4 patients, 300T>G in one patient, 4153delA in 2 patient, K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; 5382insC in 16; in BRCA2 gene a 695insT mutation was detected in 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2N.N. one patient, 6174delT in 1; in gene CHEK2 a 1100delC mutation was Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. detected in 8 patients . Altogether, a total of 23 mutations (4,8%) in Russian breast/ovarian cancer families have high prevalence of one BRCA1 gene, 2 mutations (0,4%) in BRCA2 gene were detected . The mutation - 5382insC - in BRCA1 spectrum (75% in analyzed sample of freguency of CHEK2 1100delC variant was 1,7% . The most prevailing 60 carriers) . Therefore, breast or ovarian cancer risk associated with mutation was 5382insC (69,5% of all BRCA1 mutations) . These results BRCA1 mutations can be modified by other than mutations position will be of significance for both diagnostic testing and epidemiological genetic factors . studies . We studied some variants of BRCA2 as a candidate for a risk modifier gene under BRCA1 mutations . Single nucleotide polymorphisms P0511. Breast cancer and HumARA cAG polymorphism N372H and located in the 5’-untranslated region variant 203G/A were C. Bini1, S. Ceccardi1, D. Santini2, M. Taffurelli3, M. Falconi4, F. Lugaresi1, F. investigated . The frequency of BRCA2 203GA heterozygous variant for Ingravallo1, G. Fortuni1, A. Cicognani1, S. Pelotti1; group of women with ovarian cancer was less than for group of women 1Department of Medicine and Public Health, Section of Legal Medicine, Univer- with breast cancer, both carrying a BRCA1 mutations (OR=0.28; sity of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Institute of Anatomical and Pathological Histol- P=0.026). There were no significant difference between these ogy, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Breast Cancer Surgical Unit, First groups with N372H variant . In control sample (n=109) the frequency Surgical Clinic, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Department of Anatomi- of 203A rare allele was 0 .25 that corresponds to earlier estimation . cal Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. The association of BRCA2 203GA variant with ovarian cancer was The role of HumARA polymorphism in the breast cancer predisposition significant on one-side Fisher exact test (OR=0.39; P=0.043) and no was analyzed in several studies with conflicting results. A decreased association was observed with breast cancer (P=0 .27) . It is intriguing risk has been observed with smaller repeat lengths, in particular among that 203AA homozygous variant was more frequent in ovarian cancer post menopausal women . Other studies, including young women and group in comparison with control group (OR=6.9; P=0.023). The different cut-off points, found no associations . Recently a reduced risk frequency in breast cancer group was not differ from control (OR=1.14; with shorter CAG repeats only among women with a positive family P=0 .9) . Futher investigations are necessary for conclusion . history of breast cancer was demonstrated . Nevertheless, comparing CAG repeat lengths in cancer tissues and in surrounding normal P0509. Analysis of cytogenetic and Biochemical parameters in tissues, instability in tumor associated alleles with contractions and Breast cancer females with metastasis in coimbatore city, tamil expansions of CAG repeat was reported . Nadu To provide additional data we have tested 50 incident cases of breast K. Sasikala, R. Sangeetha, C. Praveen Rajneesh, B. Lakshman Kumar, V. cancer from Caucasian women analyzing the tumor and the near Balachandar, V. Suresh, R. Jayakumar; healthy tissues, both typed for forensic genetic profiles. Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. For the relatively small sample size, that doesn’t permit to distinguish Breast cancer is the most common malignancy next to ovarian cancer true association from false positive results, no conclusion about among females . The etiology of this carcinoma is attributed to several correlation between CAG length and breast cancer cases compared factors. In the present study total of 95 confirmed cases of Carcinoma to control population, was possible . MSI occurred in cancer tissues of Breast with metastasis were selected from the local hospitals and influencing the identification of the samples and in MSI-H cancers equal number of healthy non-pregnant females were used as controls . HumARA was highly instable . Besides the data agree with a recent A statistically significant increase was noted in the level of ALP (Alkaline report in which this marker is considered not suitable for identification Phosphatases) and GGT (Gamma Glutamines Transferase), whereas purposes . non-significant results were observed with GSH (reduced Glutathione) and LDH (Lactate Dehydrogenase) when compared to that of controls . P0512. male Breast cancer - the challenge to develop special Karyotypic analysis among 95 female cancer patients only 37 of them prevention strategies (38 .95%) displayed Chromosomal aberrations such as 46, XX t(12p-; B. Welling, J. Horst; 15q+); 46, XX t(5p-; 13q+), 46 XX, t(1q-;10p+) and deletions in the short Institut für Humangenetik, Münster, Germany. and long arm of Chromosomes 3, 6, 13, 17 . among controls only two We discuss a pedigree example in regard to the importance to develop of the subjects displayed deletions of short / long arms of chromosome special strategies of prevention in BRCA positive males in families with 1 and 22 . the data were discussed pertaining to the recent literature hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer . The diagnosis of male breast available . cancer is rare and if a mutation is found in affected males it is usually a BRCA2 mutation . If such a mutation is revealed in breast cancer risk P0510. mutation screening of BRcA1/2 and cHEK2 in 480 families the question of prevention strategies is not only a question unselected breast cancer patients from Russia concerning the female family members, but also a very important O. E. Fedorova1, L. N. Lyubchenko2, F. A. Amosenko3, S. M. Portnoi2, R. F. question for the still healthy and BRCA2 mutation positiv analyzed Garkavtseva2, A. S. Zasedatelev1, T. V. Nasedkina1; male family members . These males are at a higher risk than a male 1Engelgardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, of the average population to get breast cancer and immediately the 2N.N.Blochin’s Russian Cancer Research Center RAMS, Moscow, Russian question concerning prevention strategies arises . In the literature there Federation, 3Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federa- are recommandations to perform prevention as well as necessary tion. treatment similar to strategies concerning females but there are no Mutations in BRCA1/2 genes are associated with greatly increased specialized health centers for males with longterm experiences . While Cancer genetics 10 numerous specialized “Breast Cancer Centers” for females are rising However, preliminary studies on a limited number of German up, it might be important to discuss and develop prevention strategies families suggest that such mutations are rare in our population . We especially for males . therefore screened 571 affected females from different risk groups for rearrangements in BRCA1 and 200 females at high risk for BRCA2 P0513. High-throughput sNP typing of low penetrance candidate deletions . genes of sporadic breast cancer In agreement with previous studies, we identified low frequencies for A. Vega1,2, A. Salas3,2, C. Phillips2, B. Sobrino2, B. Carracedo2, C. Ruíz-Ponte1, BRCA1 large deletions . Eight different gross aberrations were found A. Fernández-Marmiesse1, A. Blanco1, R. Rodríguez-López4, G. Rivas4, J. in 15 out of 571 index patients (2,6%) . However, we saw regional and Benítez4, Á. Carracedo1,2; risk-dependent differences. While 11 mutations were identified in 279 1Grupo de Medicina Xenómica USC, FPGMX-SERGAS, Hospital Clínico de families living in North Rhine-Westphalia, only three deletions were Santiago, Galicia, Spain, 2Centro Nacional de Genotipado (CeGen-USC), Hos- found in 272 affected females from Southern Germany (chi2-test, pital Clínico de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Galicia, Spain, 3Unidade p=0 .034) . Furthermore, most of the aberrations were detected in high- de Xenética, Grupo de Medicina Xenómica USC, Instituto de Medicina Legal, risk families with three or more cases of breast cancer, including two Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela., Santiago de premenopausal ones and in families with breast and ovarian cancer Compostela, Galicia., Spain, 4Departamento de Genética Humana, Centro (12/321 = 3,7%) . A novel deletion of exon 8 was found in an ovarian Nacional Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. cancer familiy (1/15 = 6 .7%) . So far, no large rearrangements have Linkage analysis has failed to identify the genetic causes of familiar been found in the BRCA2 gene in 200 high-risk families . This agrees breast cancer . A polygenic model has been proposed in order to with another study from Germany who also failed to detect gross explain the genetic susceptibility to breast cancer . According to this aberations in 150 high risk families . Thus, our study strongly indicates model, common population variants would be responsible for a modest that screening for deletions in Germany is only indicated in the BRCA1 to low effects of risk to develop sporadic cancer . gene in high risk families . Here we have carried out a high-throughput SNP genotyping project in order to shed some light on the complex genetic aetiology of non- P0516. Expression of a new cancer/testis gene ,tsGA10, in familiar breast cancer . For this, SNPlexTM (Applied Biosystems) iranian patients with gastrointestinal tumors highthrouput genotyping platform, which allows the study of up to 48 M. B. Mobasheri, M. H. Modarressi; SNPs simultaneously, was used for the study of 676 SNPs belonging Medical genetic department, Faculty of medicine, TUMS, Tehran, Islamic Re- to 89 genes putatively related to sporadic breast cancer, in a total of public of Iran. 480 female cases of breast cancer and 480 female controls . Cancer-testis (CT) genes are a group of genes expressed in male Genes have been selected mainly because their implications in several germinal cells and certain tumor types . There is a numerous researchs candidate cell pathways for breast cancer, such as genes related to on tumor antigens, which could be used to direct the potent cytolytic BRCA1-dependent Ub-ligase activity or genes related with the role of capacities of the human immune system against cancer . TSGA10 is BRCA1, BRCA2 and ATR in cancer susceptibility . SNP were selected expressed in normal testis, but neither in a variety of other normal following a direct/indirect approach criterion that allows capturing tissues.This gene could be classified as a member of the cancer- an important amount of the variability of these candidate genes . An testis (CT) gene family . We studied TSGA10 overexpression in independent set of neutral SNPs have been genotyped in order to gastrointestinal (GI) tumors by semiquantitative RT-PCR . Out of 31 control for population stratification that could lead to spurious positive patients, 18/31(58 .1%) showed TSGA10 transcripts . Males showed association results. We have identified a total of 28 SNPs with P- 12/22(54 .5%) and females showed 6/9(66 .7%) TSGA10 expresstion . values below 0 .05 (under a Chi-square test) that would deserve further GI epithelial tumors with 18/30(60%) TSGA10 positive and one investigation in independent studies . We noted however that these mesenchymal tumor with no TSGA10 expression were seen . TSGA10 associations do not find support when applying appropriate corrections expression were seen in 10/20(50%) of GI adenocarcinomas and for multiple tests . 7/9(77 .8%) of SCCs . It also were seen in 11/15(73 .3%) of samples with lymph node involvement and 6/9(40%) of samples without lymph P0514. Analysis of the functional roles of c-myc-dependent node involvement . Our results suggestes that TSGA10 can be a regulating ribosomal DNA genes transcription sutable tumor marker for gastrointestinal cancer diagnosis and may be C. N. Shiue, A. Arabi, P. H. Wright; potentially useful for cancer immunotheraphy . Department of Biosciences, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden. The c-Myc oncoprotein regulates transcription of genes that are P0517. Microarray analysis identifies up-regulation of CD36 in associated with cell growth, proliferation and apoptosis . Proteasome human PBmc treated with endocannabinoids inhibition leads to c-Myc accumulation within nucleioli, indicating that c- A. Malfitano1, G. Toruner2, C. Laezza1, S. Husain2, P. Gazzerro1, M. Bifulco1, Myc might have a nuclolar function . Previously, we showed that proteins E. Vitale3; c-Myc and Max interact in nucleoli and are associated with ribosomal 1Gruppo di Immuno Endocrinologia e Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR e Dipar- DNA, that c-Myc is required for activating rDNA transcription in response timento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Naples, Italy, 2UMDNJ to mitogenic signals, and that c-Myc-mediated rDNA transcription is New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, United States, 3UMDNJ New Jersey RNA Polymerase II independent . Furthermore, we investigate the Medical school, Newark, NJ, United States. functional roles of c-Myc in regulating rDNA transcription . The results This is a study of the effect of anandamide and arvanil on human suggest that c-Myc not only recruits chromatin modifying complexes peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) . We analyzed the (TRRAP, Tip60, GCN5) changing silent chromatin structure but also regulation of gene expression under immunosuppressive condition . recruits RNA polymerase I machinery cofactors (RNA polymerase During PBMC proliferation many genes are induced or repressed while I, SL-1, UBF) binding to promoter of rDNA . Intriguingly, the binding others are constitutively expressed . We used microarray technology pattern of c-Myc to rDNA leads to the assumption that c-Myc should be to identify a regulatory pattern associated with cell proliferation in involved in gene looping regulation of rDNA transcription . the presence of anandamide and arvanil . PBMC stimulated by CD3- CD28 showed a pattern of up-regulated and down-regulated genes P0515. Low frequency of gross rearrangements in the two after treatment with arvanil and anandamide . We selected and further known BRcA genes in breast/ovarian cancer families from analyzed several genes by real time PCR and protein expression Germany analyses in order to validate the results observed by microarrays . The A. Meindl1, S. Engert1, M. Kutsche2, B. Wappenschmidt3, R. K. Schmutzler3; genes were chosen by their function in the regulation of cell proliferation . 1Klinikum rechts der Isar, Munich, Germany, 2Labaratory for Molecular Medi- In particular CD36 showed an increased expression when treated by cine, Hamburg, Germany, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Co- both arvanil and anandamide . Our results suggest a possible role of logne, Germany. CD36 in anandamide and arvanil anti-inflammatory pattern. The vast majority of alterations identified in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene are either point mutations or small insertions/deletions . Large genomic rearrangements could frequently be determined in some populations . Cancer genetics 11 P0518. Quantitative determination of human telomerase reverse apoptotic genes mapping in the region . transcriptase (htERt) mRNA expression in premalignant We tested 33 microsatellites spanning from D1S243 to D1S478 . 12 cervical lesions and correlation with HPV load chordomas (75%) showed LOH, 3 of which displaying an LOH region P. Oikonomou, I. Mademtzis, I. Messinis, A. Tsezou; involving all the tested markers . 4 patients showed segmental LOH, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece. probably because of the presence of clones with different LOH extents Human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) mRNA expression in the same surgical sample . The 4 remaining patients (25%) didn’t and HPV 16 viral load were quantified using real-time PCR and were display LOH and showed the most indolent clinical course . correlated with cytologic findings and the presence of HPV infection We also determined the expression profile of TNFRSF1B; TNFRSF8; in cervical specimens . hTERT mRNA expression was evaluated in TNFRSF9; TNFRSF14; CASP9; TP73; DFFA and DFFB versus that of 15/73 (20 .5%) atypical squamous epithelial cells of undetermined nucleus pulposus. No chordoma showed an expression profile matching significance (ASCUS), in 62/156 (39.7%) low grade squamous that of nucleus pulposus . 12 showed TNFRSF1B expression, while intraepithelial lesions (LGSILs), in 49/51 (96%), high grade squamous seven expressed TNFRSF8; seven TNFRSF9 and nine TNFRSF14. intraepithelial lesions (HGSILs) and in 9/45 (20%) normal samples, In 14 we detected CASP9 expression . DFFB was expressed by 11 while viral load was quantified in 52/58 (89.6%) samples infected with chordomas . Only one patient lacked DFFA expression . TP73 was never HPV-16 . The mean levels of hTERT mRNA expression were 0 .11 in expressed, with the exception of two patients .A correlation between normal tissue, 0 .23 in ASCUS, 0 .75 in LGSIL and 2 .5 in HGSILs . A collected data and clinical follow-up is under study, in order to highlight significant increase in quantitative hTERT mRNA expression was elements that might be useful in assessing a correct prognosis in observed with increasing degree of cervical dysplasia . The HPV-16 chordoma patients . viral load was significantly higher in samples with HGSIL than LGSIL (p<0.001). A significant correlation was observed between viral load P0521. monitoring of minimal residual disease in chronic and quantitative hTERT mRNA expression values (r=0 .65, p<0 .05) . myeloid leukemia Quantitative hTERT mRNA assessment showed 96% sensitivity and S. Menif1,2, B. Meddeb3, H. Dhouib1, T. Ben Othmen4, N. Ben Romdhane5, K. 100% negative predictive value (NPV), while specificity and positive Dellagi1; predictive value (PPV) were 72% and 36 .2% respectively . Based on 1Laboratoire Hematologie Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Institut the observed moderate specificity and high sensitivity and NPV, it can pasteur, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Service Hematologie Hopital Aziza Othmana, Tunis, be suggested that quantitative hTERT may be used as an adjunctive Tunisia, 4Centre National de Greffe de Moelle Osseuse, Tunis, Tunisia, 5Labora- marker in the management of women with high grade cervical toire Hematologie Hopital La Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia. dysplasias . Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a clonal stem cell disease characterized by the presence of bcr-abl fusion gene resulting from P0519. monitoring of chimerism after allogeneic bone marrow reciprocal chromosomal translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11) . bcr-abl gene transplantation using stR-PcR techniques was proved to play the principal role in CML pathogenesis . A. D. Krstic1, O. Stojkovic2, M. Skekic1, D. Vujic1, D. Jeftic1; The treatment of CML has been revolutionized by Imatinib . More than 1Mother and Child Health Care Institute Vukan Cupic, Belgrade, Serbia and 80 % of newly diagnosed patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in Montenegro, 2Institute of Forensic Medicine, School of Medicine Belgrade, chronic phase will achieve a complete cytogenetic response (CCR) Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. with the standard dose of 400 mg imatinib daily . Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is a medical procedure that Minimal residual disease monitoring is important for assessment of involves transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) for patients disease status in patients who obtain a complete cytogenetic remission with inborn or obtained life-threatening diseases of the blood or bone to detect early signs of relapse . Quantitative RT-PCR assays enable to marrow . monitor the kinetics of residual bcr-abl transcripts over time . The main goal of post-transplantation monitoring in hematopoietic Serial peripheral bcr-abl m-RNA levels were monitored by quantitative stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is to predict negative events, such as real time PCR using the Taq man probe system for 32 CML patients in disease relapse, graft rejection and graft-versus-host disease, in order chronic phase for a median of 14 months after they achieved complete to intervene with appropriate therapy . In this context, by quantifying the cytogenetic remission . relative amounts of donor and recipient cells present in the peripheral The patients could be divided into three groups : in 16 Patients blood sample, it can be determined if engraftment has taken place at transcript levels continued to decline during the period of observation , all or if full or mixed chimerism exists . in 11 patients the transcript levels reached a plateau and in 5 patients In this work we present our results after one year of following chimerism transcript numbers rises . rising levels of bcr-abl are strongly predictive in our group of patients who underwent the allogenic BMT by related of cytogenetic and hematologic relapse . donors . Our aim is to establish the protocol for monitoring chimerism We conclude that the pattern of residual disease after achieving in our pediatric patients, to determine the optimal interval between two complete cytogenetic remission on imatinib is variable The goal of early analyses and to compare the predictivness of mixed chimerism for detection of residual disease is to allow timely therapeutic intervention relapse in different hematological diseases . before overt relapse of therapy resistant disease occurs . For this purpose we decided to use standard human identfication tests, based on multiplex PCR analyses of short tandem repeats (STRs), P0522. complex chromosomal abnormalities in chronic myeloid as they are highly informative, sensitive (1-5%), fast and therefore leukemia with promyelocytic transformation - case report represent an optimal methodological approach for engraftment S. Chirieac1, A. Arghir1, N. Berbec2,1, S. Angelescu2, A. Lungeanu1; analysis . 1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Carol Davila” Univer- sity of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. P0520. 1p36 LOH and expression study of apoptotic genes in a Although t(9;22)(q34;q11) is the sole cytogenetic anomaly in a majority selected group of chordomas of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in chronic phase, M. Longoni1, F. Orzan1, M. Stroppi1, N. Boari2, P. Mortini3, P. Riva1; 60-80% of cases show additional abnormalities in blastic phase . 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, Promyelocytic transformation in CML is a rare event, and t(15;17) is Milan, Italy, 2Department of Neurosurgery, S.Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, usually identified. Italy, 3Department of Neurosurgery, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. We present the case of a 61 year-old female with promyelocytic Chordoma is a rare embriogenetic neoplasm arising from notochordal transformation of CML, and complex numerical and structural remnants and characterized by physaliferous cells . Common genetic cytogenetic abnormalities . lesions in chordoma are: 1p36, 3p, 12p losses; 1q, 7q, 9q gains. An LOH The hematologic distinctive feature of chronic phase was persistent study on 1p36 region revealed a high incidence of 1p36 losses among thrombocytosis, resistent to therapy . Blastic crises occurred after 3 sporadic chordomas (85%) . Until now, no molecular characteristics years of evolution . have proved to be useful in establishing prognosis . Bone marrow chromosomal studies identified Philadelphia translocation We performed an 1p36 LOH study on 16 chordomas for which strict as unique anomaly, in blastic phase . Glivec therapy has been started, clinical follow-up was available and determined the expression of but primary resistance was observed .Cancer genetics 1 Cytogenetic reevaluation, at 12 months of Glivec therapy, revealed results in disturbance of circadian rhythm in HCC which may disrupt additional abnormalities: two Philadelphia chromosomes, trisomy the control of the central pacemaker and benefit selective survival 9, monosomy 15 and derivative chromosome 3 . The whole missing of cancerous cells and promote carcinogenesis . It is possible that chromosome 15 is translocated on the distal region of 3q and generates the disturbance of circadian rhythm influence the cell cycle as well an extra long derivative chromosome 3 . as provide survival benefit for HCC. The differential expression of In our case, no t(15;17) was observed, instead chromosome 15 circadian genes between non-cancerous and cancerous cells may is involved in another rearrangement . FISH will be used in order to provide a molecular basis for chronotherapy of HCC . elucidate the events that generated the complex genomic abnormalities involving chromosomes 3 and 15, in promyelocytic transformation . P0525. Application of the hot spot BRAF mutation (V600E) in the The mechanisms of blastic transformation in CML are still poorly HNPcc diagnostic strategy understood . As more cases are investigated, novel chromosomal T. K. Kadiyska1, D. Konstantinova1, V. Atanasov1, R. Kaneva1, V. Mitev2, I. anomalies might reveal new insights into the cytogenetic-molecular Kremensky1; mechanisms that led to acute transformation . 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Chemistry Acknowledgements: National Program VIASAN, Project no. 242; and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. CEEX National Program, Module III . Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading cancer diseases in the Western world as well as in Bulgaria . In the development of the P0523. Rare recurrent translocation t(1;3)(p36;q21) in chronic disease, genetic and environmental factors are involved . Hereditary myeloid leukemia - case report Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC) accounts for 5-8% of all A. Arghir1, N. Berbec2,1, S. Chirieac1, G. Mocanu3, S. Angelescu2, A. Lun- colorectal cancers and has been linked to mutations in DNA mismatch geanu1; repair (MMR) genes, resulting in genetic alterations as microsatellite 1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Carol Davila” Univer- instability (MSI) . Approximately 12-17% of the sporadic cases also sity of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 3Coltea Clinical Hospital, show MSI but MMR mutations are unfrequently found . BRAF gene Bucharest, Romania. encodes a serine/threonine kinase and plays an important role in The reciprocal translocation t(1;3)(p36;q21) have been reported the mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway . Recently, an in various myeloid malignancies characterized by megakaryocytic oncogenic V600E hotspot mutation within BRAF, has been found to hyperplasia, dysplasia and a poor prognosis . be associated with sporadic colorectal cancer with MSI, but not with In this paper we present the case of a 41year-old female patient with HNPCC . chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), harbouring both t(9;22)(q34;q11) and The aim of this study was to analyze the frequency of this hotspot t(1;3)(p36;q21). mutation in our group of patients and the applicability of this analysis in Bone marrow chromosomal studies at diagnosis, in blastic phase, the HNPCC diagnostics . A total of 140 patients with CRC (39 sporadic showed t(9;22)(q34;q11). The patient reentered chronic phase and 101 familial cases) with known MSI status have been studied . after chemotherapy, with thrombocytosis as distinct feature, and The V600E mutation has been detected by SSCP analysis and direct subsequently received interferon and cytarabine therapy . sequencing . The cytogenetic reevaluation at 12 months after diagnosis, revealed The BRAF-V600E hotspot mutation has been found in 6 of the MSI and the acquisition of an additional rearrangement: t(1;3)(p36;q21). At least in 2 of the stable tumors . A strong correlation has been found between four different clones were observed: 46,XX/ 46,XX,t(9;22)(q34;q11)/ the mutation and the sporadic origin of the tumors (p<0,002), supposing 46,XX,t(1;3)(p36;q21),t(9;22)(q34;q11)/ 46,XX,-1,+der(1)t(1;3)(p36;q2 that screening for MMR mutations in cases positive for BRAF mutation 1),t(1;3)(p36;q21),t(9;22)(q34;q11). can be avoided . We propose the involvement of this simple, low cost Further characterization of the breakpoints cluster regions at 1p36 and applicable analysis in the HNPCC detection strategy . and 3q21 should provide important insights into the molecular genetic mechanisms involved in the genesis of t(1;3)-positive malignancies, P0526. Low Frequency of AXIN mutations and High Frequency and may contribute to the understanding of the clinical features of MUTYH mutations in Patients With multiple Polyposis associated with this rearrangement . M. Buisine1, F. Guillemot2, J. Triboulet3, S. Cattan4, C. Mouton1, N. Porchet1, S. Acknowledgements: National Program VIASAN, Project no. 242; Manouvrier5, S. Lejeune5; CEEX National Program, Module III . 1laboratoire de Biochimie - Biologie Moléculaire, CHRU Lille, France, 2Service de Gastroentérologie, CH Roubaix, France, 3Service de Chirurgie Digestive P0524. Aberrant circadian gene expression in hepatocellular et générale, CHRU LILLE, France, 4service de gastroentérologie, CHRU Lille, carcinoma France, 5Service de Génétique Clinique, CHRU Lille, France. J. Chang1, Y. Kun-Tu2, Y. Ming-Yu3, L. Ta-Chih4, L. Shen-Fung4, S. Wei-Wen5; Background & Aims: Familial adenomatous polyposis has been linked 1China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China, 2De- to germline mutations in the APC tumor suppressor gene . However, a partment of Pathology, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan Re- number of patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (with classical public of China, 3Department of Biotechnology, Fooyin University, Kaohsiung, or attenuated phenotype) have no APC mutation . Recently, germline Taiwan Republic of China, 4Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung, Tai- mutations in the Wnt pathway component gene AXIN2 have been wan Republic of China, 5Department of Internal Medicine, Changhua Christian associated with tooth agenesis-colorectal cancer syndrome . Moreover, Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan Republic of China. biallelic mutations in the base excision repair gene MUTYH have been Circadian rhythm plays an important role in the regulation of digestive associated with polyposis and early-onset colorectal cancer . The aim of system . The human circadian rhythm is controlled by at least nine this study was to further assess the contribution of AXIN2 and MUTYH circadian genes . The aims of this study are to understand the aberrant to hereditary colorectal cancer susceptibility . methods: AXIN2 and expression of the circadian genes between hepatocellular carcinoma MUTYH genes were screened entirely for germline mutations by PCR (HCC) tissues and non-tumor tissues, and to explore the possible and direct sequencing in 39 unrelated patients with multiple adenomas mechanism(s) contributing to the difference . We analyzed differential or colorectal cancer without evidence of APC mutation nor mismatch expression of the 9 circadian genes in 46 HCC and paired non-cancerous repair defect . Results: Two novel AXIN2 variants were detected in one tissues by real-time quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemical patient with multiple adenomas, but no clearly pathogenic mutation . detection . We also tested the possible regulatory mechanism(s) by In contrast, nine different MUTYH mutations were detected in eight direct sequencing and methylation PCR analysis . Our results showed patients, including six novel mutations . Biallelic MUTYH mutations that decreased expression levels of PER1, PER2, PER3, CRY2 and were found only in patients with multiple adenomatous polyposis (7 TIM in HCCs were observed . Down-expression of these genes was of 22 (32%)) . Interestingly, four MUTYH mutation carriers had a family not caused by genetic mutations, and 34 .8% of the down-regulated history consistent with dominant inheritance . Moreover, one patient cases were caused by promoter methylation . The down expression with biallelic MUTYH mutations presented with multiple adenomas and of circadian genes may result in disturbance of cell cycle, but there is severe tooth agenesis . conclusions: Germline mutations are rare in no relationship between the level of down expression and the clinical AXIN2 but frequent in MUTYH in patients with multiple adenomas . status of patients . In conclusion, down-regulation of circadian genes Moreover, our data suggest that genetic testing of MUTYH may be Cancer genetics 1 of interest in patients with family history apparently compatible with disease environmental factors like as smoking, work stiuation, life styles recessive as well as dominant inheritance . are effective, many cellular mechnisms especially DNA replication, recombination and repair systems may be contribute to disease P0527. cytogenetic contribution in diagnosis of leukemia development . DNA ligase I is an essential enzyme that required for A. G. Lungeanu1, A. Arghir1, N. Berbec2,1, S. Chirieac1, D. Mut Popescu2, A. DNA replication, recombination and repair processes . A single base Lupu2, O. Ciocan2, G. Mocanu3; exchange (A→C) in exon 6 of DNA ligase I gene were reported. So we 1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Carol Davila” Univer- hypothesised that polymorhism of gene which encodes this enzyme sity of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 3Coltea Clinical Hospital, can impress the cancer development . In this study, we evaluated that Bucharest, Romania. total 234 genomic DNA material for PCR-RFLP analysis; obtained The valuable contribution of cytogenetics in diagnosis, classification from 94 patients with laryngeal carcinoma and 140 healthy controls . and risk group ascertainment at the onset of leukemia it is well DNA ligase genotype frequencies were 17%, 47,9%, 35,1% in patients recognized . and 22,1%, 39,3%, 38,6% in controls for AA, AC and CC, respectivly . In this paper we present a review of cytogenetic investigation performed We did not find any significance differencies between LSCC and DNA on 288 leukemia cases : 260 myeloproliferative disorders (chronic ligase I gene polymorphism in patients and control group (χ2=1,886, P myeloid leukemia = CML, acute myeloid leukemia = AML, other chronic =0,389). However a significant difference were found between smoking myeloproliferative disorders = CMPD and myelodysplastic syndrome habits (χ2= 6,256 and P= 0,044), nodular metastasis (χ2= 9,544 and = MDS) and 28 acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALL) . Bone marrow P=0,049) and DNA ligase I gene genotype . In the literature, there is no cells were processed directly or after short-term cultivation . Classical study about LSCC and DNA ligase polymorphisms, so our study is the techniques revealed besides recurrent rearrangements, new, unknown first research this subject. abnormalities . The cytogenetic results contributed at: diagnosis confirmation in CML Ph-positive cases; diagnosis reconsideration in P0530. Nuclear Localization of the Human mismatch Repair Ph-negative cases of myeloproliferative disorder; association of Ph Proteins, mLH1, Pms2, and mLH3 chromosome with essential thrombocytemia in 4 cases and identification M. K. Korhonen1, T. E. Raevaara1, H. Lohi2, P. Peltomäki2, M. Nyström1; of new cytogenetic abnormalities in 5 patients . A variant Philadelphia 1Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Genetics, University translocation was identified in one case, with the following karyotype: t of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of (3;9;22)(3q25::9q34;9q34::22q11;22q11::3q25). FISH results with dual Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. fusion, dual color probes were consistent with the results obtained by DNA mismatch repair (MMR) mechanism eliminates DNA polymerase conventional cytogenetics . Other 5 cases had additional or unusual errors from the newly synthesized strand during replication and abnormalities like: -t(1 ;1) in CML at debut; - t(13 ;21) in AML-M2 ; -t(6 recombination . Consistent with the role of MMR proteins in the ;14) in a case with myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disorder at first maintenance of genomic stability, loss of MMR function predisposes to presentation; -t(3 ;5) in ET at diagnosis; -t(7 ;9) in ALL at the onset. cancer . MMR process is proposed to consist of three steps, mismatch The global percentage of unusual, additional and variant abnormalities recognition and assembly of the repairosome, degradation of the error- was 21% . It must be underlined the higher incidence of chromosomal containing strand, and repair synthesis . In man, one key factor in the abnormalities in acute leukemias (85%) compared with chronic assembly of the repairosome is suggested to be MutLα, a heterodimer myeloproliferative disorder (48,6%) . The mechanism and prognostic of MLH1 and PMS2 . Another heterodimer of MutL homologues MLH1 impact of variant and additional abnormalities have to be elucidated . and MLH3, MutLγ, was recently suggested to assist in the repair of Acknowledgements: CEEX Program, Module III . base-base mismatches and single extrahelical nucleotides . Consistent with the functions, MMR proteins are mainly localized in the nucleus . P0528. Analysis of homozygous or combined deletion 13q4.3 in Two different proteins, MLH1 and a transcription factor p73, have been patients with B-cell chronic lymphocitic leukemia shown to influence the subcellular distribution of PMS2 and dimerization A. Carrió, D. Costa, A. Valera, C. Gomez, N. Villamor, D. Colomer, M. Rozman, of MLH1 and PMS2 has been shown to limit nuclear localization of F. Bosch, E. Monserrat, E. Campo; MutLa. Whether nuclear localization of MLH1 is limited or influenced Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. by its dimerization with PMS2 or MLH3 as well as nuclear localization B-cell chronic lymphocitic leukemia (B-CLL) is the most frequent of MLH3/ MutLγ has remained questionable. Here, by using normal leukemia in the Western world . Deletion of chromosome 13q14 .3 is the human MLH1, PMS2, and MLH3 proteins and mutated MLH1 proteins, most frequent genetic aberration in B-cell chronic lymphocitic, founded which were unable to interact or lacked nuclear localization signal in approximately 50% of patients with B-CLL and suggesting the (NLS), we demonstrate that protein interaction is essential to nuclear presence of tumour suppressor gene(s) whose loss or inactivation may import of PMS2 but not of MLH1 . In the presence of MLH1 and PMS2, contribute to the pathogenesis of B-CLL . Loss of this region has also MLH3 protein seems to locate in cytoplasm . been observed in other human malignancies . The 13q14 .3 deletion can be found in the onset of B-CLL, in contrast to other chromosomal P0531. Donor cell-derived acute myeloblastic leukemia aberrations . The deletion can be heterozygous, homozygous or after allogeneic peripheral blood hematopoietic stem cell combined . Deletion 13q4 .3, as sole anomaly, has a good prognosis transplantation for juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia in clinical evolution, but not data are available about possible clinical S. Berker Karauzum1, Z. Cetin1, A. Manguoglu1, G. Tezcan2, A. Kupesiz2, A. repercussion of homozygous or combined form . Yesilipek2, G. Luleci1, V. Hazar2; Routinely FISH analysis, with specific probes for chromosomes 11 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and (LSI ATM), 12 (CEP12), 13 (LSI D13S319/13q34) and 17 (LSI p53), Genetics, ANTALYA, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- were performed 270 samples from B-CLL patients . A 53% of samples ment of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, ANTALYA, Turkey. showed the del(13)(q14 .3) in hemizygous, homozygous or combined The recurrence of leukemia following allogeneic hematopoietic stem form . cell transplantation (HSCT) is one of the major consequences of the The implication of homozygous or combined deletion in hematologic treatment failure . It frequently results from outgrowth of residual host features and clinical follow-up of these B-CLL patients will be tumor cells; however, in a minority of cases, it may arise from cells of discussed . donor origin . Donor cell leukemia (DCL) accounted for approximately 5% of relapses demonstrated by cytogenetic studies of 54relapses P0529. investigation of DNA Ligase i Gene Polymorphism in in sex-mismatched bone marrow transplants .The improvement in Patients with Laryngeal carcinoma by PcR-RFLP technique cytogenetic and molecular analysis such as short tandem repeat (STR) R. Celik1, F. Sari1, H. Acar1, K. Ozturk2, H. Arbag2; sequencing have provided more accurate and faster determination of 1Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Deparment of Medical Genetics, donor engraftment and also differentiation of DCL from host leukemia Konya, Turkey, 2Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Deparment of Oto- relapse . laryngeology, Konya, Turkey. We report here the case of a 5 year-old girl with juvenile myelomonocytic Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) is the one of the most leukemia (JMML) and normal female karyotype who developed acute common cancer type on the worldwide . Altough in the arising of this myeloblastic leukemia (AML) with a karyotype of 46, X, t(X; 7) (p21; Cancer genetics 1 p11.2), der(7)t(3; 7) (q13.3; q22) five months after peripheral blood Glioblastoma The expression patterns * hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) from her HLA- samples: SSEA- SSEA- matched sister . We performed the hybridization of short tandem repeat SSEA-1 sequence markers to DNA obtained from donor peripheral blood, number, (%) 3 4 patient’s peripheral blood including leukemic blasts and patient’s hair 3 - - - root . This hybridization showed that the leukemic blood DNA matched 3 + - - the donor blood DNA and not the patient’s DNA, thus confirming DCL 6 + + - To our knowledge this is the first case of a donor cell leukemia 12 + + + developing after peripheral blood HSCT forJMML . 9 + - + P0532. mutation analysis of the EGFR tyrosine kinase domain in 3 - - + spanish Head and Neck cancer patients. 2 - + + Y. Lemos-González1, M. Páez de la Cadena1, F. J. Rodríguez-Berrocal1, E. 20 ( 26 ( In total: 38 30 ( 79 .0 ) Pallas2, D. Valverde1; 52,6 ) 68,4 ) 1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de * - negative reaction; + a clear positive reaction with at Vigo, Vigo, Spain. least in some parts of tissue material . The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a tyrosine kinase, regulates a number of essential cellular functions and appears to play P0534. A 7 year survey on familial adenomatous polyposis a central role in the aetiology and progression of a variety of solid patients in Switzerland: Identification of novel APC germline tumours . EGFR is frequently overexpressed in several epithelial mutations and genotype-phenotype correlations tumours including head and neck carcinoma (HNC), thus being a promising therapeutic target . In fact, inhibition of activated protein J. Luz, J. Zhang, A. Russell, M. Attenhofer, H. J. Müller, K. Heinimann; kinases has emerged as an effective approach to cancer therapy . Research Group Human Genetics, Basel, Switzerland. Recent studies showed that the mutations in the kinase domain of Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), caused by germline mutations EGFR gene in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tissues could predict in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, shows considerable significant clinical responses to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). phenotypic heterogeneity . This variability has been associated with the The different involvement of EGFR mutations in several types of cancer position of the APC mutation: attenuated FAP (AFAP; patients with and the correlation between mutations and clinical benefits prompted <100 colorectal polyps) has been related to APC mutations at the us to examine the presence of mutations in exons 18, 19, 20 and 21 in extreme 5’ (codon 1-168), 3’ end (codon >1680) and exon 9 . EGFR for HNC Spanish patients . For this study 101 unrelated FAP patients were consecutively screened Genomic DNA was extracted from 31 tumoral tissues of HNC samples for germline mutations in APC . In 28 (71 .8%) out of 39 FAP patients and analysed by PCR-SSCP . DNA sequence variations in EGFR were with >100 adenomas and 28 (45 .2%) out of 62 with <100 adenomas found in exons 18, 20 and 21, for 9 out of the 31 of HNC patients a pathogenic APC mutation was identified, with 17 (30.4%) of them (29%) . All the variations detected were polymorphisms or were representing novel sequence alterations . located in non-coding regions . Moreover, they were not involved in The median age at diagnosis of the 56 APC mutation carriers was the generation of alternative splicing sites as we checked using the 40 .0 years (IQR 18 .0) with 50 .0% presenting with >100 adenomas . A FGENESH software . positive family history was reported in 31 patients implicating 41 .5% In our set of HNC patients, mutation in the kinase domain of the EGFR of the mutations having occurred de novo . Extracolonic disease was gene is a relatively rare event . It would be interesting to investigate the observed in 19 (33 .9%) patients . EGFR gene amplification and other ways in which the EGFR may be Interestingly, 26 (51%) patients carrying an APC mutation located affecting carcinogenesis . within the “classical FAP” region displayed an attenuated phenotype which cannot be explained by earlier age at diagnosis (median 41 .0 vs . 36 years, p=0 .33) . In 5 (8 .9%) patients the APC mutation was located P0533. Expression analysis of embryonic stage specific within the presumed AFAP region (median age: 45 .8 years (IQR antigens ssEA-1, ssEA-3, and ssEA-4 in glioblastoma samples: 6 .0)) . In contrast to the 2 patients with 3’ mutations and, as expected, a pilot study <100 polyps, all 3 patients carrying a 5’ mutation actually displayed A. Mikelsaar; hundreds of polyps. Thus, our findings challenge the prevailing view University of Tartu, Centre of Excellence of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, on genotype-phenotype correlations in FAP . Department of Human Biology and Genetics, Tartu, Estonia. The 38 samples of glioblastoma tissues were used to investigate the P0535. subgroups of patients with familial adenomatous expression of SSEAs. Unfixed samples were stored in a liquid N-tank . 2 polyposis without APc mutations distinguished by genetics and The immunofluorescence analysis was carried out on tissue pieces phenotypic characteristics. taken from frozen samples with a scalpel, fixed to nitrocellulose paper, blocked, and incubated with SSEA specific monoclonal antibodies. T. A. Muzaffarova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, I. Y. Sachkov2, A. M. Kuzminov2, E. K. Specific reaction with tissue material was revealed by fluorescence Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; microscopy using Alexa conjugated secondary antibodies . The 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2State analysis revealed practically all possible SSEA expression patterns Scientific Centre of Colo proctology, Moscow, Russian Federation. in glioblastoma samples except the variant were SSEA-3 is the only Mutations in MYH can not explain all cases of familial adenomatous expressed antigen (see Table) . The most frequent pattern (in 12 of 38 polyposis (FAP) without APC mutations . In our sample of Russian glioblastomas, 31,6%) was co-expression of all SSEAs . The further patients 55% of FAP were due to APC and 4% due to biallelic MYH study should show how much the expression characteristics of SSEAs mutations . There are some evidence that the patient group without revealed could be related to the malignisation process of brain cells APC mutations is not homogeneous . We divided this group in two or used in subtyping of gliomas or explained the pathogenesis . The subgroups: with not more than one affected relative (subgroup I) study is supported by Estonian SF grant nr . 5250 and target grant and with many affected relatives of a proband (subgroup II) . Such TARMPO421 subdivision was based on the notion of different FAP risk in the families . Attenuated FAP was observed in 43% of cases in the subgroup I that is significantly higher in comparison with the subgroup II (OR=9.0; P=0.037) and with the APC mutation patient group (OR=10.9; P=0 .007) . The average age of the disease onset in the subgroup I was 36 .2 year that is 1 .5 times higher than in the group of patients with APC mutations (t = 2,83; P = 0,007). On the other hand, the difference in average age between patients of subgroup II and patients with APC mutations was not significant. Further we analyzed four APC polymorphisms in attempt to find specific Cancer genetics 1 gene variants for subgroups . One of the genotype frequency was Further investigations are necessary to reveal whether there exists a significantly higher in the subgroup I in comparison with control group genotype-phenotype correlation in this ‚deletion carrying‘ subgroup of (OR=4.9; P=0.015). There was no difference between the subgroup II patients . and control group . P0538. Analysis of cDH1 and iL1RN variants among gastric P0536. Fanconi anemia FANcD1/BRcA2 displays genotypic/ cancer families in Russia phenotypic correlations: a report of two pedigrees and review of A. S. Tsukanov1, N. I. Pospekhova1, M. P. Nikulin2, L. N. Lyubchenko2, A. V. the literature. Karpukhin1; E. B. Gomez Garcia1, J. de Winter2, M. Macville1, M. J. Blok1, M. Vreeburg1, D. 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2N.N. Marcus-Soekarman1, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders1; Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. 1Dept. Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Dept. of Clinical Ge- Mutations in CDH1 gene were associated with inherited gastric cancer netics and Human Genetics, Free university Medical center, Amsterdam, The among patients of several countries . However the mutations origin and Netherlands. spreading are not known . Further investigations of CDH1 gene among Patient 1 had small stature, microcephaly, microphthalmy, cleft palate, patients of different populations can give necessary information . VSD, imperforate anus, rectovaginal fistula, absence/hypoplastic All CDH1 exons were screened among probands of 9 families with thumbs and hypothyroidism . She died at age 3 of a solid tumor in the diffuse inherited gastric cancer and 11 with familial gastric cancer posterior fossa . Chromosome and complementation studies made by SSCP and CSGE . Revealed variants of DNA fragments were the diagnosis of FA type D1 . DNA-analysis, reported by Howlett et al . sequenced on both strands . Four rare variants (531+10G>C, 1896C>T, Science 2002, revealed biallelic mutations in the BRCA2 gene: 7699 2076C>T, 2253C>T) and one new variant (1937+23G>A) were found . insAT and 9900 insA as the cause of type D1 in this kindred (EUFA423) . Frequencies of these rare variant and frequent polymorphism 2076C>T Each parent was carrier . Her deceased paternal grandmother was were not differ from earlier described . No deleterious mutations were the only relative with cancer (BRCA2 mutation was absent in the revealed in CDH1 gene. This result may reflect low frequency of CDH1 pancreatic tumor) . mutations among Russian families with inherited gastric cancer . Patient 2 developed a Wilms’ tumor at age 1 . She had small stature, The association of sporadic gastric cancer risk with some variants of microcephaly and café au lait spots . A BRCA2 mutation (886 del GT) IL1RN gene was established earlier while a role of this gene in familial had been found in her mother, counseled for familial breast cancer gastric cancer was not studied . We compared a distribution of IL1RN (BC) . In her father’s family several women had BC, a 9345G>A variants among our sample of familial gastric cancer and control BRCA2 mutation, reported to have an effect on splicing, was present . individuals (n=57). No significant association of either IL1RN variant Both were present in the child which, together with an increased with gastric cancer risk was found . chromosome breakage, confirmed the diagnosis. Complementation studies are underway . P0539. Genetic heterogeneity in gliomas Twenty two other children have been reported . Distinct clinical features S. Urbschat1, S. Wemmert1, S. Wirth2, V. Jung3, R. Ketter1, W. Feiden4, K. from the 24 patients with FANCD1/BRCA2 are: high incidence of solid Zang5, W. Steudel1; tumors in early childhood,10 patients had brain tumors and six a 1Department of Neurosurgery, Homburg/ Saar, Germany, 2Evangelisches Kran- Wilms’ tumor, absence of aplastic anemia, early onset acute leukemia, kenhaus, Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Düsseldorf, Germany, 3Depart- imperforate anus and BC among relatives . ment of Urology, Homburg/ Saar, Germany, 4Department of Neuropathology, Little correlation between FA complementation groups and clinical Homburg/ Saar, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Homburg/ Saar, features had been reported so far, here we show that genotype/ Germany. phenotype associations do exist for this subtype, with potential Gliomas display a wide range of histopathological features and biological important therapeutic implications . behavior, and an inherent tendency to progress to a highly malignant phenotype . Molecular- and cytogenetic studies have delineated that P0537. Germline exon- and whole gene deletions in the APc different grades of gliomas correlate with specific genetic alterations. gene and their correlation with phenotype Glioblastomas, the most malignant form of gliomas, may develop de M. M. Weiss1, E. C. Bik1, M. Nielsen1, H. F. A. Vasen2, F. Hes1, E. Bakker1, C. novo (primary glioblastomas) or through progression from low-grade M. J. Tops1; or anaplastic astrocytomas (secondary glioblastomas) . 1Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, Cell culture analysis may be biased by clonal selection artifacts . 2Netherlands foundation for detection of hereditary tumors (NFDHT), Leiden, Homogenized tissue lacks control over the tissue composition and The Netherlands. permits contamination of the tumor specimen with preexisting and During the period 1994-2004 a total of 564 patiënts were submitted for reactive nonneoplastic tissue . Moreover, gliomas exhibit a diffuse identification of the family specific APC mutation in polyposis patients infiltrating growth pattern into normal brain so that no tumor area to our DNA diagnostic laboratory . These patients were screened for contains a uniform cellular composition . Genetic heterogeneity can germline mutations in the APC gene by Denaturing Gradient Gel hardly be detected by conventional methods . In order to evaluate an Electrophoresis (DGGE), Protein Truncation Test (PTT), sequencing intratumoral genetic heterogeneity we performed FISH investigations analysis and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification and microdissection analysis in paraffin-embedded glioma tissue (MLPA) . Using this method we examined 124 tumor areas from 41 gliomas . In 221 patiënts we could identify a pathogenic APC mutation (39%) . Furthermore we correlate the cytogenetic data with the histomorphology Most of the mutations in the APC gene were frameshift mutations of the given tumor areas . (n=108, 49%) and nonsense mutations (n=73, 33%), furthermore Low-grade astrocytomas most often showed normal karyotypes, by we found splice mutations (n=20, 9%) and complete or partial gene conventional cytogenetic methods . However, we were able to identify deletions (n=20, 9%) . Also, the Ile1307Lys variant, which is found in numerous alterations in low-grade astrocytomas, especially in areas 6% of the Ashkenazi Jewish population and confers a relative risk of with a gemistocytic appearance . Primary glioblastomas and secondary 1 .5-2 .0 for colorectal cancer was found in 4 patiënts . One of these glioblastomas showed consistant as well as different genetic findings, appeared to be a carrier of two MUTYH mutations, and one was also which correlate partial with the histomorphological features of the carrier of a nonsense APC mutation . investigated areas . Our results provide clear evidence of inter- and Most of the 20 deletions identified by MLPA were found only once. intratumoral genetic heterogeneity in gliomas . In order to develop The recurrent deletions were the whole gene deletions (n=7), exon genetic prognostic criteria, the distinct genetic heterogeneity of these 9-15 (n=3), and exon 7-13 (n=2) . The majority of the APC deletion tumors should be considered . patients displayed the classical FAP phenotype (100-1000 colorectal adenomas), however, the two families carrying the deletion from exon 7-13 seem to show a more atypical FAP phenotype (less polyps and late onset) . Interestingly, only this exon 7-13 deletion is an inframe deletion .Cancer genetics 16 P0540. Glutathione s-transferases null genotype in acute the sporadic group . The mean age at menarche was 13 .5 years in myeloid leukaemia the familial group as against 14 .7 years in the sporadic cases .The M. H. Sheikhha1, S. M. Kalantar1, K. Tobal2, J. A. L. Yin3; cancer had metastasized and lymph nodes were affected in 50% of 1Yazd Clinical and Research Center for Infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, both familial and sporadic cases, but in the sporadic cases, 77 .8% 2MRD Lab, , King’s College, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Haema- of the lymph node positive cases were seen in the pre-menopausal tology, MRI, Manchester, United Kingdom. women . Bilateral affection of the disease was seen in only three cases . Background: The expression of many of the cancer susceptibility DNA was screened for BRCA1 gene mutations by CSGE . None of enzymes is genetically polymorphic in human population . The the patients showed BRCA1 gene mutations .GSTT1 and GSTM1 glutathione S-transferase (GST) is one of the metabolising enzymes, genes were secreened for null mutations . The patients included in which plays an important role in the detoxification of mutagens and the study had primary breast carcinoma and were on chemotherapy . carcinogens . Different studies have shown an increased frequency Follow-up was 2 years (range, 3- 24 months) .GSTT1 null mutation was of GST-null genotypes in several malignancies . Objective: To associated with risk of early onset of breast cancer . Three patients investigate the rate of GSTT1 and GSTM1 null genotypes and to had a relapse and one patient died from breast carcinoma . The gene determine its importance in prognosis of the disease in AML patients . deletion of GSTs in relation to early onset of breast carcinoma and methods: DNA was extracted from peripheral blood or bone marrow clinical response to chemotherapy and recurrence free survival will be of 180 patients who were in presentation status of AML . A multiplex discussed . PCR method was used simultaneously to amplify regions of GSTM1, GSTT1, and βετα-globin genes in genomic DNA . The survival curves P0543. Use of FFPE samples on Agilent‘s oligo acGH were analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method and compared by the log- microarrays rank test (Mantel-Cox) using the SPSS software program . Results: Of R. Argonza-Barrett1, R. Taylor2, C. J. Rizzo2; the total of 180 patients, 23 cases (12 .8%) showed null genotypes in 1Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2Agilent Technologies, both genes, while in 52 patients (28 .9%) both genes were wild-types . Wilmington, DE, United States. GSTM1 null-GSTT1 wild-type was detected in 91 patients (50 .6%) and Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples (FFPE) provide GSTM1 wild-type-GSTT1 null genotype was detected in 14 patients an important source of archival DNA for which extensive clinical data (7 .8%) . These rates are within the upper limit of the rates detected in are available . The ability to analyze this material allows retrospective the normal European population. There was no significant difference studies of pathogenesis, treatment, and patient outcome . Agilent’s in the overall survival and in disease free survival between different oligonucleotide aCGH platform was used to identify regions of groups . conclusion: These observations suggest that the inherited chromosomal gain and loss on several cancer FFPE samples . absence of the GSTT1 and GSTM1 carcinogen detoxification pathway Comparison of matched FFPE and fresh samples from the same may be related to carcinogenesis but it is not an important determinant patient shows a high degree of correlation for both cell lines and tumor of prognosis in AML . biopsies . Archived and frozen DNA from the same biopsy sample had greater than 90% concordance . To test reproducibility, single normal P0541. Nonsense associated exon skipping is not sufficient to and hepatocellular carcinoma FFPE samples were processed 4 times . suppress cancerogenesis in Gorlin syndrome All normal DNA samples showed no aberrations; all hepatocellular J. W. Bauer; carcinoma DNA samples showed the same 2-fold copy number loss Dept. Dermatology, Salzburg, Austria. at chromosome 9p22 . Furthermore, because the amount of patient Mutations of the transmembrane transporter protein Patched (Ptc), material available is often limited, and unbiased amplification of the a member of the Hedgehog pathway regulating homeostasis of cell degraded nucleic acids found in most FFPE samples remains a serious proliferation and differentiation in a variety of tissues, are implicated challenge, we have developed a protocol that permits the use of as in the development of autosomal dominant Gorlin syndrome (NBCCS, little as 500 nanograms of input genomic DNA in aCGH experiments . nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome) characterized by multiple skin The robustness of this system has been tested with FFPE samples and endodermally derived cancers as well as congenital abnormalities . from several different tumor types . Tumor promotion is thought to be associated with reduced functionality of ptc leading to deregulation of downstream targets like sonic P0544. molecular characterization of splice site mutations in hedgehog and Gli pathways . However, transcriptional events leading BRcA1 and BRcA2 genes in czech families with hereditary to the reduced suppression effects of patched have not been studied breast cancer. in detail . We describe a heterozygous germline polymorphism P1315L E. Machackova1, L. Foretova1, M. Lukesova1, P. Vasickova1, I. Coene2, H. in a patient suffering from Gorlin syndrome, which contrasts to the bi- Pavlu1, V. Urbankova1, J. Kuklova1, M. Navratilova1, K. Claes2; allelic, somatic “two-hit” mutations G1019X (sharing the same allele 1Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Center for Medical with P1315L) and I1070M in genomic DNA of a basal cell carcinoma Genetics, Gent, Belgium. (BCC) in this patient . Despite the stop codon present in the BCC, real- Accurate RNA splicing involves conserved sequence motifs at the time RT-PCR and western blotting showed an over-expression of ptc intron-exon junctions and the branch site . Splice site mutations often in tumor cells . This upregulation is mediated by in-frame skipping of occur at the essentially invariant GT and AT dinucleotides located the exon 19, harbouring G1019X, thus constituting a failing rescue respectively at the start of an intron (splice donor) or at its end (splice attempt of the transcriptional machinery to escape the consequences acceptor) . Flanking these important signals, however, other conserved of this premature stop-codon . These molecular alterations underscore sequence elements are present, which, if mutated, can also cause the significance of structurally unaltered ptc protein for suppression of aberrant splicing . cancerogenesis . Molecular genetic analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 is performed in 500 Czech high-risk breast and/or ovarian cancer families and 150 early- P0542. glutathione s-transferases (gstt1 and gstm1) gene onset cancer cases during the period 1999-2005 . In about 30% of our deletions: susceptibility and prognostic implications in Breast families unequivocal deleterious mutations were identified, including carcinoma patients frame-shift, nonsense and missense mutations in the C3HC4 - RING A. Sharma, P. Paliwal, Kucheria, Bansal; domain of BRCA1 . Furthermore, we detected 10 different alterations in All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. conserved splice sites (termed by traditional BIC nomenclature): Glutathione S- transferase (GSTT1 and GSTM1) detoxify a wide BRcA1: c. 421-3C>G; c.4304G>A; c.4794+1G>A; c.5271+2dupT; range of environmental carcinogens contributing to tumor cell survival BRcA2: c.703G>A; c.704-2A>G; c.7235G>A; c.8983-1G>A; c.9346- by detoxification of products induced by cancer therapy. A study is 2A>G; c.9345+2T>A; designed to investigate the susceptibility and prognostic implications Some of them were reported in the BIC database as “Splice” mutation, of the GSTT1 and GSTM1gene deletions with breast carcinoma in 100 but without known effect at the cDNA level . For genetic counseling patients compared to 100 controls . The patient group also consisted and clinical management of the patients it is very important to know of ten cases with a positive family history . The mean age at diagnosis if changes lead to aberrant splicing . We used splice prediction in the familial group was 38 .0 years as compared to 44 .7 years in programs to predict possible changes in efficiency of splice sites and Cancer genetics 1 characterized the transcripts at the cDNA level . P0547. Digenism in a case of early onset colorectal cancer contract grant sponsor: Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: (HNPcc, Lynch syndrome) MZ00020980501; Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of Health of the O. Caron1,2, A. Neuville3, A. Schneider4, M. P. Gaub4, M. Guiot1, M. P. Chenard3, Czech Republic; contract grant number NR8213 J. E. Kurtz2, J. P. Bergerat2, T. Frébourg5, J. L. Mandel1; 1Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires, Strasbourg, P0545. Efficiency of the Revised Bethesda Guidelines (2003) for France, 2Département d’Oncohématologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires, Stras- the Detection of mutations in mismatch Repair Genes in Austrian bourg, France, 3Département d’anatomopathologie, Hopitaux Universitaires, HNPcc Patients Strasbourg, France, 4Laboratoire de Biochimie/Biologie moléculaire, Hopitaux B. Wolf1, S. Gruber1, S. Henglmueller1, S. Kappel1, M. Bergmann2, F. Wrba3, J. Universitaires, Strasbourg, France, 5Laboratoire de Génétique moléculaire, Karner-Hanusch2; Hôpitaux Universitaires, Rouen, France. 1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Research Laboratories, Lynch syndrome or Hereditary NonPolyposis Colorectal Cancer is an Vienna, Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Vienna, hereditary cancer susceptibility caused by alteration in genes involved Austria, 3Medical University of Vienna, Department of Clinical Pathology, Vi- in postreplicative mismatch repair (MMR), MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 . enna, Austria. People carrying a mutation in one of these genes have a 70% risk of The clinical diagnosis of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer developing a colon cancer and a 40% risk of developing endometrial (HNPCC) is based on the Amsterdam II criteria (ACII) . The purpose of cancer . Risk begins to increase after the age of 20-25 years . The using the Bethesda guidelines (BG) is to select tumours for microsatellite tumours arbour microsatellite instability (MSI) and usually loose MLH1, analysis. Recently the modified Amsterdam criteria (ACmod) and MSH2 or MSH6 expression . Bethesda guidelines (BGmod) were proposed to simplify definitions. We report a sporadic case of an eighteen-year-old woman with a We evaluated the efficiency of the ACmod and BGmod to identify poorly differentiated pT4N1M1 colon adenocarcinoma . No familial patients with germ-line mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 in 81 unrelated history could be documented up to now, but the patient’s family lives in Austrian HNPCC families . Microsatellite (MS) analysis was performed Africa . The adenocarcinoma was MSI-high and a triple loss of staining in 55 tumours . The new criteria included more families than the old of MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 was observed . Two germline mutations ones: BGmod, n=81; BG, n=72; ACmod, n=52 and ACII, n=35. The were found: a nonsense mutation in MLH1, and a large duplication of more stringent old criteria tended to show greater positive predictive exons 7 to 10 in MSH6 . No mutation was found in MSH2 . value for association with a germ-line mutation than the corresponding The very young age of diagnosis in this case could be explained by new criteria: BGmod, 23%; BG, 26%; ACmod, 31% and ACII, 37%. this double alteration . The loss of staining of both MSH6 and MSH2 The larger number of patients analysed in the ACmod group resulted might be caused by destabilization of MSH2 because of lack of its in greater sensitivity compared to the ACII . The increased workload partner MSH6 . for BGmod was not associated with greater sensitivity . Microsatellite To our knowledge, this is the first description of digenism in Lynch instability (MSI) significantly enhanced specificity in all subgroups. We syndrome. Inheritance’s risks in first degree relatives are dramatically recommend the use of the ACmod criteria to select patients for primary increased in comparaison to a family with a single alteration in one sequence analysis, when microsatellite analysis is not possible . If the gene. Our finding suggests that early case of Lynch syndrome should BG are used, we suggest that BG be given preference over BGmod, be investigated for all 3 MMR genes, even if one mutation was already as the former signify a lesser workload . found . P0546. Altered mut L homologue (MLH1) mRNA allele expression P0548. mutation analysis of the msH6 gene in 52 mLH1/msH2- in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPcc) patients negative, HNPcc suspect italian patients measured using mALDi-toF ms. P. Pazienza*1, M. Barberis*2, I. Borelli2,3, S. Regazzoni1, D. Giachino1, G. V. Wilson1, M. Santibanez-Koref2, J. Eden2, A. Curtis1, J. Burn2; Casalis Cavalchini2, A. Allavena2, M. Micheletti2,4, A. Arrigoni5, M. Schena6, E. 1Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Institute Grosso3, T. Venesio7, E. David4, B. Pasini2,3, N. Migone2, M. De Marchi1; of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. 1Università degli Studi di Torino, Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e Biologiche, Germline mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes are known Orbassano, Italy, 2Università degli Studi di Torino, Dipartimento di Genetica, to cause susceptibility to HNPCC, an autosomal dominant disorder Biologia e Biochimica, Torino, Italy, 3ASO S.Giovanni Battista, SCDU Genetica that accounts for approx . 5% of all colorectal cancers . About 50% Medica, Torino, Italy, 4ASO S.Giovanni Battista, SCDU Anatomia Patologica, of HNPCC mutations in MLH1 and the Mut S homologue 2 (MSH2) Torino, Italy, 5ASO S.Giovanni Battista, SC Gastroenterologia, Torino, Italy, result in the generation of a premature termination codon (PTC) . 6ASO S.Giovanni Battista, SC Oncologia Medica, Torino, Italy, 7IRCC, Anatomia Transcripts containing such mutations trigger nonsense-mediated Patologica, Candiolo, Italy. mRNA decay (NMD) a cellular mechanism that prevents the formation The HNPCC syndrome bears high cancer risk at colorectum, of truncated proteins, which may be detrimental . We have examined endometrium and other organs, due to MMR defects . Testing in clinical MLH1 transcripts extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes from contexts is frequently limited to MLH1/MSH2, since only a minority HNPCC patients and controls, for altered allelic mRNA expression . of cases are thought to depend on MSH6 and other genes . Within All individuals were heterozygous for the exon 8, c .655A>G a program aimed to prevent inherited cancer in the Piedmont area, polymorphism . A primer extension assay was carried out on genomic we have implemented the mutation analysis of MSH6 on a set of 88 and cDNA, and products were analysed using matrix assisted laser suspect HNPCC probands, in which 52 were previously found to be desorption/ionisation - time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-ToF MLH1 and MSH2 mut- negative, with the aim to define proper criteria for MS). The relative mRNA expression of each allele was quantified and MSH6 testing . Cases were included on the basis of recognized clinical normalised against genomic DNA . We found that there was no change criteria and on preliminary analyses on the tumor for IHC expression in MLH1 mRNA allele expression in our controls or in HNPCC patients of MMR proteins and microsatellite instability . All 10 MSH6 exons with missense mutations . However, a 1 .99 ± 0 .11 fold (mean ± S .E .M .) were amplified in 19 amplimers from leukocyte DNA, and analysed by imbalance in allele mRNA expression was observed in patients with DHPLC . Screening for major deletions was performed by MLPA . Two MLH1 mutations predicted to cause NMD . Interestingly, individuals point mutations (K537fs and Y1286delinsIN), one deletion of exons with a mutation that results in a PTC in exon 2 followed immediately by 2-4 and two variants of unknown pathogenic significance were found. an ATG codon have a greatly reduced, but still measurable imbalance In all three MSH6-mut patients the tumor was MSI-H; in one of them in MLH1 mRNA allele expression, 1 .345 ± 0 .07 fold (mean ± S .E .M .) we demonstrated a double-negative IHC pattern (MSH2- and MSH6-) . These results show the potential that this assay has to be used as a Within the limits of our small sample, MSH6-mut patients showed less pre-screening tool . typical family history . The inclusion of MSH6 in HNPCC genetic testing can significantly improve sensitivity. A MSH6 and/or MSH2 negative IHC, better than any clinical feature, appears to efficiently pinpoint cases for MSH6 screening among MSH2-neg cases . Supported by Regione Piemonte and Compagnia di S .Paolo, TorinoCancer genetics 1 P0549. combined effect of the p Arg72Pro and the RNASEL detected in blood serum of these patients . Arg462Gln sequence variant on the age of disease onset in We observed high correlation with the size of tumor and lymph Hereditary Nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPcc) patients node metastasis in tissue of tumor, but did not correlate with tumor S. Krüger1, C. Engel2, A. Bier3, A. Silber4, H. Görgens4, E. Mangold5, C. Pagen- differentiation and tumor cell type in that patients who underwent stecher5, E. Holinski-Feder6, M. von Knebel Doeberitz7, G. Moeslein8, W. Diet- operation (p<0 .05) . maier9, S. Stemmler10, W. Friedl5, J. Rüschoff11, H. K. Schackert4, T. German In addition we observed that a higher recurrences rate in that patients HNPCC-Consortiums12; who had if the telomerase activity level was higher than the other 1Institute of Clinical Genetics and Department of Surgical Research, Dresden patients in the same group . These results suggest that the level of University of Technology, Dresden, Germany, 2Institute for Medical Informatics, telomerase activity is positively correlated with the pathological stage Statistics and Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 3Institute and mortality of lung cancer . of Clinical Genetics, Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany, 4Department of Surgical Research, Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, P0551. HumARA cAG polymorphism in human colon cancer Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Ger- S. Ceccardi1, C. Bini1, D. Santini2, M. Taffurelli3, M. Falconi4, F. Lugaresi1, F. many, 6Institute of Human Genetics, University of Munich, Munich, Germany, Ingravallo1, G. Ferri5, A. Cicognani1, S. Pelotti1; 7Institute of Molecular Pathology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Ger- 1Department of Medicine and Public Health, Section of Legal Medicine, Univer- many, 8Department of Surgery, St. Josefs-Hospital Bochum-Linden, Bochum, sity of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Institute of Anatomical and Pathological Histol- Germany, 9Institute of Pathology, Molecular diagnostic unit, University of ogy, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Breast Cancer Surgical Unit, First Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 10Institute of Human Genetics, Ruhr-Uni- Surgical Clinic, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Department of Anatomi- versity Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 11Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Kassel, cal Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Department of Pathological Kassel, Germany, 12German Cancer Aid, Köln, Germany. Anatomy and Legal Medicine, Section of Legal Medicine, University of Modena introduction: The tumour suppressor gene p53 plays a key role in and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. the apoptotic pathway, and the prostate-cancer-susceptibility gene The HumARA CAG repeat is located in the first exon of Androgen RNASEL is a tumour suppressor also involved in apoptosis . Recently, Receptor (AR) coding for a polyglutamine stretch . It is hypothesized we could show that functionally different variants in both genes that the shorter the length of this tract, the greater the affinity of (Arg72Pro in p53 and Arg462Gln in RNASEL) are associated with the androgens to the AR and the greater the androgenic effect . age of onset (AO) in HNPCC patients . Hereby we aimed to assess the Normal polymorphic tract of CAG varies according to the ethnicity in a combined effect of both variants . range of 8-36 repeats . The CAG expansion over 40 repeats leads to methods: We screened 246 unrelated HNPCC patients with pathogenic spinal bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) . germline mutations in MSH2 or MLH1 and colorectal carcinoma as first Because of the HumARA marker is highly polymorphic in the normal tumour and 245 healthy controls . population up to now it has been commonly used in forensic application, Results: The global log-rank test revealed significant differences in the but recently its relationship with cancer risk induced by the length of AO for both variants independently (p=0 .0176 for p53 and p=0 .0358 for polyglutamine tract in the AR, suggests to consider it a not suitable RNASEL) and for the combined genotype of both variants (p=0 .0174) . marker for forensic casework . A mutation pathway independent of The highest difference in median AO was twelve years between microsatellite instability was delineate in colon cancer CAG alterations homozygous carriers of the wild-type in both genes (42 years) and suggesting that androgens contribute to colon carcinogenesis . of the polymorphic allele in both genes (30 years), respectively . We have analyzed the HumARA CAG polymorphism in 50 colon Multivariate Cox regression model indicated that the p53 and RNASEL cancers in comparison to the surrounding healthy tissue . The samples genotypes had a significant influence on AO (p=0.016 for p53 and were previously typed for 15 STR markers used in forensic genetic p=0 .014 for RNASEL) in an additive mode of inheritance, and that the profiling showing different percentage of MSI-H, and MSI-L. effects of both variants are additive without any interaction . AR-CAG alterations occur in cancers with and without MSI and no conclusions: Our results suggest that p53 codon 72 and RNASEL correlation to sex and staging has been demonstrated . codon 462 genotypes are independently associated with AO in The data seem to confirm the previously report that the AR is an HNPCC in a dose-dependent manner, and that the combined effect additional target of mutations related to genetic instability and is purely additive . This may be relevant for preventive strategies . Our HumARA marker should be replaced by other X-STR markers for results support the notion that the p53- and Rnase L-pathways do not forensic purposes . interact . P0552. interleukin-10 genotypes in sporadic colon cancer P0550. Using quantitative Real time PcR is a good toll to detect T. Cacev, S. Kapitanovic; htERt activity and prognosis of lung cancer Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. D. Yasar1, S. Berker Karaaraüzüm1, A. Erdogan2, G. Özbilim3, G. Lüleci1; Interleukin-10 (IL-10) is an anti-inflammatory and immuno-suppressive 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and cytokine involved in angiogenesis in various cancers . IL-10 production Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department is influenced by single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the of Thoracic Surgery, Antalya, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, promoter region of the gene . Department of Pathology, Antalya, Turkey. We examined IL-10 haplotypes consisting of three SNPs -1082(G/A), Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein enzyme that synthesizes telomeres -819(C/T) and -592(C/A) within the promoter region of the IL-10 gene . after cell division and maintains chromosomal length and stability . IL-10 production is associated with haplotypes that are defined by Approximately 85-90% of human cancers, including lung cancer, these SNPs, so that individuals can be genotyped for higher or lower show high activity of telomerase . However, the correlation between levels IL10 production. These haplotypes might influence the risk for the quantitatively measurement of telomerase activity and the clinical colon cancer development and progression possibly by affecting the characteristics of lung cancer patients remains unclear . The aim efficiency of the antitumour immune response and/or pathways of of this study was to elucidate the clinicopathological relationship angiogenesis . between telomerase activity and telomerase reverse transcriptase A total of 100 sporadic colon cancer (SCC) patients and 100 unrelated subunit (hTERT) status in non small cell lung cancer using Real Time cancer-free controls were genotyped for -1082 SNP using real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) assay . PCR TaqMan® SNP genotyping assay . PCR-RFLP method was used RNA was extracted from 23 lung cancer, 23 adjacent normal lung for -819 and -592 SNPs . tissue specimens and theirs blood plasmas obtained from patients The most frequent IL-10 genotypes in both groups were medium who underwent surgery . hTERT mRNA expression was estimated by expressing genotypes ACC/GCC (30,0% in control and 29,9% in SCC) quantitative RT-PCR using LightCycler Instrument . and ATA/GCC (22,9% in control and 24,7% in SCC) . High producing Clinical and pathologic parameters were evaluated with respect to genotype GCC/GCC was detected in 17,1 % of controls, and 15,5% the level of telomerase activity . Prominent telomerase activity was of SCC samples . Low producing genotype ACC/ACC was more detected in 19 (82,6 %) lung cancer tissues and 4 (7,4 %) adjacent frequent in controls (20,0%) when compared to SCC (6,2%), and low non-neoplastic samples . In contrast, no telomerase activity was producing genotype ATA/ATA was more frequent in SCC (8,2%) when Cancer genetics 1 compared to the control where it was not detected at all . Combined Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Centre of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, genotype ACC/ATA was detected in 10,0% of control and 15,5% of Yerevan, Armenia. SCC samples . According to literature in 2-10% cases with chronic myeloid leukemia Our results indicate that some of the specific IL-10 genotypes might be (CML) chimerical gene BCR/ABL ensues on complex translocation, associated with sporadic colon cancer . involved together with chromosomes fragments 9q34 and 22q11 one and more other chromosomes . P0553. molecular and immunohistological properties of juvenile Here we report on a 20-year old man with chronic myeloid leukemia . polyps from SMAD and BMPR1A mutation carriers FISH analysis has shown a presence of ABL/BCR fusion gene in 100% M. Plasilova1, A. M. Russell1, J. Zhang1, N. Bösch1, S. T. Gokaslan2, R. Ash- nuclei . After course of therapy with Glivek (Imatinib mesylate) repeated faq2, H. Mueller1, K. Heinimann1; cytogenetic analysis has found t(2;9?;22). Chromosome 9 was apparently 1Research Group Human Genetics, Division of Medical Genetics UKBB, Center normal . Application of LSI ES BCR/ABL probe revealed fusion gene of Biomedicine DKBW, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2Department only in 44% nuclei . Using WCP for chromosomes 2 and 22 we detected of Pathology, UT Southwestern Medical School, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, two cell clones: 46,XY,der(2)t(2;22)(q11;q11)t(9;22)(q34;q12)[16]/ Dallas, TX, United States. 46,XY,t(2;22)(q11;q11)[17]. In the first clone presumably occurred Juvenile polyps are the most frequent type of colorectal polyps in two breakpoints on 22q11 and 22q12 . The fragment 22q11~22q12 children and adolescents . In general, these lesions are solitary and was transferred on der(2)(q11), and other segment 22q12->22qter have a low potential to become malignant . However, in patients - on der(9) . The terminal part of chromosome 9: 9q34->9qter was affected by the autosomal dominantly inherited juvenile polyposis detected on der(2) with formation of fusion gene BCR/ABL on der(2) . syndrome (JPS), multiple juvenile polyps are developed throughout the The complex translocation t(2;9;22) was previously found only in two gastrointestinal (GI) tract which if left untreated may cause bleeding, cases with CML . anemia and carry an elevated risk of developing GI cancer . Germline To the best of our knowledge the prognostic significance of 2q11 mutations in the SMAD4 or BMPR1A genes, the members of the segment is not yet described in the literature . Decrease of nuclei transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ)-receptor SMAD superfamily, number with BCR/ABL fusion gene after Glivek treatment has shown have been shown to cause disease in 35-50% of JPS patients . So far, that this variant translocation does not influence on sensitivity of the little data is available on the nature of the second, somatic mutation (eg . patient to the drug . loss of heterozygosity (LOH)) and oncogene activation in tumours from JPS patients with an identified germline mutation. Here we present P0556. complex chromosomal rearrangements of bone marrow the results of a molecular genetic survey on two juvenile polyposis cells in three patients with childhood leukemia kindreds harbouring pathogenic SMAD4 (1244-1247delACAG) and N. S. Lakic, A. Krstic, S. Cirkovic, M. Guc-Scekic, D. Micic, M. Kuzmanovic; BMPR1A (583C>T; G195X) germ line mutations, respectively. Twenty- Mother and Child Health Care Institute, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. four tumour specimens from mutation-positive family members were Until now, plenty of chromosomal aberrations have been described as assessed for the presence of LOH at the SMAD4, BMPR1A and APC a specific for the particular type of leukemia and they have important gene loci, the frequency of somatic mutations in the KRAS, BRAF and diagnostic and prognostic value . Cytogenetic analysis of bone marrow p53 genes as well as SMAD4 expression and tissue localisation . Based cells in leukemian patients may also, show nonspecific changes of on these findings, the different molecular genetic events and pathways chromosomes. Often, these nonspecific chromosomal aberrations involved in SMAD4 / BMPR1A tumourigenesis will be discussed . are part of complex karyotype which includes presence of multiple chromosomal aberrations in one bone marrow cell’s clone . P0554. Evaluation of genetic damage due to chemotherapy and In this report we present 3 children with different type of leukemia, radiotherapy in patients with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia by diagnosed and treated at Mother and Child Health Care Institute, micronuclei assay Belgrade . M. Taheri1,2, H. Mozdarani3, M. Izadyar4; First patient was a girl, 15 years old, with diagnosed AML morphology 1Zahedan University of Medical Science, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran, type M1 .Cytogenetic analysis of bone marrow cells shown complex 2National institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic karyotype: 46,XX,t(4;10)(q21;q24),del(11)(q23) Patient relapsed in Republic of Iran, 3Tarbiat Modarres University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, short period and after bone marrow transplantation died . 4Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Second child was a boy, ANLL was diagnosed at the age of 6 and two Leukemia is a heterogenous group of neoplastic disorder which cell’s clones were detected in karyotype of bone marrow cells: 46,XY,- derived from malignant transformation of hematopoietic progenitors . 18,del(18)(q21),add(5)(p15) [8] / 46,XY [14] . After short relapse, In most cases leukemia is associated with cytogenetics disorder . In patient died . addition cytogenetics disorders are induced by chemical and radiation Third patient is a girl with AML, M1 morphology type . The disease was which are used as therapeutically regimens . Micronuclei assay is one diagnosed when she was 4 years old . Cytogenetic analysis of bone of the sensitive methods in evaluation of genetic and chromosomal marrow cells revealed: 47,XX, i(7)(q11),t(10;11)(p14;q14),+19. Patient aberration . In the present study, genetic alteration due to radiotherapy achieved complete remission . and chemotherapy protocols in patients with Acute Lymphoblastic The authors will discus the progress and outcome of different type Leukemia (ALL) is evaluated by micronuclei assay techniques . of leukemia with previously mentioned complex chromosomal Total of 40 patients with ALL and 10 controls were used as sample rearrangements in bone marrow cells . subjects . According to treatment phases, patients were divided are into four groups as a without treatment, remission induction, consolidation P0557. investigation of MRP1 gene amplification in patients with and maintenance groups . Genetic alterations in these groups were acute leukemia evaluated by micronuclei assay techniques . M. Golalipour1, F. Mahjoubi1, K. Alimoghaddam2; The frequency of micronuclei observed for each group was significantly 1National centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, AND2) Hematol- higher than control group. Data also indicate that there were significant ogy, Oncology and BMT Research Center, Sharyattee Hospital, Tehran, Iran, differences in the frequency of micronuclei among four groups . Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 22) Hematology, Oncology and BMT Research The finding indicate that radiotherapy and chemotherapy in ALL patients Center, Sharyattee Hospital, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. mainly kills cells by induction of genetic loss(chromosomal aberration) . Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a complex phenomenon in which many observation of genetic loss in erytrocytic cells can be considered as a different genes regulating drug transport, cellular repair, detoxification significant side of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. and drug metabolism will activate . Nevertheless, up-regulation of multidrug resistance gene (MDR1) and multidrug associated protein P0555. A rare complex translocation in a case with cronic gene (MRP1) could be at the basis of the resistance phenotype in myeloid leukemia vivo. Increase in gene copy number and over-expression are two H. Mkrtchyan1, G. Avetisyan1, S. Ghazaryan2, L. Muradyan3, S. Daghbashyan3, major mechanisms for increasing the activity of these two genes . In R. Aroutiounian1; most drug resistant cell lines, gene amplification have been detected 1Yerevan State University, Yerevan, Armenia, 2German Cancer Research but the role of gene amplification in inducing MDR phenotype in clinic has not yet been known . We aimed to evaluate MRP1 gene copy Cancer genetics 0 number in leukemic patients by real time PCR . So mrp1 gene copy P0560. cytokine sNPs screening analyses in canine malignant number in peripheral blood of 30 patients and 10 healthy volunteers histiocytosis determined and compared with ß-actin copy number in each sample . J. T. Soller1,2, H. Murua Escobar2,1, M. Janssen1, I. Nolte2, J. Bullerdiek1; As standard we used leukemic CCRF-CEM cell line (drug sensitive) 1Centre for Human Genetics Bremen, Bremen, Germany, 2Small Animal Clinic, and its drug resistant subline E1000 . MRP1 gene copy number in Hanover, Germany. CCRF-CEM was shown to be normal but has been highly increased in Malignant histiocytosis is a tumour disease which is characterised by E1000. However no sign of gene amplification detected in healthy and increasing proliferation of macrophages and reinforced degradation of patients groups . Our results suggest that increase in MRP1 gene copy erythrocytes . High progression of this disease leads to an unfavourable number observed in resistant cell lines is not responsible for MRP1 prognosis for the patients most of them children up to the age of three up-regulation in vivo. years. Neoplastic histiocytes frequently infiltrate bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, liver and lung tissues . Histological and cytological P0558. suspected germline tP53 mutation mosaicism in a case findings proposed an important role of aberrant expression of cytokines of Li-Fraumeni syndrome in histiocytosis . Due to the fact that the Bernese Mountain Dogs K. Novotna1, K. Pavlikova1, D. Sumerauer2, V. Krutilkova1,3, A. Puchmajerova1, show a predisposition for a spontaneously development of malignant Z. Sedlacek1; histiocytosis these dogs could be used as a genetic model organism to 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University Second Medical dismantle the mechanisms of human malignant histiocytosis . School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department Therefore we screened the canine cytokine cDNA transcripts of TNFα, of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Charles University Second Medi- Interleukin-1-alpha (IL1A) and Interleukin-1-beta (IL1B) for single cal School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Gennet, nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) . Total RNA was isolated from Prague, Czech Republic. lung, spleen, testis, and skin tissues of nine different dogs (seven Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare hereditary predisposition to a Bernese Mountain dogs, one Collie and one Westhighland Terrier) . broad range of tumours . About 70% of LFS families carry germline We amplified and sequenced the corresponding cytokine cDNAs by TP53 mutations . We present a girl with clinical symptoms typical for RT-PCR, screened them for SNPs and analysed the effects caused on LFS (adrenocortical cancer at 1 year and osteosarcoma at 5 years the protein sequence . of age) but with no family history of cancer . A point C>T mutation in For TNFα one nucleotide insertion in exon 1 coding sequence of one exon 8 (Arg282Trp) was identified in DNA isolated from her blood Bernese Mountain Dog individual showed a frame shift mutation leading lymphocytes . However, the substitution was detected in neither of her to a truncated form of TNFα protein. Several Bernese Mountain Dogs parents indicating that the defect could be a de novo mutation . Careful and the West Highland Terrier showed SNPs in the coding sequences examination of the sequence data showed that the mutated allele which lead to missense mutations within the protein sequences of ILA might be present in a lower amount compared to the wildtype allele . and ILB . Repeated sequencing yielded reproducibly the same findings. We compared the sequencing results with a DGGE (Denaturing Gradient P0561. study of correlation of mRP1, and mDR1 Expression and Gel Electrophoresis) analysis with DNA from the patient, DNA from Function in iranian AmL Patients another patient with codon 281 mutation, and DNAs from two tumours M. Taheri1,2, F. Mahjoubi3, K. Ali-Moghaddam4; with somatic codon 282 mutations . The ratios between the alleles as 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,, Tehran, Islamic observed on DGGE correlated closely with the ratios from sequence Republic of Iran, 2Zahedan University of Medical science, Zahedan, Islamic curves . This led us to the notion that this patient could be a mosaic of Republic of Iran, 3National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, normal and heterozygous cells, and prompted us to examine the allele Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Hematology - Oncology and BMT Research ratio in other non-invasively sampled tissues . The results obtained Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. from urine sediment looked similar to that from blood . On the contrary, A major problem in treating patients with cancer by chemotherapeutic in buccal cells both alleles seemed to be present in equal amounts . To regimes is that their tumors often develop a multidrug resistant (MDR) our knowledge this is a first description of suspected somatic mosaicism phenotype and subsequently become insensitive to a wide range of in LFS . Supported by grants MSM0021620813 and MZO00064203 . chemotoxic drugs . Multidrug resistance can result from changes that limit accumulation P0559. Data of NscLc gene expression pilot study of drugs within cells by limiting uptake, enhancing efflux, or affecting K. Välk1, T. Vooder2, C. Petzold1,3, A. Metspalu1; membrane lipids such as ceramide . 1University of Tartu, IMCB/Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 2Clinic of Car- ABC (ATP-binding cassette) transporters are a family of transmembrane diovascular and Thoracic Surgery of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, proteins that can transport a wide variety of substrates across biological 3University of Applied Sciences, Department of Biotechnology, Senftenberg, membranes in an energy dependent manner . Their overexpression is Germany. associated with increased efflux of chemotherapeutic drugs. Cancer is worldwide problem and lung cancer is one of the frequent The MDR1 gene is located on chromosome 7q21 .12 ,encodes for ones causing ca 1 million deaths every year . Although early stage P-gp . P-gp transports many hydrophobic substrates and anti-cancer lung cancer is in most cases surgically curable, about 80% of lung drugs including etoposide, doxorubicin and vinblastine . cancer cases due to tumour spread or distant metastases need either The MRP1 (ABCC1) gene is located on chromosome 16p13 .12 . MRP1 radiotherapy, adjuvant or neoadjuvant polychemotherapy . Despite can mediate the transport of negatively charged conjugated hydrophilic of certain success achieved in the field of combined therapy, the compounds with a large hydrophobic moiety such as glutathione S-, prolonged use of it is limited by developing resistance to drugs and glucuronide, and sulfate conjugates of drugs . It can extrude neutral side effects of this treatment . and basic organic compounds if the cell contains normal levels of In everyday lung cancer diagnostics histological classification is used. GSH, probably by co-transport of the drug with GSH . Accordingly, lung cancer is divided to small cell lung carcinoma (20% of In a preliminary study using RT- real time PCR we found corelationship all lung cancers) and non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC, 80% of all between increase MRP1 expression level and resistance to treatment lung cancers) including three main groups: squamous cell carcinoma among patients with AML . Now we aim to detect and measure the (20-35%), giant cell carcinoma (4 .5-15%) and adenocarcinoma (30- MRP1 protein in this group of AML patients . 50%) . Despite of lung cancer histological subgroup diagnostics, the Furthermore, we want to investigate the possible role of other reported clinical course of the same stage patients is quite different . This fact gene such as MDR1 among AML patients with MDR phenotype for suggests that histological form of cancer is not sufficient predictor of whom high level of MRP1 expression could not be detected . clinical course of the disease .In the current study we have used cDNA microarrays with 46 .000 features to monitor gene expression patterns P0562. mYBL2, ZNF217, cYP24 and stK6 gene amplifications of different NSCLC samples in hope to find differentially expressed are rare events in melanoma tumorigenesis genes that would help us to discriminate different NSCLC types and D. K. Koynova1, E. Jordanova2, N. Gruis3, A. Milev4, K. Kirov5, D. Toncheva1; eventually predict the survival and clinical course of the patients . 1Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Pathology, Leiden Univer- sity Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Department of Dermatology, Cancer genetics 1 Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Department of and methyl groups have been implicated with risk of colorectal Pathology, National Center of Oncology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Department of Der- cancer . 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) plays matology, National Center of Oncology, Sofia, Bulgaria. a central role in folate metabolism, irreversibly converting 5,10- Comparative genomic hybridization on paired primary and metastatic methylenetetrahydrofolate to 5-methylenetetrahydrofolate, which is a melanoma identified a relation between chromosome 20q abnormalities vital source of methyl groups for DNA methylation . A C ->T polymorphism and melanoma progression . The purpose of this study is to determine at nt .677 in egzon 4 of the MTHRF gene was described which results the frequency of gene copy number changes on chromosome 20q and in enzyme variant with reduced activity of 30% in heterozygotes and to evaluate their significance for melanoma progression. up to 70% in homozygotes . We evaluated the relation between this Fluorescent in situ hybridization with four BAC clones corresponding polymorphisms and risk of colorectal cancer in a case-control study to MYBL2, ZNF217, CYP24 and STK6 genes (located at chromosomal involving 115 patients with colorectal cancer and 111 controls from region 20q13 .1-q13 .2) was applied on tissue microarray, consisting of the Republic of Macedonia . Genotypes were obtained by PCR-RFLP 280 primary melanomas and melanoma metastases . A BAC probe analysis on DNA samples isolated from peripheral blood . Risk of corresponding to centromere 20 was used as a control . colorectal cancer was estimated with conditional and unconditional The study showed low level of amplification ranging from 1.17% logistic regression . Relative risk estimates were similar between patients to 2 .03% . The frequency of gain varies between 5 .41-7 .63% and and controls irrespective of the sex, age, Dukes stage, family history involves single gene or more genes per sample. Amplification occurs or type of genetic instability (MSI or CIN) of tumors of the patients . in two subamplicons, since coamplification between ZNF217, CYP24 Higher frequency of T-allele was found only in patients with tumors in and STK6, separately from MYBL2 gene changes was assessed . the upper colon ( 0 .54 vs . 0 .34, p=0 .05, 95% CI: 0 .9872<R .R .<3 .9778) Additional copies of centromere 20 were detected in 28 .34% . A resulting in ~3 fold reduction of the relative risk for this type of colon significant difference was observed between primary tumors and cancer in homozygotes . The protective role of MTHFR 677Tallele with metastases regarding the frequency of aneuploidy of chromosome 20 low potential for DNA methylation for the development of rightsided (p=0 .05) . The more progressed the tumor was, the higher an increase colorectal tumors is a new observation which should be confirmed in a in centromere copy number was detected . larger cohort of patients with different ethnic background . In conclusion, aneuploidy of chromosome 20, rather than gene specific copy number changes of MYBL2, ZNF217, CYP24 and STK6 is the P0565. Germline mutation of both copies of the MLH1 gene mechanism involved in melanoma progression . could play an important role in the early-onset of cRc I. Marcos1, S. Borrego1, M. Urioste2, C. García-Vallés3, G. Antiñolo1; P0563. methyl Primer Express® Software and influence of 1Unidad Clínica de Genética y Reproducción. HHUU Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, amplicon characteristics to successrate in sequencing of Spain, 2Departamento de Genética Humana. Centro Nacional de Investigacio- bisulfite treated DNA nes Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 3Servicio de Cirugía Pediátrica. HHUU B. Finkelnburg1, A. Rico2, A. A. Pradhan3, M. F. Fraga4, C. Ferrero4, M. Es- Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain. teller4; Objectives: Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) is an 1Applera Deutschland GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany, 2Applera France S.A., autosomal dominant inherited disorder that is characterized primarily Courtaboeuf Cedex, France, 3Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United by the development of colorectal cancer (CRC) . CRC in adolescent States, 4Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, Spanish National Cancer Centre patients is extremely rare even in families with HNPCC . Those cancers (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. require particular attention because the survival rate for this young A well known method to study methylation patterns is to treat gDNA group of patients is poor . Here, we describe a family with HNPCC and by sodium bisulfite to distinguish methylated cytosine (5mC) from two germline mutations in MLH1 gene and very early onset colorectal unmethylated C, which is deaminated to uracil (U) and replaced by cancer in the proband (12 years old) . Our observations suggest that thymine (T) in subsequent amplification. 5mC still remains as C. the germline mutation of the both copies of the MLH1 gene could play Subsequent amplification can focus on selective amplification of a important role in the early-onset of CRC . methylation patterns in CpG islands (methyation specific PCR, MSP) Study design: Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood or on amplification of bisulfite treated (converted) gDNA (Bisulfite lymphocytes from the proband and 8 members of the HNPCC family treatment specific PCR, BIS). Selection of PCR focus is done by primer and sequenced for MLH1 and MSH2 genes . DNA obtained from design . After PCR, sequencing can clarify the methylation pattern but proband´s sigmoid tumour specimen was analyzed for high frequency several factors must be taken into account to ensure reliable data . microsatellite instability (MSI) . During the bisulfite treatment base composition will undergo dramatical Results: Two germline MLH1 gene mutations have been identified. One changes . This must be taken under consideration during primer and located in the exon 8 of MLH1 gene, R226X, and other change located amplicon design for the initial amplification. Dependend on the base in the exon 19 of MLH1 gene, V716M . Proband’s tumor demonstrated composition of the target region the design may change the originally MSI at each loci tested, defining the tumor as having high-frequency focused strategy for sequencing . MSI . In first instance, strategy is depending on preferred outcome: Conclusions: In this patient, V716M mutation in addition to R226X 1 . More or less methylated? / Which CpG in target region is differentially may lead to inactivation of both copies of the MLH1 gene allowing methylated? > Direct sequencing of PCR products . earlier accumulation of mutations in microsatellites and other repetitive 2 . Semi-quantitative results > Cloning of PCR products and sequencing sequences, generating MSI and initiating the tumorigenic process . of multiple clones . Supported by Fondo de Investigaciones Sanitarias (PI051291 and In a second instance, the base composition of the amplicon itself will Red de Centros INERGEN C03/05) lead to the conclusion, whether direct sequencing of PCR products can be done or not . P0566. Evaluation of 11q23 rearrangements in turkish ALL and Here we use a new PC Software called “Methyl Primer Express®” AmL patients by FisH to design BIS oligos on different promotor-target regions to show S. Yakut1, S. Berker Karauzum1, Z. Cetin1, G. Tezcan2, A. Kupesiz2, V. Hazar2, examples for critical amplicons and recommendations for successful A. Yesilipek2, I. Karadogan3, L. Undar3, G. Luleci1; amplification and sequencing. 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department P0564. methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase c677t of Pediatric Haematology and Oncology, Antalya, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University, polymorphism and colorectal cancer risk in Republic of Faculty of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Anta- macedonia lya, Turkey. Z. Sterjev1,1, A. Kapedanovska1, Z. Serafimovska1, T. Josifovski2, M. Panovski2, Structural abnormality of 11q23, including the MLL gene, is a recurrent L. .Suturkova1, A. J. Dimovski1; chromosome change observed in 3-7% of acute lymphoblastic 1Faculty of pharmacy, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, leukemias (ALL) and in 3-4% of acute myeloblastic leukemias (AML) . 2Clinic for Abdominal Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, The former Yugo- Although over 30 variant translocations are known to be related to MLL slav Republic of Macedonia. translocation, the most common abnormalities are t(4;11)(q21;q23), Polymorphisms in genes involved in the metabolism of folate Cancer genetics  t(9;11)(p22;q23), t(11;19)(q23;p13) and t(6;11)(q27;q23). Also deletion Certain MMR gene mutations predispose to combined occurrence of 11q23 region is a rare chromosomal abnormality that can be seen of sebaceous gland neoplasms and visceral malignancies . This is in ALL cases . To reveal the 11q23/MLL translocation, we analyzed known as Muir-Torre syndrome (MTS), and regarded as a phenotypic 52 patients with ALL( 45 pediatric) and AML ( 4 pediatric, 3 adult) variant of HNPCC . using both conventional cytogenetic (CC) analysis and FISH by using The sebaceous tumors associated with MTS appear in many patients LSI MLL Dual Color, Break Apart Rearrangement probe, placing an before visceral malignancies, providing important predictability of emphasis on the result discrepancies . Six of the 45 pediatric ALL HNPCC-related cancers in mutation carriers . However, molecular patients (13,3%) and 4 AML (2 pediatric, 2 adult) patients had the assessment needs to be carried out to verify the presence of 11q23/MLL translocation, while monosomy 11 was observed in 1 the syndrome . Contribution of non-truncating mutations found in ALL patient, and multiple copies of MLL gene was revealed in 1 AML skin cancer patients is difficult to interpret and therefore, genetic patient and 1 ALL patient . 11q23 rearrangement was detected only in assessment of MTS requires a functional test . 8 of the 13 patients by FISH. t(4;11) and t(6;11) translocations were Here, we studied the repair efficiency of the two MSH2 missense detected by both metaphase, FISH and CC analysis in AML patients . mutations, L187P and C697F, found in HNPCC families including Also in 5 patients, chromosomal abnormalities other than 11q23/MLL mutation carriers with sebaceous skin tumors . We assessed their translocation, was restricted to CC analysis only . Two ALL cases and capability to correct DNA mispairs with a functional mismatch repair two AML patients with 11q23/MLL translocation died, the other cases assay. Both mutations were deficient in the assay, which together with MLL gene rearrangement are being followed up . As a result, with tumor findings, high MSI and loss of MSH2 protein expression, we recommend that 11q23/MLL FISH should be performed in the suggested their predisposing role in both internal and skin malignancies diagnosis and monitoring of ALL and AML in combination with CC . in the families . The functional testing of the two missense mutations in MSH2 P0567. molecular mechanisms of multidrug resistance in cancer supports the notion that Muir-Torre subphenotype of HNPCC is chemotherapy: Clinical significance of MRP1 gene In Iranian associated with severe functional defects in the repair capability of Leukemic pateints the mutated proteins, which is compatible with a phenotype fulfilling M. Golalipour1, F. Mahjoubi1, H. Ghafaree2, K. Alimoghaddam2; the Amsterdam criteria in the families . 1National centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 22) Hematology, Oncology and BMT Research Center, Shary- P0569. characterisation of a new variant of the MSH gene attee Hospital, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. (c.1022t>c - p.Leu341Pro) in 9 HNPcc families of North of Multidrug resistance (MDR) is one of the main obstacles in treatment France of cancer patients . Therefore it has been studied for half a century S. Lejeune1, A. Wacrenier2, F. Escande3, C. Fantini1, M. Delescaut3, N. Por- now, ever since cytotoxic drugs were first used for cancer therapy. chet3, S. Manouvrier1, M. Buisine3; So far, about three separate forms of MDR have been characterized 1Service de Génétique Clinique, CHRU Lille, France, 2Laboratoire d’Anatomie in more detail: classical MDR, non-Pgp MDR and atypical MDR . Pathologie, CHRU Lille, France, 3laboratoire de Biochimie - Biologie Molécu- The classical MDR drug pump is composed of a transmembrane laire, CHRU Lille, France. glycoprotein (P-glyco-protein-Pgp) encoded by the so-called Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) accounts for multidrug resistance (MDR1) gene . Typically, non-Pgp MDR has no ~2% of all colorectal cancer (CRC) cases . Studies at the PAFNORD P-gly-coprotein expression, yet has about the same cross-resistance registry (regional multidisciplinary center of North of France) have pattern as classical MDR . This non-Pgp MDR phenotype is caused revealed a unique germline MSH2 c .1022T>C-p .Leu341Pro missense by over-expression of the multidrug resistance-associated protein mutation that has never been reported . Detailed analyses showed (MRP1) gene . that this specific mutation constituted ~20% of all germline MMR gene To the best of our knowledge (although one of the main obstacles in mutations identified in PAFNORD registry. chemotherapy success rate) no one systematically investigated the The objectives of this study were : i) to determine if the c .1022T>C is role of MRP1 gene in inducing MDR phenotype in Iranian leukemic the disease causing mutation and not a clinically silent mutation ; ii) to patients . By employing chromosome microdissection we shown that characterise the founder effect . increased in gene copy number and also over-expression of MRP1 Complete analysis of MSH2, MLH1 and MSH6 did not reveal gene are involved in drug resistance in a drug resistance leukemia cell other pathogenic mutations. The c.1022T>C variant was identified line. In addition, we have used fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) in 7 .1% of HNPCC families in PAFNORD registry and was not and Real-Time PCR technology to study the association between identified in 103 healthy controls. All colorectal cancer tested showed MRP1 and MDR phenotype in Iranian AML patients . So far we found microsatellite instability (4/4) and absence of MSH2 protein (3/3), by that over-expression of MRP1 occurs in about 20% of the Iranian AML immunohistochemical analysis . The variant is located in a conserved patients . We are aiming to further investigate whether or not elevated domain of MSH2 important for structure of the protein . The c .1022T>C MRP expression in Iranian patients at diagnosis is an unfavorable variant segregates with the HNPCC phenotype in 17 patients (lod- prognostic factor for clinical outcome of chemotherapy . scores are being performed) . Thi allele was identified in 9 apparently unrelated families. All originated P0568. the importance of functional testing in the genetic from the french region of Lille in North of France . Haplotypes are being assessment of muir-torre syndrome, a clinical subphenotype of performed using microsatellite markers flanking the MSH2 gene in HNPcc order to characterise this variant as a founder mutation in North of S. Ollila1, L. Sarantaus1, R. Kariola1, I. Ambus2, L. Velsher2, E. Hsieh3, M. Klar- France . skov Andersen4, T. E. Raevaara1, A. Gerdes4, E. Mangold4, P. Peltomäki5, H. T. All these results support the hypothesis that the c .1022T>C variant Lynch6, M. Nystrom1; is the disease causing mutation and encourage us to use it in 1Departmet of biological and environmental sciences, division of genetics, presymptomatic screening, even if functionnal assay has not been University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Genetics Program, North York Gen- performed . eral Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Department of Anatomic Pathology, Sun- nybrook & Women’s College Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada, P0570. the prevalence of a germline MSH6 mutation is very low 4Clinical Genetics Department of KKA, Odense University Hospital, Odense, in patients without microsatellite instability in their tumour Denmark, 5Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, C. M. Kets, S. J. Wezenberg, M. Goossens, K. M. Hebeda, J. H. J. M. van Finland, 6Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Creighton Krieken, N. Hoogerbrugge, M. J. L. Ligtenberg; University School of Medicine, Omaha, NE, United States. Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. A majority of families with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer introduction: Germline mutations in the MSH6 mismatch repair (HNPCC) are attributable to germline mutations in DNA mismatch gene account for a minor part of Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal repair (MMR) genes . However, the clinical phenotype of HNPCC Cancer syndrome (HNPCC) . Failure of the DNA mismatch repair patients reflects a complex interplay between the predisposing system causes high level microsatellite instability (MSI-high) in mutation and putative constitutional and somatic modifiers. tumours of HNPCC patients and MSI analysis is often used to start Cancer genetics  HNPCC diagnosis . The sensitivity of MSI analysis to detect MSH6 was performed in 28 patients, while 2 patients rejected any therapy . mutations is questioned . Use of genetic assay allows earlier and more definite identification and methods: To investigate the role of MSH6 mutations in a cohort of clinical management of those with a familial risk of medullary thyroid HNPCC suspected patients without microsatellite instability in their cancer in comparison to the standard monitoring used previously . tumour DNA, we performed immunohistochemical staining of the MSH6 protein in these tumours and analyzed the MSH6 gene in P0573. Evaluation of 13q14 deletions by interphase FisH in patients most suspected of HNPCC . multiple myeloma and chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Patients Results: All 380 tumours that were not MSI-high showed presence Z. Cetin1, S. Berker Karauzum1, S. Yakut1, L. Undar2, I. Karadogan2, A. Timu- of the MSH6 protein . In 90 patients, from this group of 380 patients, ragaoglu2, K. Temizkan2, G. Luleci1; MSH6 germline mutation analysis was performed, and no pathogenic 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and mutation in MSH6 was detected. Pathogenic MSH6 mutations were Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department exclusively found in patients with MSI-high tumours with loss of MSH6 of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Antalya, Turkey. expression (n=9) and in 2 patients in which MSI analysis was not Multiple Myeloma (MM) and Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) performed . are two of the most common hematological malignancies in adults conclusion: Presence of MSI-high in tumour DNA is reliable to select originating from B-lymphocytes . 13q14 deletions/monosomy 13 have patients for MSH6 germline mutation analysis . The prevalence of a been observed with a frequency of 40-60% and 34% in CLL and MM germline MSH6 mutation is very low in patients with tumours that are respectively . Deletions at 13q14 are associated with unfavorable not MSI-high . prognosis in patients with MM whereas associated with favorable outcome in CLL cases . We evaluated 13q14 deletions in 19 MM P0571. msH6 gene analysis in patients with Lynch syndrome and in 5 CLL cases at diagnosis by interphase FISH combined K. Pavlíková1, L. Foretová2, A. Křepelová1; with conventional cytogenetics (CC) as both diseases have a low 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics University Hospital Motol and 2nd proliferative rate making CC analysis difficult. CC studies revealed School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk informative karyotypes in 14 of the 19 MM cases (73 .7%) . Chromosomal Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic. abnormalities were detected in 7 of 19 MM cases (36 .8%) including Lynch syndrome (hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer) is a three cases with monosomy 13 associated with complex karyotypes cancer susceptibility syndrome with autosomal dominant inheritance by CC . 13q14 deletions were detected by FISH in 5 of the MM cases and high penetrance . It is caused by germline mutations in mismatch- (26 .3%) . These deletions presented as monoallelic 13q14 .3 deletion repair genes, predominantly MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 . MSH6 in one and monosomy 13 in 4 MM cases . In this study in addition to mutations account for about 7% of all germline mutations in mismatch- the CC, application of FISH studies for 13q14 deletion was increased repair genes . the number of the cases with chromosomal abnormality up to 47 .3% in We screened for MSH6 gene defects in 59 patients with high MM . We could not obtain informative karyotypes from CLL cases . while predisposition to cancer and without MSH2 or MLH1 mutations . Fifteen 13q14 deletions were obseved in 4 of the CLL (80%) cases by FISH of these patients fulfilled the Amsterdam criteria. We used PCR- analysis . Deletion was monoallelic in three CLL cases, and biallelic based DGGE and sequencing to detect point mutations and MLPA in the fourth case . Our preliminary results show that interphase FISH (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification) to detect genomic application in conduction with CC studies increase the chromosomal rearrangements of the MSH6 gene . abnormality detection rates both in MM and CLL cases . We detected 14 different variants . Two of them were clearly pathogenic - Ser601Stop and c .1135_1139delAGAGA . Four were intronic P0574. New genetic variants of the MYH gene in APC mutation- substitutions, five synonymous substitutions and three were missense negative patients from Galicia (NW spain) variants . One of the latter, Arg1076Cys has not been published yet . It C. Ruiz-Ponte, N. Gómez-Fernández, A. Vega, A. Carracedo; is located in a conserved domain of the MUTS proteins and causes a Grupo de Medicina Xenómica USC, FPGMX-SERGAS, Santiago de Compos- non-conservative amino acid substitution . We found this variant in one tela, Spain. from 110 population-based controls . The same result was obtained Germline mutations in the base-excision-repair gene, MYH, have been with the Val878Ala variant, which had been considered as possibly associated with recesive inheritance of multiple colorectal adenomas pathogenic . and cancer . In contrast, germline mutations in the APC gene have been We did not detect any rearrangements of the MSH6 gene in any of the shown to cause the dominant inherited colorectal cancer syndromes of 59 patients . classical familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and attenuated familial We can conclude that the frequency of MSH6 mutations in our series adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) . is lower than expected and the pathogenicity of some variants is not Thirty-one unrelated APC mutation-negative Galician patients with clear . either classical (>100 colorectal adenomas) or attenuated (<100 Supported by grants GA UK CR 58/2005 and IGA MZ CR NR/8294-3 . colorectal adenomas) polyposis were screened for germline mutations in MYH . Direct DNA sequencing of the entire coding region and the P0572. molecular diagnostics of multiple endocrine neoplasia adjacent intronic sequences of MYH was performed . type 2 (mEN ii) in slovenia Three (9 .7%) biallelic and three (9 .7%) monoallelic MYH germline D. Glavac1, B. Korosec1, D. Bergant2, M. Ravnik-Glavac1; mutations carriers were identified in five AFAP and one FAP families. 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Medical faculty, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Insti- The two most frequent germline mutations (p .Y165C and p .G382D) tute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. were observed . In contrast to other populations where the frequency Genetic testing for the RET-protooncogene germline mutation showed of these two mutations is quite similar, G382D was the most common almost 100% sensitivity and specificity for identifying those at risk of mutation in galician patients (56% vs 11%) . A novel mutation p .Q388X developing inherited medullary thyroid cancer (multiple endocrine (c .1162 C>T) and other new variants in either exonic or intronic neoplasia (MEN) 2A, MEN 2B, or familial medullary thyroid carcinoma sequences were described (GenBank reference sequence NM_ (FMTC) . Presymptomatic detection of mutations and prophylactic 012222 .1) . surgical intervention are now the accepted standard of care . In 1996 Monoallelic MYH mutation carriers may be at an increased risk for we introduced a proposal for genetic screening of Slovenian patients developing colorectal cancer . However further studies are required to with the hereditary form of MTC, and their relatives . Consequently, establish a correlation of monoallelic mutations with the disease . we have to date identified by genetic analysis 30 carriers of the RET protooncogene mutation among 145 Slovenian MTC patients and their relatives; 15 with codon 634, 9 with codon 618, 5 with codon 790 and one with codon 918 mutation of the RET oncogene, respectively . Genotype - phenotype correlation revealed MEN 2A in 15 patients, FMT in 14 patients and the MEN 2B phenotype in one patient, respectively . The standard treatment was total thyroidectomy, which Cancer genetics  P0575. mutation analysis of the MYH gene in Unrelated czech expression is associated with elevated Ras activity and increased cell APc mutation-negative polyposis patients proliferation, predisposing to a variety of tumors of the peripheral and M. Šulová1, K. Zídková1, Z. Kleibl2, J. Štekrová1, V. Kebrdlová1, M. Kohoutová1; central nervous systems . We have developed the protocol for direct and 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine and indirect NF1 DNA-diagnostics . The presence in the genome of several General Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Insti- unprocessed NF1 pseudogenes severely hampers mutation analysis tute of Biochemistry and Experimental Oncology, the First Faculty of Medicine, of this gene. To overcome these difficulties, we have designed new Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. specific primers for exons 10a, 10b, 11, 19b, 21, 24 and 42. Moreover, In 20-30% of patients with classical familial adenomatous polyposis we have included additional marker ACint27b in a panel of intragenic (FAP) and up to 90% of those with attenuated polyposis (<100 microsatellite markers (TCCAint1, D17S1849, TAGA/TAGGint27a and colorectal adenomas; AFAP), no pathogenic germline mutation in the GTint38) that has increased indirect NF1 DNA-diagnostics efficiency. adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene can be identified. Some of the DNA samples from 60 unrelated NF1 patients were screened for the APC negative FAP and AFAP cases have recently been found to be presence of mutations by SSCP, HD and microsatellite analysis; all attributable to MYH associated polyposis (MAP) . MAP is an autosomal mobility shifts were sequenced . Eighteen mutations have been found recessive syndrome associated with 5-100 colorectal adenomas and sixteen of them were described for the first time. The mutational and caused by mutation in the MYH gene . The MYH protein plays screening has revealed the presence of small deletions and small an important role in the base-excision-repair system as an adenine- insertions (65%), missense and nonsense mutations (14%), splice specific DNA glycosylase. site mutations (16%) and large deletions (5%) . These results show We screened for germline MYH mutations in 90 APC-mutation- reduction in splice site mutations frequency in comparison with negative probands with classical and attenuated familial adenomatous other data (25%). This may indicate insufficiency of our methods for polyposis . The entire coding region and intron-exon borders of the identification of splicing defects that induces us to develop a mutations MYH gene were analyzed . As a prescreening to detect DNA sequence search technique at a cDNA level in future . changes, denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC) was performed using the WAVE nucleic acid fragment analysis system P0578. Expression profiling of Neuromedin U and its receptors (Transgenomic). Samples showing unique profiles were sequenced in cancer cell lines in both directions on ABI Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer (Applied J. C. Tracey1, A. Falchi1, V. Hayes1, S. McClean1, R. L. Darley2, A. J. Bjourson1; Biosystems) . 1University of Ulster, Coleraine, United Kingdom, 2University of Wales, College In majority of patients multiple genetic changes in MYH gene were of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom. found . Altogether 10 previously reported changes and 8 novel genetic Neuromedin U (NMU) is a regulatory peptide known to act via two alterations, mostly in intronic sequences were identified. We have G-protein coupled receptors: NMUR1 and NMUR2 . A recent study detected compound heterozygotes for two the most common germline revealed NMU may be involved in an autocrine growth loop in acute mutations c.494A>G (p.Y165C); c.1145G>A (p.G382D) too. These myeloid leukaemia (AML) . Epigenetic silencing of the NMU promoter variants are established to be associated with adenomatous polyposis occurs in head, neck and esophageal squamous cell carcinomas . and colorectal cancer . NMU has also been shown to significantly reduce cellular proliferation, Supported by the grant project IGA MZ CR NR8103-3/2004 indicating tumour suppressing activity . Expression analyses of the NMU receptors and ligand were carried out on a panel of human cancer P0576. Expression of putative NF1 modifying genes in cell lines derived from a range of tissues (prostate, breast, bladder, neurofibromas colon, AML) . Expression analyses revealed one of the following B. Bartelt-Kirbach, M. Wüpping, D. Kaufmann; patterns: expression of the ligand and both receptors, expression of Department of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany. the ligand and one of the receptors, expression of one or both the Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common autosomal receptors but not the ligand . Those cell lines lacking NMU expression dominantly inherited tumor diseases . Typical hallmark symptoms are were examined for promoter hypermethylation. Twelve out of fifteen multiple neurofibromas, hyperpigmented areas of the skin (café au cell lines examined expressed the NMU ligand and one or both of its lait spots) and Lisch nodules . As the symptoms of NF1 show a high receptors . RT112 (bladder), CACO-2 (colon) and P39 (AML) cell lines interfamilial variability, the existence of modifying genes has long been showed little or no expression of the ligand. Bisulphite modification and proposed . NF1 patients with microdeletions spanning the NF1 and DNA sequence analysis revealed methylation of the NMU promoter several surrounding genes with yet unknown function have an earlier in each . 5’Aza dC inhibition of methylation in the P39 cells restored onset of neurofibromas and a higher tumor load as classical NF1 NMU expression . The data indicates that NMU may be involved in an patients . Therefore, it seems likely that one of the genes additionally autocrine growth loop via NMUR1/NMUR2 in cancer types other than missing in these patients contributes to the severity of the disease . AML . Lack of NMU expression is due to promoter methylation in the On the other hand, two variants of classical NF1 exist where patients cell lines examined . present with markedly fewer or no neurofibromas. Familial Spinal NF (FSNF) is characterised by the presence of spinal neurofibromas with P0579. A novel mutation in Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) a wide and symmetric distribution . Patients with this disease generally S. Bendova1, T. Marikova1, A. Krepelova1, B. Petrak2; lack dermal neurofibromas. Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - 2nd Medical (NFNS) is a variant showing phenotypic overlap with Noonan School, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Child Neurology, Charles syndrome (including short stature, facial anomalies and webbed neck) . University - 2nd Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic. It was recently shown to be caused by mutations in the NF1 but not Neurofibromatosis type 1 is one of the most autosomal dominant the PTPN11 gene which is responsible for plain Noonan syndrome . common diseases with an incidience 1:3000 in all ethnic groups . It is We are planning a detailed investigation of the 14 genes surrounding a multisystem disorder with the variable clinical features as café au the NF1 gene in patients with FSNF or NFNS compared to patients lait spots, Lisch nodules, multiple freckling, neurofibromas or plexiform with classical NF1 . We will present data on the expression of these 14 neurofibromas, optical gliomas, distinct osseous lesions and learning genes in neurofibromas and control tissues. disabilities. Other clinical findings associated with NF1 are high-signal intensity foci on the T2 weighted MR images of the brain . These areas P0577. New approaches to DNA-diagnostics of are going to be observed on MRI and data presented . neurofibromatosis type 1 in Russian Federation. Various somatic and germinal mutations in tumor-suppressor NF1 O. Drozd1,2, O. Babenko1,2, M. Nemtsova1,2, D. Zaletayev1,2; gene are causes of the Neurofibromatosis type 1 disease, more than 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. 650 different mutations have been found up to this time . Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. The family with three clinical affected members have been examined by Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant disorder molecular genetic methods . We have used PCR and DHPLC methods with high index of spontaneous mutations and extremely varied clinical for detection of small insertions, deletions, indels and nucleotide manifestations . The disease is caused by mutations in the tumor substitutions. The positive results were confirmed by sequencing suppressor gene NF1. Loss of NF1 gene product (neurofibromin) analysis . The novel mutation c .1_2delATinsCC has been found at all Cancer genetics  family members in the start codon NF1 gene . P0582. Analysis of BRcA1 and BRcA2 genes among unselected Mutation probably prevents the start of transcription and causes ovarian cancer cases in Russia. haploinsufficiency. It consequently leads to the deficit of Neurofibromin T. Y. Smirnova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, L. N. Lyubchenko2, R. F. Garkavtseva2, E. protein and to rare phenotype manifestations . K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; Supported by: 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2N.N. IGA MZ CR c . NR 7926-3 Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. AV-CR-1ET 101210513 Hereditary ovarian cancer in many cases is connected with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations . P0580. common DNA polymorphisms in thrombophilia-related We found the BRCA1 mutations in 86% families with ovarian cancer genes predispose for oral cancer only . This frequency was similar to the mutations occurrence among C. N. Yapijakis1, E. Vairaktaris1, Z. Serefoglou1, A. Vylliotis1, E. Nkenke2, P. families with ovarian cancer that included breast cancer also (61%) . Kessler2, F. W. Neukam2; High incidence of the mutations among familial ovarian cancer 1University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, 2University of Erlangen stimulated us to investigate BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations on a sample Medical School, Nurnberg, Germany. of 53 unselected cases of ovarian cancer at first on Russian sample. Although traditionally oral cancer was thought to be triggered mainly The BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations have 11 women (21%), including 9 by environmental factors (tobacco or/and alcohol), recently some BRCA1 mutations (17%) and 2 BRCA2 missense mutations (4%) . In reports have implicated thrombosis-related factors in its development . BRCA1 spectrum the more frequent was 5382insC mutation (60%) . Therefore, we investigated whether DNA polymorphisms affecting The three other mutations were C61G, 2080delA and 4154delA . The gene expression and activity of thrombophilia-related factors, analysis of family history characteristics is performing at the present are associated with oral oncogenesis . We studied DNA samples time . isolated from leukocytes of 176 patients with oral cancer and 120 Single nucleotide polymorphisms E1038G of the BRCA1, N372H and healthy controls of matched sex,age and ethnicity . The prevalence located in the 5’-untranslated region variant 203G/A of the BRCA2 were of 8 polymorphisms was analyzed in the groups of patients and investigated among patients without mutations and in control sample controls by allele-specific PCR or RFLP methodologies: FV Leiden, of 109 women. Significant association of 203AA homozygous variant prothrombin(PT) G20210A,MTHFR C677T,PAI-1 4G/5G,GPIa C with ovarian cancer occurrence was revealed (OR=7.3; P=0.004). This 807/ T ,IL-1β C3953T,TNF-α -G308A, and TNF-β G252A . The observed variant may be considered as a marker of ovarian cancer . 807 allele and genotype frequencies of PT and TNF-β were not statistically different between the groups of patients and controls . There was a P0583. Analysis of loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 17 in significant increase of MTHFR,IL-1β and GPIa heterozygotes in the ovarian carcinomas subgroups of patients without family history of cancer and with a B. O. Petrovic1,2, I. Novakovic3, M. Perovic1, S. Petkovic1, B. Popovic4, L. Lu- positive family history for thrombophilia (p<0 .01,p<0 .02 and p<0 .001 kovic3; respectively) . The 4G and -G308A alleles, which increase expression 1Institute for Gynecology and Obstetrics, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, of PAI-1 and TNF-α genes respectively, were significantly increased 2Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 3Institute for Biol- in all subgroups of patients in comparison to controls (p<0 .001) . In ogy and Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 4School of Sto- view of these results, a greater than previously thought percentage matology, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. of individuals in the general population(15-40%) may have a major or Ovarian carcinoma is the leading cause of death from gynecological minor predisposition for oral cancer, and may be at risk with or without malignancies and one of the most common hereditary cancers among the involvement of environmental factors (Vairaktaris et al .Anticancer female . Specimens from 5 benign tumors, 1 chronical absces, 1 Res 2005;J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2006;Oral Oncol 2006;Eur J Surg ovarian cyst, 1 borderline tumor, 21 epithelial ovarian cancer, 6 ovarian Oncol 2006) . The ability to routinely detect these polymorphisms may cancers that are not epithelial by origin and 5 specimens from ovarian significantly contribute in prevention of oral cancer. epithelial cancer metastasis, were examined for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 2 microsatellite loci: TP53 at locus 17p13 .1 and D17S855 P0581. BRcA1/BRcA2 mutations in primary ovarian cancer (BRCA1) at locus 17q21 . The frequency of LOH at locus 17p13 .1 was patients 30,7% in epithelial ovarian cancers and 25% in metastasis . LOH at D. Aktas1, M. Gultekin2, M. Alikasifoglu1, K. Yuce2, E. Tuncbilek1, A. Ayhan2; the region of p53 gene was detected in ovarian cyst and borderline 1Hacettepe University, Department of Genetics, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, tumor, but it was not found in benign tumors and carcinomas that Department of Obstetric and Gynecology, Turkey. are not epithelial by origin . The frequency of LOH at locus 17q21 Individuals carrying inactivating germline mutations in the breast was 50% in benign tumors, 38,5% in epithelial ovarian carcinomas, and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1 and BRCA2 have 50% among non epithelial carcinomas and 33,3% in metastasis . In an increased risk of developing cancer . Germline mutations of the one epithelial ovarian cancer LOH was found at the both locuses of two genes are transmitted in the autosomal dominant fachion and chromosome 17 at the same time . Our results indicate that LOH at predispose carriers to the development of ovarian and/or breast the regions of p53 and BRCA1 tumor suppressor genes correlate cancer . We have screened 176 women with primary ovarian cancer with advanced stages of ovarian carcinoma and poor survival . In for mutations in BRCA1 (185delAG and 5382insC) and BRCA2 some cases of ovarian carcinoma LOH at locuses 17p13 .1 and 17q21 (6174delT) gene in using mutagenically separated PCR, single strand occurs later in tumorigenesis, and predominantly in post-menopausal confirmation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis followed by sequencing of women . Although, allelic loss of one of these genes may be directly variant bands. Three germlime alterations were identified: A frameshift associated with malignant transformation per se, because it occurs in mutation (5382insC) was observed in two ovarian cancer patients with all histological grades . familial cancer history . A unique amino acid substitution in exon 20 (G1748S) was seen in two patients and a splice site variant (IVS20+5 P0584. p53 gene mutation analysis in bladder cancer A>T) was deteceted in a patient with ovarian cancer . Moreover, a A. Ozgoz1, H. Samli1, M. Solak1, F. Aktepe2, K. Yorukoglu3; complex alteration (IVS20+5 A>T and G1748S) was also noted in 1Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Afyon, two patients . However, 185delAG and 6174delT mutations were not Turkey, 2Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pathology, Afyon, observed in ovarian cancer subjects . Our preliminary results indicate Turkey, 3Dokuz Eylül University Medical Faculty, Department of Pathology, that BRCA1 gene are involved in some ovarian cancer patients, Izmir, Turkey. both with and without a family history, demonstrating the importance p53 is one of the tumor supressor genes and plays an important role in of BRCA1/BRCA2 in the development of ovarian cancer patients in supression of bladder cancer . Recent studies have suggested that p53 Turkish population . mutations are necessary for tumor formation . p53 is the most commonly mutated tumor suppressor in various human cancers, therefore the presence of p53 mutations may help indicate the prognosis for patients with bladder cancer . Understanding the regulation of p53 function in tumor suppression is essential to design new therapeutic strategies to Cancer genetics 6 treat this disease . We investigated the frequency of mutations in exon (CGH) . During last few months we have applied also high-resolution 5 and 7 of p53 gene in bladder cancer tissue samples . comparative genomic hybridization (HR-CGH) . Cultivation of solid Tissue samples from bladder cancer patients were used from paraffin- tumor tissue is not always successful, possible explanation could embedded cancer tissues. DNA was isolated from paraffin-embedded be generally low proliferation activity of tumor cells in vitro . Here we bladder cancer tissue samples using “Xylen Cyanol” method . Screening present our cytogenetic results together with clinical characteristics . for p53 mutations was done by polymerase chain reaction-single strand Supported by grants 0021622415 and IGA MZ NR-9125-4 conformational polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) analysis of exon 5, 6 and 7 of the gene . Enzyme restrictions were performed on 5th exon and on P0587. molecular genetic analysis of apparently sporadic 7th exon using enzymes HaeII and HaeIII, respectively . pheochromocytomas and paraganglioma in czech patients This study was performed on paraffin embedded tissue samples Z. Musil1, J. Veselá1, A. Křepelová1, J. Widimský2, T. Zelinka2, M. Kohoutová1; from 22 bladder cancer patients . Mutation rate was 45% in 22 cases, 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine, whereas mutation rates of exon 5 and exon 7 were found to be 60% Prague, Czech Republic, 2the Third Medical Department - Clinical Department and 40%, respectively . The presence of a p53 mutation may aid in of Endocrinology and Metabolism of the First Faculty of Medicine, Charles appropriate initial staging and subsequent treatment for patients University, Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. diagnosed with bladder cancer . The pheochromocytoma is tumor arising in adrenal or extra-adrenal sites and occurs as a sporadic form or, less frequently, in familial P0585. Detection of p53 gene in breast cancer by PcR amd setting as a part of inherited syndromes . Paraganglioma of the enzyme restrictioin and demonstration of p53 protein in breast head and neck occurs mostly sporadically and also in syndromic or tissue with immunohystochemistry nonsyndromic familial settings . To date four susceptibility genes for M. Aydin Ozgur1, H. Samli1, M. Solak1, H. Dilek2; pheochromocytoma have been reported that included RET proto- 1Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Afyon, oncogene, VHL tumor suppressor gene and recently identified Turkey, 2Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pathology, Afyon, genes SDHB and SDHD for succinate dehydrogenase subunit B Turkey. and D respectively . Mutations in these genes can predispose one to p53 is one of the tumor supressor genes and plays an important pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma . All established genes were role in supression of breast cancer . Therefore, understanding the analyzed to investigate possible genetic cause of apparently sporadic regulation of p53 function in tumor suppression is essential to design pheochromocytoma (ASP) and paraganglioma in population of Czech new therapeutic strategies to treat this disease . We investigated the patients . Among 27 patients with ASP two novel germline (missense) frequency of mutations in exon 5 and 7 of p53 gene and p53 protein in mutation was found in the VHL gene . Further, one novel coding single breast tissue by immunohistochemical analysis . nucleotide change and one inversion in SDHB gene were detected . Screening for p53 mutations was done by PCR-SSCP analysis of exon In a child with neuroblastoma and paraganglioma we detected a 5 and 7 of the gene . Enzyme restrictions were performed on 175th novel splice site mutation in SDHB gene . In addition, in one examined codon on 5th exon and 249th codon on 7th exon using enzymes HaeII patient with apparently sporadic paraganglioma we detected recently and HaeIII,respectively. Each of the paraffin-embedded specimens identified mutation of the start codon in SDHD gene. These results was immunologically stained for the p53 biomarker expression . confirm that molecular genetic testing makes it possible to differentiate Mutation rate of 20 cases was found to be 30%, whereas mutation the sporadic from the hereditary form of the disease, which will affect rates of exon 5 and 7 were found to be 20% and 11,8%, respectively . medical management . After immunohystochemical staining, more than 90% p53 staining was Supported by the grant project MSM 0021620808 achieved in 4 samples; 3% in 1 sample; 1% in 2 samples and 0,5% in 2 samples . No staining was detected in 11 samples . Staining was P0588. transforming Growth Factor Beta 1 Leu10Pro positive in 3 p53 mutation cases and 6 mutation cases, and staining polymorphism and breast cancer morbidity: A case-control was negative in 3 mutation cases and 8 mutation negative cases study and meta-analysis (Fisher’s chi-sq test; p>0.05). A. Gonzalez-Zuloeta Ladd1, A. Arias Vasquez1, J. Witteman1, A. Uitterlinden2, The results obtained in these breast carcinoma paraffin-embedded J. Coebergh1, A. Hofman1, B. H. C. Stricker1, C. M. van Duijn1; tissues indicate that no clear-cut linear relationship exists between 1Epidemiology & Biostatistics, rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Internal Medicine, the p53 mutational status and the extent of its respective mRNA and Erasmus MC, rotterdam, The Netherlands. protein expression . Therefore, direct DNA analyses and functional Studies have shown that TGF-β has a dual role as a tumor suppressor 1 assays remain the only methods for the reliable detection of p53 in early stages and a tumor promoter in later stages of carcinogenesis . mutations . In this gene, a Leu10Pro substitution leads to higher circulating levels of TGF-β . This variant has been studied in relationship to the risk 1 P0586. Detection of chromosomal Aberrations by FisH, cGH for breast cancer yielding contradicting results . We aimed to unravel and sKY in cultured and Noncultured solid tumors in children the relationship of this polymorphism and the risk of breast cancer by during 2003 and 2005 means of an association study and a meta-analysis . A. Oltová1, P. Šmuhařová1, P. Kuglík2, D. Žežulková1, V. Vranová1, P. Múdry3, V. Women participating in the Rotterdam Study including 163 patients Baičiová3, J. Štěrba3; with breast cancer were genotyped for this polymorphism . We carried 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Dept. out a logistic, a survival analysis by age and finally, we performed a of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Masaryk University Brno, Czech Republic, meta-analysis . 3Clinics of Pediatric Oncology, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic. The logistic regression analysis showed an increased risk of breast Pediatric tumors are the second main cause of children´s death in cancer for Proline allele carriers (OR=1.5; 95%CI =1.1-2.2) against developed countries . Contrary to leukemias chromosomal alterations non-carriers . Which was maintained when studying only incident associated with malignant transformations are less well characterized for cases (OR=1.8; 95%CI =1.1-2.8). There were no differences in risk pediatric solid tumors . We present results of cytogenetic examinations among prevalent cases . The survival analysis showed that carriers of of 262 pediatric solid tumors . Some of them were examined using by this same allele had a HR of 1 .8 (95% CI = 1 .2-2 .7) compared non- interphase fluorescent in situ hybridization (I-FISH), especially tumors carriers . Finally, the meta-analysis showed the no difference in risk where deletions or amplifications of specific genes and/or presence of of breast cancer between proline allele carriers and non-carriers (OR fusion genes are known and could be used as diagnostic tool . Proven pooled = 1 .02, 95% CI = 0 .95-1 .09, heterogeneity = 28%) . prognostic significance of the N-myc amplification, del 1p36, gain 17q, Our data suggests that the TGF-β Leu10Pro polymorphism might play 1 abnormalities on chromosome 11 are well known for children with a role in breast cancer risk . neuroblastoma . For medulloblastomas i(17p), c-myc and i(12p) in germinal tumors are the other candidates . Vast majority of tumor samples were cultured and other possible chromosomal abnormalities were detected using FISH, spectral karyotyping (SKY) and comparative genomic hybridization Cancer genetics  P0589. An important cause of polyposis coli: mosaïc APC men with a high risk of developing prostate cancer . Population studies mutations show that the risk of prostate cancer may be influenced by heritable F. J. Hes1, M. Nielsen1, E. Bik1, J. T. Wijnen1, B. Bakker1, H. F. A. Vasen2, M. H. factors . Mutations in the BRCA1/2 genes are known to increase the Breuning1, C. M. J. Tops1; risk of breast and ovarian cancer and may also increase the relative 1LUMC, Centre for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, risk of prostate cancer from 1 .5-fold up to 23-fold depending on the 2NFDHT, Dutch Polyposis Register and LUMC, Department of Gastroenterol- gene involved and the context of the mutation . ogy, Leiden, The Netherlands. As prostate cancer is an indolent disease in much of the general Background: The patient with multiple polyps in the colon poses a population, screening for it is controversial, with no established diagnostic challenge . Given the relatively high frequency of de novo reduction in mortality . We aim to establish whether male BRCA1/2 APC mutations, a substantial proportion of mosaic APC mutations are mutation carriers have a higher incidence, are at risk of more aggressive to be expected in patients with polyposis coli . So far, only four cases of prostate cancer and whether new markers can be identified. mosaic APC mutations have been reported . Samples will be taken yearly from 850 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and Methods: We performed germline mutation analysis in 568 consecutive compared with a control group of men who have a negative predictive index-patients with polyposis coli referred for APC scanning using genetic test over 5 years . This international collaboration will be the DGGE and PTT, and subsequent sequence analysis in DNA fragments largest ever screening programme in men with these mutations . displaying abnormal patterns . APC gene deletions were detected It will also enable us to determine the sensitivity and specificity of either with Southern blot analysis or MLPA . PSA screening, research into new disease markers and determine a Results: Scrutinizing the molecular genetic results of 223 index-patients biological profile of BRCA1/2 mutation carriers using proteomics and with pathogenic APC mutations lead to the identification of 11 mosaic DNA/ RNA microarrays . Our current accrual rate is 100% . Complete cases (5%). Eight mosaic cases were identified as somatic, one case recruitment of the UK cohort is anticipated by the end of the year . as gonadal and two cases as combined gonadal and somatic . We Baseline PSAs, prevalence of undiagnosed prostate cancer, and the observed C>T transitions in CGA-sites in four of the eight cases with age of onset in male BRCA1/2 mutation carriers will be compared with somatic mosaicism, which is significantly more than 25 of the 212 non- the control group . mosaic patients from our cohort (p=0 .011) . Phenotypes of patients with somatic mosaicism ranged from an attenuated form of polyposis coli to P0592. AiDit - expanding familial prostate cancer research in florid polyposis with major extra-colonic manifestations. Eastern Europe Conclusions: Mosaicism accounts for a significant number of APC R. Doherty1, J. Lubinski2, E. Manguoglu3, G. Luleci3, M. Christie1, E. Bancroft1, mutations and is predominantly identified in apparently de novo cases A. Mitra1, S. Morgan1, R. Eeles1; of FAP . Patients with a somatic mosaicism exert a wide variety in 1Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 2International Heredi- phenotype and arise repeatedly from mutations affecting CGA-sites . tary Cancer Centre, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 3Depart- These observations have consequences for molecular genetic APC ment of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz University, testing and the clinical management of polyposis coli patients and their Antalya, Turkey. family members . AIDIT (Advancing International Co-operation and Developing Infrastructure for Targeted Screening of Prostate Cancer in Men with P0590. strategies and outcomes of preimplantation genetic Genetic Predisposition) is an international project, funded by the Sixth diagnosis of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Framework Programme of the European Community (EC), which aims C. Moutou1, N. Gardes1, S. Viville1,2; to facilitate co-operation between European countries in the field of 1Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg - SIHCUS-CMCO, Schiltigheim, France, cancer research . AIDIT will focus on linking clinical and research teams 2Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch - CU de in countries new to, or soon to enter, the European Union with the Strasbourg, France. IMPACT Consortium, an international team investigating screening and More than fifteen years after the first birth after preimplantation diagnostic practices for men with a genetic risk of prostate cancer . genetic diagnosis (PGD), the progress in single cell PCR and mutation Cancer research has been targeted as a high priority for the EC; detection has led to a considerable increase in the number of available however, research is most successful when it is centralised and well co- diagnoses . If PGD was initially proposed to couples at risk of having a ordinated, avoiding the duplication and fragmentation associated with child affected by a severe genetic disorder, late onset diseases such smaller, isolated studies . AIDIT provides the opportunity for teams who as Huntington ‘s disease and, more recently, inherited cancers have might be new to research in genetics or oncology to become integrated become a new class of indications . into an existing study . Communication between new and existing We present here our experience of PGD for familial adenomatous collaborators will allow the sharing of knowledge and formulation of polyposis, a dominant inherited cancer due to APC gene mutations . strategies to overcome local barriers and challenges . Twelve couples were referred between 2000 and 2005 . The AIDIT team will establish and present a website to facilitate We initially developed tests to detect the mutation alone, but rapidly communication between project collaborators, and facilitate a we set up multiplex PCR combining mutation detection and indirect conference to bring together international research teams, clinicians diagnosis using linked microsatellites . Protocols were optimised by and policy makers . The project will also aim to raise awareness of modifying standard conditions, particularly after a judicious primer familial prostate cancer among health professionals and the public choice, in order to add internal controls in single cell PCR . Finally, within Associate Candidate Countries and New Member States of the we have set up multiplex indirect diagnoses to be able to offer EU . a PGD whatever mutation is involved in familial cases . Mutation This abstract reflects only the authors’ views. The European Community detection strategies were based on: (i) a new double allele-specific is not liable for any use that may be made of the information contained PCR approach allowing the simultaneous detection of the wild type therein . and mutated allele; (ii) sizing the PCR fragments for deletions; or (iii) restriction length polymorphisms . We developed 7 tests which were validated on more than 500 single cells . Nine PGD cycles have been performed for 3 couples, resulting in 11 embryo transfers and 3 pregnancies, with the birth of one healthy boy and one ongoing pregnancy . P0591. Identification of Men with a Genetic Predisposition to Prostate cancer: targeted screening in BRcA 1 / 2 mutation carriers and controls: the imPAct study. A. V. Mitra, E. K. Bancroft, R. A. Eeles; Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom. We would like to introduce an international screening study aimed at Cancer genetics  P0593. Expression pattern of androgen metabolism genes directions taking into account multifocality and heterogenity of prostate support a neuroendocrine differentiation in an androgen- cancer tissue . The detection of circulating, cancer-related RNA dependent prostate cancer cell line treated by valproic acid molecules in plasma of cancer patients is challeging but potentially (VPA) treatment effective tool for molecular diagnostic and prognosis . M. Biancolella1, A. Valentini2, D. Minella1, K. Margiotti1, A. Farcomeni3, S. In this study, we compared the mRNA expression of prostate-associated Bueno3, G. Chillemi3, R. Miano4, G. Vespasiani4, A. Desideri5, S. Bernardini2, F. genes, PSCA, SFRP1, Akt-1, Her2/neu to the mRNA expression of Amati1, G. Federici2, G. Novelli1,6; B2M gene in plasma samples of prostate cancer patients . The RNA 1Dept. of Biopathology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Dept. of Laboratory isolation was effective in 64% (25/39) plasma samples (volume 800 Medicine, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 3CASPUR, Rome, Italy, 4Dept. μl). 4 plasma samples of healthy donors were suggested as control. of Urology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 5Dept. of Biology , Tor Vergata RNA samples were evaluated using real-time RT-PCR by TaqMan University, Roma, Italy, 6University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little technology . All specimens were positive for B2M. Rock, AR, United States. The highest transcript amounts were found for PSCA, which relative Prostate carcinoma (PCa) originates as an androgen-dependent expression level was dozens as high in 18/21 (86%) samples compared hyperproliferation of the epithelial cells of the gland and it evolves in an with control. We found insignificant decrease of Akt-1 and SFRP1 androgen-independent, highly aggressive cancer for which no cure is relative expression levels in 70% and 52% samples accordinally (the available to date . It was supported that neuroendocrine differentiation others did not express these genes) . The presence of Her2/neu mRNA plays an important role in the progression of prostate cancer to in the plasma samples was detected with extremely low concentrations androgen independent state . in prostate cancer group as well as in control group . We studied the effect of Valproic acid (VPA), an inhibitor of hystone Our data suggest that plasma PSCA mRNA may be a useful tool for deacetylase (HDAC), in a human prostate cancer androgen-dependent detection of prostate cancer although the optimization of RNA isolation cell line (LnCaP) . is nessecery for increasing of diagnostic sensitivity . This study was LnCaP were treated with 5mM VPA, and after 48 hours, assayed support by Applied Biosystems, USA . for viability, cell proliferation and gene expression patterns by a low- density microarray (AndroChip) . VPA was able to induce apoptosis P0596. Activating PtPN11 mutations play a minor role in and inhibition of cell growth . The treatment caused a decrease of PSA pediatric and adult solid tumors secretion and stimulated a NSE (neuron specific enolase) expression. C. Carta1, S. Martinelli1, E. Flex1, E. Puxeddu2, M. Tonacchera3, H. P. McDow- Microarray analysis showed that VPA was able to modulate the ell4, G. Kokai4, C. Dominici5,6, A. Rosolen7, R. Riccardi8, M. Genuardi9, P. Gram- expression of different androgen metabolism genes and in particular, matico5,10, M. Tartaglia1; up-regulation of the UGT2B7 (FC 1 .9) gene, involved in DHT 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Università di Perugia, Perugia, Italy, (dihydrotestosterone) degradation, and a down-regulation of PSA (FC 3Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 4RLC NHS Trust Alder Hey, Liverpool, United - 6 .19), AR (FC -1 .7) and its coregulator ARA24 ( FC -2 . 89) . Kingdom, 5Università “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 6IRCCS Bambino Gesù, The results suggest that VPA treatment reduces the expression of Rome, Italy, 7Università di Padova, Padua, Italy, 8Università Cattolica del Sacro PSA (at RNA and protein levels) and also the amount of androgen Cuore, Rome, Italy, 9Università di Firenze, Florence, Italy, 10Azienda Ospedalie- available to prostate cells by increasing UGT2B7 expression, ra S. Camillo-Forlanini, Rome, Italy. nevertheless, the treatment stimulates the production of NSE, down- The PTPN11 gene encodes SHP-2, a widely expressed cytoplasmic regulates AR expression, and promotes neuroendocrine differentation . protein tyrosine phosphatase functioning as a signaling transducer . Taken together, these results suggest that VPA treatment should not Germ-line PTPN11 mutations cause Noonan syndrome (NS), be considered as a chemotherapeutic agent in androgen-dependent a developmental disorder characterized by an increased risk of prostate cancer . malignancies . Recently, a novel class of activating mutations in This work was supported by an AIRC grant PTPN11 has been documented as a somatic event in a heterogeneous group of leukemias . Because of the relatively higher prevalence of P0594. Quantitative study of mitochondrial RNAs in prostate certain solid tumors in children with NS and the positive modulatory cancer. function of SHP-2 in RAS signaling, a wider role for activating PTPN11 J. Abril Jarilla; mutations in cancer has been hypothesized . Here, we screened Instutut de Recerca Oncológica (IRO), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. a number of solid tumors, including those documented in NS or in Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the commonest cancers in male which deregulated RAS signaling occurs at significant frequency, for population around the world, and it is responsible for nearly 6% of all PTPN11 mutations. No disease-associated mutation was identified male cancer deaths . Despite this relevance, the mechanisms involved in neuroblastoma (N=32), melanoma (N=50), and thyroid (N=85) and in the development of the prostate malignancy remain unknown . colon (N=48) tumors, while a missense mutation previously reported in In the last years there have been several reports of mitochondrial leukemias was identified in one rhabdomyosarcoma specimen (N=38). dysfunction in some human cancers . The aim of our group was to Furthermore, a novel missense change, promoting an increase in SHP- perform a quantitative study of the mitochondrial RNA in tumour and 2 basal phosphatase activity, was observed in one glioma case . Our non-tumour samples from PCa patients . data document that deregulated SHP-2 function does not represent We analysed the mitochondrial respiratory chain genes ND2, ND4, a major molecular event in these pediatric and adult tumors, further ND6, COXII, CytB and the ribosomal 12S . The study was performed supporting our previous evidence indicating that the oncogenic role of by relative quantification using real time PCR with two reference genes PTPN11 mutations is cell-context specific. (18S and Cyclophilin) . Twenty-seven tumour-non-tumour pairs and 17 additional non-tumour samples were studied . P0597. chromosome breakage and apoptotic response to Although no statistical differences were found between the two groups, irradiation in unaffected BRCA1 and BRCA mutation carriers the results suggest a down-regulation of the studied genes in tumour compared with age-matched controls. samples . J. G. Barwell1, L. Pangon2, A. Georgiou2, I. P. Kesterton3, Z. Kote-Jarai4, S. Grants from Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia (MEC, SAF 2002- Tomlinson5, J. Morris2, Z. Docherty3, R. Camplejohn2, J. Berg6, E. Solomon2, R. 02668), and Instituto de Salud Carlos III (CO3/07 and G03/054) . Eeles7,8, R. M. H. Carrier clinic collaborators8, Y. Hey9, S. V. Hodgson1; 1St George’s University Of London, London, United Kingdom, 2King’s College, P0595. RNA alterations in plasma of prostate cancer patients. London, United Kingdom, 3Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Institute T. V. Kekeeva1, B. Y. Alekseev2, P. V. Shegai2, M. V. Nemtsova3, D. V. Za- of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 5Cancer Research UK, Edin- letaev3; burgh, United Kingdom, 6Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, United Kingdom, 7Insti- 1Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow Herzen tute Of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 8Royal Marsden NHS Foun- Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Research Cen- dation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 9CRUK, Manchester, United Kingdom. tre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. The proteins encoded by BRCA1, BRCA2 and CHEK2 are known Among molecular markers of prostate carcinogenesis the detection of to be involved in cell cycle check points, the repair of DNA breaks plasma tumor-specific alterations could be one of the most appealing and breast cancer susceptibility . However, it is not known whether Cancer genetics  individuals who are heterozygous for germ-line BRCA1 and BRCA2 Hypermethylation of CpG islands was detected in overall 30% of mutations have an altered cellular response to irradiation . We have tested colorectal samples, although the extent of methylation varied investigated 53 BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers who have never from a few % to over 70%. No significant differences were found had a malignancy, and age matched unaffected controls . between the frequency of RASSF1A methylation in MSI low and MSI We found that BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers have normal high colorectal carcinomas (P=0 .462) . Our data demonstrate that cell cycle kinetics and apoptotic response to irradiation in peripheral RASSF1A is rather frequently inactivated in both, MSI low and MSI blood lymphocytes compared with controls . However, we detected an high colorectal carcinomas increased number of chromosome breaks post irradiation using the G2 assay (P=0 .002) and the S phase enrichment assay (P=0 .011) in P0600. Genomic and expression profiling of clear cell renal cell BRCA1 mutation carriers compared with age-matched controls . BRCA2 carcinomas with loss of chromosome 3p mutation carriers also had an increased number of chromosome R. P. Kuiper1, R. Pfundt1, E. Lerut2, M. Debiec-Rychter2, A. GeurtsvanKessel1, breaks per cell compared to their matched controls using the S T. Roskams2, E. F. P. M. Schoenmakers1; phase enrichment assay (P=0 .045) . The repair of other chromosomal 1Dept. of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The aberrations was not statistically different between groups . Netherlands, 2University Hospital of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Radiation-induced micro-array gene expression data from the Clear cell renal cell carcinomas (cRCCs) comprise the major subgroup peripheral blood lymphocytes of five BRCA1, five BRCA2 mutation of RCCs . Loss of 3p is the most frequent aberration in this type of carriers and five age-matched controls showed an average reduction tumors and can be found as the sole karyotypic change in about 10% in brca1 expression post irradiation in BRCA1 mutation carriers of 43% of the cases . The region on 3p that is lost varies from p11 .2 to pter, with (p=0.012), and a non-significant reduction in brca2 protein expression most of the breakpoints clustering around p14 .2 . The 3p losses occur by post irradiation in BRCA2 mutation carriers of 34% compared with terminal or interstitial deletions as well as by unbalanced translocations controls (p=0 .24) . We detected a number of consistently altered genes of the 3p region with other chromosomes (often chromosome 5) . The in response to irradiation in mutation carriers with BRCA1 or BRCA2 frequent loss of 3p sequences suggests the presence of one or more haploinsufficiency and discuss the functional implications of these. tumor suppressor gene(s) that are relevant for (the early stages of) tumor development . Indeed, several candidate genes on chromosome P0598. the canine RAGE - HmGB1 complex, a hand on 3p with tumor suppressor activity have been associated with renal metastasis? tumorigenesis, including the FHIT gene on 3p14, the RASSF1A gene H. Murua Escobar1,2, J. T. Soller2, K. A. Sterenczak2, J. D. Sperveslage2, S. on 3p21, and the VHL gene on 3p25 . In this study, we performed Winkler2, J. Bullerdiek2, I. Nolte1; molecular fine-mapping of the genomic regions on chromosome 3 1Small Animal Clinic, Hanover, Germany, 2Centre for Human Genetics Bremen, involved in RCC initiation and progression . We have selected a set Bremen, Germany. of 36 clear cell renal tumors with 3p aberrations, and with either a Metastasis is one of the major problems when dealing with malignant relatively good or poor outcome of the disease . Using high-resolution neoplasias. Accordingly, the finding of molecular targets which can be array CGH we were able to reveal the most commonly deleted regions addressed to reduce tumour metastasising will have significant impact on 3p. By integrating the genomic profiles with expression profiles of on the development of new therapeutic approaches . Recently, the these tumor samples, we aim to identify the genes on 3p of which receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) - high mobility the expression is affected by copy number loss and which, thus, are group B1 (HMGB1) protein complex has been shown to have significant candidate genes involved in clear cell renal tumorigenesis . influence on invasiveness, growth and motility of tumour cells, which are essential characteristics required for metastatic behaviour . A set of P0601. microsatellite analysis in sporadic renal cell carcinoma in vitro and in vivo approaches showed that blocking of this complex (Rcc) and its prognostic value resulted in drastic suppression of tumour cell growth . J. Mares1, M. Babjuk2, T. Viktorova1, V. Soukup2, J. Duskova2, J. Stolz2; Due to the similarities of human and canine cancer the dog has joined 12nd Medical Faculty, Prague 5, Czech Republic, 21st Medical Faculty, Prague the common rodent animal model for therapeutic and preclinical 2, Czech Republic. studies . However, complete characterisation of the protein complex Purpose: Sporadic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is one of the most is a precondition to establish a therapeutic approach based on the common urological malignities in adults (85%) . The prognosis of RCC blocking of the RAGE-HMGB1 complex in spontaneously occurring is very poor because of high mortality and unpredictable progression tumours in dogs . We characterised the canine HMGB1 and RAGE after tumor abstraction . We correlated allelic loss on chromosome genes and proteins completely . The canine RAGE gene shows a 3p with clinicopathologic data of patients with conventional renal cell 2835bp genomic structure, a 1384bp mRNA with a 1215bp protein carcinoma . coding sequence and a 404 amino acid protein . The canine HMGB1 Material and Methods: Our RCC sample collection was obtained after cDNA sequence consists of 2236bp The gene consists of the five radical nephrectomy from 60 patients . DNA was isolated from tumor exons and four introns of which exon 1 (76bp) and a contig spanning cells, nontumorous renal cells and blood . Microsatellite analysis of the exon 2 - exon 5 (3959bp) were characterised . The deduced protein is D3S1289 and D3S1560 was performed by fragmentation analysis on a 215 amino acid molecule . Additionally the chromosomal localisations GA ABI PRISM 3100-Avant . and the gene expression patterns of both genes were characterised . Results: Microsatellite analysis showed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on chromosome 3p in 71,7 % of the RCCs . We found a correlation P0599. RASSF1A hypermethylation status in msi low and msi between LOH and nuclear grade (p=0 .08) on the cut-off of statistic high colorectal carcinomas significance, but no correlation with other parameters. M. Strazišar, S. Smerkolj, M. Ravnik-Glavač, D. Glavač; Conclusions: LOH on loci of the D3S1289 and D3S1560 may provide Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia. prognostic significance in patients with the RCC. RASSF1A tumour suppressor gene is inactivated in a variety of solid Research is supported by MSM 0021620808 . tumours, usually by epigenetic silencing of the promoter and/or LOH at 3p . We examined epigenetic and genetic status of the RASSF1A P0602. Genetic differences of serous Fallopian tube carcinoma, gene in 53 colorectal carcinomas (CRCs) . 32 CRCs with low MSI serous Ovarian carcinoma and an aggressive borderline and 21 with high MSI were used in the study . 21 high MSI colorectal malignancy of the ovary: a Genome-Wide Array-Based samples were reselected from a pool of 245 sporadic CRCs evaluated comparative Genomic Hybridization study with 5 microsatelite markers (BAT 25, BAT 26, BAT 40, D18S58 M. E. Nowee1, A. M. Snijders2,3, M. B. Verbruggen1, J. M. J. Piek1, D. A. P. and D17S250) . DNA was isolated from the tumor and adjacent non Rockx1, R. de Wit1, J. Fridlyand2,3, A. N. Jain2,3,4, D. Pinkel3,4, P. J. van Diest5, R. - tumour tissue, amplified in polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and H. M. Verheijen1, D. G. Albertson2,3,4, J. C. Dorsman1; analyzed for MSI status. A sample was defined as high-MSI (MSI-H) if 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Cancer Re- more than two of the 5 examined loci showed unequivocal instabilities . search Institute, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, Bisulphite treatment of DNA, followed by PCR and direct sequencing United States, 3University of California San Francisco Comprehensive Cancer of CpG islands revealed the methylation status of the RASSF1 gene . Center, San Francisco, CA, United States, 4Department of Laboratory Medicine, Cancer genetics 0 University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 5De- analyzed cell lines . The physiological role of such an interaction has partment of Pathology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands. been confirmed by means of a dominant negative version of the NFY The molecular relationship between serous ovarian carcinoma (OVCA) transcription factor, that has turned out to decrease both in vitro TLX3 and serous Fallopian tube carcinoma (FTC) is still unclear . We have promoter activity and endogenous amount of mRNA . We propose performed Array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization studies, analysing that proper cell specific regulation of the human TLX3 gene requires 14 representative FTC and 14 matched OVCA cases at a genome-wide the interaction of the NFY-proximal sequence with long-range tissue- scale with a medium resolution . In addition, we have compared the specific cis-elements which we are searching at present. results with data of a clinically agressive serous borderline malignancy of the ovary obtained with exactly the same platform . The studies P0605. A preliminary study: Evaluation of manisa propolis indicate that the analysed OVCAs and FTCs displayed both common effect on leukemia cells obtained from leukemia patients with and more distinctive patterns of changes . In contrast, the investigated telomerase activity borderline case did not show a similar pattern of changes . Zooming in C. Biray1, O. Cogulu2, C. Gunduz1, E. Karaca2, F. Ozkinay2; on the genes present in the altered regions results in the identification 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, of already known genes implicated in gynaecological malignancies, Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, such as cMyc, ERBB2, CCNE1 and Akt2 . New genes found include Turkey. Brg1, whose product has been implicated in a BRCA1-linked pathway, Propolis is a resinous material collected by the honeybees and obtained suggesting that this pathway may also play a role in sporadic cancers . from beehives . Recently the characteristics of this product have A further development of DNA-tests based on results of array-CGH attracted great attention in terms of anticancer, immunostimulatory, might be useful for diagnostic purposes, especially to discriminate antiviral and antibacterial effects . Flavanoids and caffeic acid between borderline tumors and OVCAs and FTCs and be instrumental phenyl esters in propolis have been shown to be antimutagenic and to prevent erroneous chemotherapies for borderline patients . anticarcinogenic . In addition there have been a considerable number of studies investigating the underlying mechanisms of those effects P0603. cD24 as a unique immunphenotyping marker for chronic of propolis . We have previously shown that propolis inhibited the myeloid Leukemia-stem cell expression of telomerase by decreasing the hTERT level in T-cell acute S. Sozer; lymphoblastic leukemia cell line . The aim of this study is to investigate Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey. the effect of propolis prepared in different concentrations on hTERT in The purpose of this study was to find a marker that diminishes chronic the leukemia cells obtained from leukemia patients . myeloid leukemia-stem cells (CML-SCs) from normal stem cells in a Telomerase activity in the cell cultures of bone marrow samples in 4 mouse model system of CML . As a mouse model retrovirus transduction cases with leukemia have been evaluated following propolis treatment model was employed using a vector expressing p210/BCR/ABL in 3 different concentrations after 24 and 48 . Cell viability of propolis- and the green fluorescent protein (GFP). Transplantation studies of treated and control cultures were analyzed by XTT assay . The BCR/ABL infected cells in recipient mice demonstrated an aggressive LightCycler instrument was used for the quantification of hTERT. myeloproliferative disease within ~3 weeks, as has previously been Propolis treatment was not effective in juvenile myelomonocytic observed with this approach . Phenotypic analysis of bone marrow from leukemia cells, however, significantly both positive and negative BCR/ABL mice showed contribution by the transduced cells to multiple differences were observed in the hTERT of pre-B-cell leukemia . lineages, suggesting a primitive stem/progenitor cell gives rise to the Particularly, propolis decreased the hTERT significantly in the case disease . Subsequent analysis of primary cells that arise in vivo showed with high leucocyte count . the leukemia-initiating activity resides in cells that are Sca-1+/c-kit+/ Propolis may be effective in a positive or negative way on hTERT in Lin- . Further, comparison of the BCR/ABL mice and GFP control mice the pre-B leukemia . Determining the way propolis has an effect on revealed preferential over-expression of CD24 (heat-stable antigen) those cells needs to be evaluated by analyzing the individually varying in the primitive leukemic cells (~90%), demonstrating a possible BCR/ parameters in leukemia with the hTERT in further studies . ABL induced activation of the antigen . Sorting and serial transplantation studies of CD24+ vs . CD24- cells from BCR/ABL mice showed that P0606. telomerase activity in pediatric and adult-onset the leukemia-initiating activity resides in the CD24+/ Lin- population . hematological malignancies Collectively, these data indicate that BCR/ABL expression increases O. Cogulu1, B. Kosova2, C. Gunduz2, E. Karaca1, A. Erbay3, S. Aksoy1, D. proliferative of primitive CML cells and up-regulates the CD24 antigen . Karapinar1, M. Kantar1, Y. Aydinok1, C. Vergin3, N. Cetingul1, C. Ozkinay1, F. We suggest that the CD24 antigen represents a potential marker to Ozkinay1; distinguish normal from CML stem cells and that it may confer specific 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, functional properties on the CML population . 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 3Behcet Uz Children’s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey, Izmir, Turkey. P0604. NFY drives basal transcription of the human TLX, a Telomerase is a reverse transcriptase enzyme which synthesizes gene overexpressed in t-acute lymphocytic leukaemia telomeric DNA (TTAGGG)n in dividing cells . It is highly activated in S. Borghini1, M. Vargiolu1, M. Di Duca2, R. Ravazzolo1,3, I. Ceccherini1; germ-line and in immortal cells . The level of telomerase activity may 1Laboratorio Genetica Molecolare, Istituto G Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2Laboratorio be correlated to the diagnosis, prognosis and possible therapeutic Fisiopatologia dell’uremia, Istituto G Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 3Dipartimento di approaches to the hematological malignancies . Its activity decreases Pediatria e CEBR, Università di Genova, Genova, Italy. with age in the absence of a malignant process . In this study we Based on a knocked-out mouse model and a few expression studies, measured the level of telomerase activity in different pediatric and TLX3 is regarded as a homeobox gene crucial for the development adult-onset hematological malignancies to make comparisons of the autonomic nervous system . Despite an involvement in normal between those diseases investigated and to evaluate whether there ematopoiesis has been excluded, its expression can be detected in is any age dependendency or not . Those ratios were also compared 20% of children and 13% of adults T-cell acute lymphocytic leukaemia to the prognostic factors described previously . The online real-time (T-ALL) samples, frequently in association with chromosomal reverse-transcriptase PCR was used for the quantification of hTERT rearrangments involving 5q35, where the gene is located . in peripheral blood (PB) and bone marrow (BM) in 32 cases with We have focused on the identification of elements and factors playing acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), 13 cases with acute myeloblastic a role in the TLX3 physiological expression regulation, and therefore leukemia (AML), 10 cases with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), 7 likely to be involved in cancer development . In particular, after identifying cases with multiple myeloma (MM). PB hTERT correlated significantly the transcription start points, we have made use of in vitro tranfection with BM levels in acute leukemia and in MDS . Highest hTERT were assays to demonstrate that the 5’-untranslated region of the gene is observed in ALL patients followed by MDS, AML and MM patients necessary for the basal promoter activity in cell lines from different respectively . The average relative-ratios of BM and PB hTERT were origin . By site-directed mutagenesis, two tandem CCAAT boxes have 175 .30±206 .55 and 99 .03±152 .27 in ALL, 9 .28±12 .47 and 8 .61±13 .32 been localized as critical elements of this region . In vivo chromatin in AML, 34 .23±39 .52 and 22 .35±24 .67 in MDS . The average BM immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assays have hTERT was 4 .82±4 .91 in MM patients . No correlation was observed indicated that nuclear factor Y (NFY) recognizes these sites in all the Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 between the telomerase activities and the age in the hematological clinical importance . We aimed to develop a quantitative method based malignancies investigated . The known prognostic factors were not on the real-time quantitative RT-PCR (RQ-PCR) in order to monitor shown to have significantly correlation to the telomerase activity in all WT1 level in children with ALL and assess its prognostic importance . malignancy groups . Furthermore, we wished to compare the sensitivity, efficiency, and reliability of this method with the conventional semi-quantitative RT- P0607. Expression of a new cancer/testis gene ,tsGA10, in PCR (CQ PCR) . patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Fourteen newly diagnosed ALL children were included in this study . M. H. Modarressi, M. B. Mobasheri, M. Shabani, H. Asgarian, F. Shokri; The peripheral blood samples were collected before induction, at the Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. second week of induction, at the start of consolidation and beginning Among tumor antigens identified to date Cancer/testis (C/T) antigens, of the maintenance phase of chemotherapy . The last blood sample are a group of highly attractive targets for immunotherapy and was collected from each patient at random 2 to 6 month after the cancer vaccines. To date more than 50 C/T have been identified. maintenance phase started . For Real-Time RT-PCR we have used Testis-Specific Gene A10 (TSGA10) is a recently identified C/T gene LightCycler device, SYBR Green I dye and WT1 primers with 90bp which is expressed normaly in testis, fetus, and frequently in human PCR products . cancers . It can make the gene a candidate for immunotherapy and The proportion of patients with detectable WT1 was 92% at for detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) . We previously diagnosis and 42% at the second week of therapy, 38% at the start of demonstrated TSGA10 expression during spermatogenesis . There is consolidation, and 0% at the beginning of maintenance . WT1 could not also evidence for potential TSGA10 involvement in cell proliferation be detected in any of the last samples . The absence of WT1 showed and/or differentiation . Antibody against TSGA10 antigene has been accordance with the clinical course of patients . CQ PCR and RQ PCR observed in some cancers . results were correlated together . Here we demonstrated expression of TSGA10 by semi-quantitative RT- These preliminary results indicate that real time PCR can be employed PCR in 44 (84 .6%) out of 52 bone marrow samples and all peripheral to monitor MRD in the leukemic patients during chemotherapy . blood samples from patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), Although the CQ PCR results were strongly correlated with RQ PCR while there is no expression of TSGA10 in normal blood samples . but it had lower sensitivity and reliability . Presence of TSGA10 expression in ALL may open a window to functional study of mitotic checkpoint proteins in leukemia . RT-PCR of P0610. BAc Array cGH analysis of primary childhood acute TSGA10 may help in detection of residual clonal cells leading to early lymphoblastic leukaemias and their recurrencies diagnosis and better prognostic qualification of the disease. A. Matthäi1, C. Steinhoff2, E. Schröck1, M. Vingron2, C. Eckert3, G. Henze3, K. Seeger3, C. Hagemeier4, R. Kirschner-Schwabe3; P0608. Detection of monosomy 3 in uveal melanoma: 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Max-Planck-In- A comparison between interphase fluorescence in situ stitut für Molekulare Genetik, Abt. Vingron, Berlin, Germany, 3Klinik für Pädiatrie hybridization on cultured cells and on nuclei isolated from m. S. Onkologie/Hämatologie, Universitätsmedizin Charité, Berlin, Germany, paraffin-embedded tissue 4Klinik für Allgemeine Pädiatrie, Universitätsmedizin Charité, Berlin, Germany. S. L. van Zelderen-Bhola1, W. Maat2, E. S. Jordanova3, E. R. Barthen2, H. W. Array CGH analysis has been applied to DNA of childhood acute Wessels1, N. E. Schalij-Delfos2, M. J. Jager2; lymphoblastic leukemia samples (n=28) for the detection of copy 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The number changes . The samples represent three different disease Netherlands, 2Dept. of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Center, stages (first occurrence, first and second relapse) of 10 patients. The Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Dept. of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Cen- Array CGH chip used is a custom made BAC Array a resolution of at ter, Leiden, The Netherlands. least 1 Mb or less . Uveal melanoma is the commonest malignancy of the eye among adults In total, 230 copy number gains versus 214 copy number losses were with an annual incidence rate between 0 .49 and 0 .76 per 100 .000 in found. The mean number of aberrations was five gains and six losses the Caucasian population . Up to 53% of the patients die of metastatic per sample . In detail, aberration count ranged from no aberration to disease . It is important to identify high risk patients, so that such 36 copy number gains or up to 22 deletions per sample . The most individuals could be monitored for the presence of liver metastases aberrations were detected within the group of TEL/AML1 negative and could be offered adjuvant chemotherapy or liver resection surgery tumors . The mean count of copy number changes per sample was at an early stage . Unfavourable prognostic factors among others are 18, composed of eight losses and ten gains per sample . Here, loss tumor size, ciliary body involvement, the presence of epithelioid cells of chromosome 9 material and copy number gains of chromosome and specific extravascular matrix patterns. Monosomy of chromosome 21 were found in nine, and in eight of 18 samples, respectively . In 3 is also a significant indicator of poor prognosis in uveal melanoma. contrast, the four TEL/AML1-fusion gene positive patients showed the The identification of this monosomy in tumor tissue is therefore very least number of copy number changes . In detail, it ranged from none to important . The aim of this study was to compare the detection rate of nine copy number gains, and from two up to 13 deletions per sample . monosomy 3 between cytogenetic analysis and interphase fluorescence The chromosome bands 12p13-p12 encompassing the TEL-gene was in situ hybridization (FISH) on cultured cells and interphase FISH on lost most frequently . This gene is represented by two BACs on the nuclei isolated from paraffin-embedded tissue. Both techniques were Array chip . performed in a series of 50 enucleated uveal melanomas . FISH on FISH analysis will be performed to confirm these results as well as nuclei isolated from paraffin-embedded tissue showed monosomy 3 in other copy number changes with a resolution of less than 1 Mb . 62% of the cases while combining karyotyping and FISH on cultured cells a monosomy of chromosome 3 was detected in only 38% of the Po05. molecular and biochemical basis of disease cases . We can conclude that the use of interphase FISH on nuclei isolated from paraffin-embedded tissue increases the possibility to P0611. the implication of DNA damage in neurodegenerative identify patients at high risk for metastases . conditions M. Hosseini; P0609. Rapid Quantitative Detection of Wt1 Expression Level by Islamic Azad University, Basic science-Islamshahr Branch, Tehran, Islamic Real-time Rt-PcR for Evaluation of minimal Residual Disease Republic of Iran. (mRD) in Pediatric Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia DNA damage has been implicated in numerous neurodegenerative S. Talebi1,2, Z. Badiei1, J. Tavakkol-Afshari3, F. Mahjoubi2, A. Brouk3, M. Golali- conditions . We showed that P38 MAPK is up regulated / phosphorylated pour2; and participate in death signaling following DNA damage . In this 1Dr.Sheikh pediatric hospital (Sarvar), Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Na- experimental model, primary embryonic cortical neurons were tional Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Re- prepared from E14-16 rat embryos . A density of 1 .2×105 cells/well public of Iran, 3Bu-Ali Research Institute, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. plated on the wells, pre-coated with poly-D-lysine . Camptothecin, the The submicroscopic levels of leukemic cells (MRD) in peripheral blood topisomerase-1 inhibitor, (10-5 M) was added to neuronal culture after samples from children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) have 24 hours . After 4,6,24 and 48 hours , expression of the P38 and ATF-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  2 was studied using primary antibody in the Immunocytochemistry normal allele was 28 . technique, and number of healthy and death nuclei were counted by The frequency of CTG≥18 is 9.83% in Western Europe and 9% in Japan cell lysis buffer . Then percentage of the healthy , death and expression which suggests that there is a correlation between the prevalence of of the cells was analyzed by one way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post DM1 in a population and the frequency of alleles with CTG≥18. What test . Percentage of the expression of P38 was 4%, 20%, 40% and we have concluded up to now from our data shows that the frequency 55%, and percentage of the survival was 95%, 85%, 64% and 50% of alleles with CTG>18 is comparative to Western Europe and Japan . for 4, 6, 24 and 48 hours, respectively . The expression of ATF-2 was also 3%, 20%, 30%, 45% and percentage of the survival was 97%, P0614. Analysis of polymorphisms metabolisms genes (cYP19, 85%, 64% and 50%, respectively . Percentage of the expression and Gstm1, Gstt1 and NAt2) in endometriosis patients with survival of the P38 neurons for 24 hours were 40 and 64 percent and different efficiency of hormone-modulate therapy. it was for ATF-2 , 30 and 64 percent respectively which these results N. Shved, T. Ivashchenko, N. Kramareva, M. Aseev, V. Baranov; compared to control were increased significantly ( p<0.05).Expression Ott’s institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. of the proteins at 4 hours was not changed significantly. Expression Endometriosis is an estrogen-dependent disease of women of of the P38 and ATF-2 was increased simultaneously . Thus, in this reproductive age . The main direction of conservative therapy of model, Camptothecin induces neuronal death by stimulation P38-ATF- endometriosis patients is the recovery of unstable hormone status 2 pathway . with anti-estrogens drugs . However, some patients are resistant for hormone-modulate therapy and have severe side effects . P0612. mutation screening of the APc gene in 134 spanish Retrospective analysis of the results of hormone therapy allowed to Families. divide patients to two groups according to hormone therapy efficiency. M. Fernández Ulloa1, P. Cabello1, D. Rey1, E. Garcia-Galloway1, R. Fernán- Group 1(54 patients) revealed positive responses to combined dez1, A. Alonso2, C. San Román1; surgical and therapeutic treatment . Some women have demonstrated 1Hospital Ramon y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pam- conspicuous resistance to this kind of treatment and were arbitrarily plona, Spain. attributed to group 2 (63 patients) . An increased frequency of A1 allele Background: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an inherited, of the CYP19 gene was observed in group 2 as compared to group autosomal dominant syndrome caused by germ-line mutations of the 1 (32% versus 17%, p <0 .01) . Carriers of the A1/A6 genotype were adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene . Affected individuals develop registered in 30 .6% of group 2 as compared to 4 .7% in group 1 (p hundreds to thousands of colonic polyps . More than 700 mutations <0 .01) . Analysis of combination of functionally impaired alleles of the have been described until now along the gene and it was found that GSTM1, GSTT1 and NAT2 revealed significant difference between the same APC mutation could cause different clinical manifestations . two groups of patients . The combination of the GSTT 0/0 and NAT2 However, it has been suggested the relationship between the S/S (p<0.05; OR 8.3), GSTM1 0/0 and NAT2 S/S (p<0.01; OR 8.6), localization of the mutation and specific phenotypes associated with GSTM1 0/0 and GSTT1 0/0 (p<0.05; OR 10.5) genotypes significantly the disease . increased in group 2 . Total analysis of the GSTM1, GSTT1 and matherial and methods: We study 134 unrelated patients with NAT2 genes revealed significantly higher frequency of functionally diagnosis of FAP and their relatives . Genomic DNA were obtained impaired genotypes in group 2 as compared to group 1 (68 .6% and from affected individuals after informed consent and mutation analysis 13 .0% respectively, p<0 .001,OR 14 .6 ) . These data suggest that the of the whole coding sequence of APC gene was done by dHPLC .The polymorphisms metabolisms genes is associated with different effect results obtained were confirmed by DNA sequencing. of hormone therapy in endometriosis patients . Results: Sequence changes of the APC gene have been detected in 45% of the affected patients We have identified twenty novel mutations: P0615. mutation in gene encoding RANK in iranian familial three missense mutations, nine small deletions and two indels that expansile osteolysis pedigree create a new stop codon and produce a truncated protein, and six S. Assadi1,2, F. Absalan1,3, N. Gharaii3, H. Goodarzi3, Y. Shafeghati4, ,. Karimi- nonsense mutations . Nineteen mutations corresponded to exon 15 Nejad5, F. Shahram6, E. Elahi1,7; and one to exon 13 . Four novel silent polymorphisms were founded in 1National Institute for Genetic engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic exon 15 and 13 of the gene . Republic of Iran, 2Faculty of Science, University of Azarbayjan, Tabriz, Islamic conclusion: The study of mutation status in the affected members Republic of Iran, 3The University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 44. as well as in the healthy individuals of each family has confirm that Genetic Rsearch Center, University of Welfare Science and Rehabilitation at mutations are causative . We also describe the patient’s phenotypes Evin, Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Karimi-Nejad/Najmabadi Genet- associated with these mutations . The description of every new mutation ics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 66. Rheumatology Rresearch Cen- finding may contribute to a better knowledge of these severe disease. ter, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7Faculty of Science, The University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P0613. ctG Repeat Polymorphism at the myotonic Dystrophy Familial expansile osteolysis (FEO) is a rare bone dysplasia which Locus in Healthy iranian Population is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait . Generalized features B. Shojasaffar1, N. Moradin1, S. Nafisi2, M. Azimian1, K. kahrizi1, H. Najmaba- are altered trabecular pattern or modeling abnormalities . Hearing loss di1; is an early manifestation during childhood and cervical resorbtion of 1Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shariati Hospital, teeth is common . Osteolytic lesions usually develop in the long bones Neurology department, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. during early adulthood . The disease was linked to chromosome 18 Myotonic Dystrophy type1 is caused by large and unstable expansion in a large afflicted Irish pedigree in 1994, and the associated gene, of CTG repeats in DMPK gene which is located on 19q13 .3 . According TNFRSF11A, encoding receptor activator of nuclear factor-κ B to the hypothesis that expanded (CTG)n alleles originated from large (RANK) was discovered in 2000 . RANK is highly expressed in bones size normal alleles, there is a correlation between the prevalence of and is essential in osteobalst formation . The Irish pedigree and three DM1 and the frequency of large size normal alleles in a population . So subsequently identified pedigrees form America, Germany and Spain, DM1 is considered to be more prevalent in Europe and Japan but it is all shared a common 18 base pair insertional mutation in the gene . rare in Africa . It has also been proposed that DM1 is not prevalent in There is evidence that the mutation prevents appropriate trafficing of other parts of Asia including Iran . the protein to the cell surface and also increased constituitive activation To determine the distribution of alleles in healthy Iranian population of RANK . We now report the same mutation in an Iranian FEO and the frequency of large size normal alleles . pedigree, which is the first reported FEO pedigree of non-European Two hundred healthy individuals from different ethnic groups who live descent. The mutation was identified by sequencing and an intragenic in Iran participated in this study . A polymerase chain reaction was haplotype for the mutated allele is presented . conducted to determine the size of the alleles . So far, our data reveals that 23 .70% of alleles had 5 repeats, 23 .25% had 6-8 repeats, 45 .75% had 9-17 repeats and 7 .25% of alleles had CTG repeats of more than 18 . The most repeat number of CTG among Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P0616. Novel mutation in SLCA encoding sGLt2 in a in anamnesis (control group I), and in 49 placentas from childbirth Portuguese patient with autosomal recessive renal glucosuria women without RSM and with clinically and morphologically proved A. R. Fernandes1,2, R. S. Cerqueira1, L. Lameiras1, I. Miguel1, F. Rocha3, P. PLI (II group) . Group III included 23 placentas from patients with RSM Teixeira3, S. Beck1,4, P. Tavares1,5; and without PLI, and IV group included 24 placentas from patients 1CGC Centro de Genética Clínica, Porto, Portugal, 2ULHT, Lisboa, Portugal, without RSM and with PLI . 3Serviço de Nefrologia, Hospital S. João de Deus, V.N. Famalicão, Portugal, ACE genotype frequencies D\D D\I and I\I were significant difference 4Pediatric Hospital, Greifswald University, Greifswald, Germany, 5Genética (p<0,01: df6) in 4 groups studied (Table .I) . Médica, FMDP, Porto, Portugal. Table I . ACE gene genotypes frequencies in 4groups studied Renal glucosuria (RG) (OMIM #233100), an autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by renal glucose wasting in the absence genotype Igroup(n=36) IIgroup(n=54) IIIgroup(n=23) IVgroup(n=24) of hyperglycaemia or other proximal tubular dysfunction, results from mutations in SLC5A2 gene encoding the sodium/glucose co- D\D 22,2% 46,4% 47,8% 16,6% transporter type 2 (SGLT2) . In this work, we report a novel mutation I\D 58,3% 29,6% 43,5% 7,5% Val296Leu (886G>C) in a non-consanguineous Portuguese family I\I 19,5% 24% 8,7% 45,9% with autosomal-recessive RG . The index case is a 15 year-old patient, asymptomatic but with glucosuria and with normal glucose tolerance . ACE gene polymorphism is partly involved in the origin of RSM and Sequence analysis of SLC5A2 genomic DNA revealed a relatively PLI. ACE genotype could be treated as a disease modifier factor rather common SGLT2 IVS7+5 G>A mutation (a donor splice site mutation than as a disease susceptibility contributor . found to be associated with some residual glucose re-absorption and comparably low glucose excretion) transmitted from the patient´s P0619. molecular pathology of two special cases of acute father and a novel mutation Val296Leu (886G>C) involving a highly intermittent porphyria conserved residue . The mother was heterozygous for this last mutation. These findings confirm that mutations in the SLC5A2 gene D. Ulbrichova1, E. Flachsova1, M. Hrdinka1, J. Prochazkova1, I. Mikula1, J. are responsible for recessive renal glucosuria . Saligova2, E. Silhanova3, J. Zeman1, P. Martasek1; 11st School of Medicine, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2University Hospital Kosice, P0617. microarray based mutation analysis of ABcA4 gene in Kosice, Slovakia, 3University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic. several retinal dystrophies from spain Porphyrias are mostly inherited disorders caused by decreased activities of the enzymes in the heme biosynthetic pathway . Heme is D. Valverde1, R. Riveiro-Alvarez2, M. Baiget3, C. Ayuso2, .. EsRetNet4; synthesized by an orchestrated cascade of eight enzymes . Defects in 1University of Vigo. Spain, Vigo, Spain, 2Fundación Jiménez Díaz.Madrid. seven of these enzymes cause porphyrias, each of them characterized Spain, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital de Sant Pau.Barcelona. Spain, Barcelona, by a typical spectrum of accumulated and excreted porphyrins and their Spain, 4Retinal Spanish Network, Spain, Spain. precursors . Four of them are described as acute hepatic porphyrias Genetic variation in the ABCA4 (ABCR) gene has been associated (AP), which share possible precipitation of acute attacks . Acute with several distinct retinal phenotypes, including Stargardt disease/ intermittent porphyria (AIP), caused by porphobilinogen deaminase fundus flavimaculatus (STGD/FFM), cone-rod dystrophy (CRD), deficiency (PBGD), is the most frequent among hepatic porphyrias. retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and age-related macular degeneration . During systematic genetic analysis of AIP patiens, diagnosed in The current model of genotype/phenotype association suggests that Czech and Slovak Republics, we found three novel mutations and patients harbouring deleterious mutations in both ABCR alleles would five previously described mutations in seven unrelated patients. Two develop RP-like retinal pathology . Here we describe the spectrum of of these patients are the subject of this presentation: In a 15-year- mutations in ABCA4 gene founded in several phenotypes associated old boy with abdominal and subsequent neurological symptomatology, in Spanish population . 966insA (led to stop codon after 36 completely different amino acids Of 61 families recruited, 7 were diagnosed as Autosomal Dominant compared to wt-sequence) mutation within PBGD was found (de novo Macular Dystrophy, 26 were cone-rod dystrophy and 28 were classified mutation) . In another patient (female with acute attack in personal as typical RP . history), two mutations [518G>A (R173Q), and 610C>A (Q204E)] were For ADMD families three mutated alleles were detected in three found to be located in the same allele of exon 10 . Structural modeling families in heterozygous state (42%) . For family 59 a complex allele and the expression studies were performed . G1961E+S2255I was detected but it seems that the mutation no The probability of a life-threatening porphyric attack in AIP is a cosegregate in this family . For family 92 a mutation in heterozygous significant personal burden and creates a challenge for counseling state, I156V, was detected . And a mild allele (R943Q) was detected and medical management . Introducing molecular biology techniques for family 105 . to the diagnosis and heme arginate to the treatment of acute attacks For CRD families, for 11 of them a mutation were detected, for five increase our chances for effective treatment of AIP . families two mutations were found and for three families only one Supported by Grants MŠMT 1M6837805002, 0021620806 and GACR mutated allele were detected . So we could detect almost one mutated 303/03/H065 . allele in eleven families out of 26, represented 42% . For 28 classical RP families, no mutations were founded for 18 families and only in P0620. Molecular characterization of the first missense mutation the remaining 10 families one mutated allele was detected . So we in the fibrinogen Aalpha-chain gene causing afibrinogenemia. detected almost one mutated allele in the 35% of the RP cases . R. Asselta, M. Platè, M. Malcovati, M. L. Tenchini, S. Duga; P0618. Polymorphisms in the AcE gene are associated with Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, recurrent spontaneous miscarriages and placental insufficiency Milan, Italy. Congenital afibrinogenemia (MIM#202400) is a rare coagulation O. N. Bespalova, T. E. Ivaschenko, O. A. Tarasenko, O. V. Malysheva, V. S. disorder characterized by very low or unmeasurable levels of Baranov; functional and immunoreactive fibrinogen in plasma, associated with Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. a hemorrhagic phenotype of variable severity . It is transmitted as an The pathogenesis of recurrent spontaneous miscarriages (RSM) autosomal recessive trait (prevalence 1:1 .000 .000) and is invariantly and placental insufficiency (PLI) is rather complex and presumably associated with mutations affecting one of the three fibrinogen genes involves interaction of several genetic and environmental factors . The (FGA, FGB and FGG, coding for Aα, Bβ and γ chain, respectively). renin-angiotensin system (RAS) contributes to the pathogenesis of Fibrinogen is secreted by hepatocytes as a hexamer composed of two several diseases including fibrosis in the heart, kidney, lung, placenta copies of each chain; the lack of one chain has been demonstrated to and thus most probably might be involved in RSM and PS . The key prevent its secretion. Most genetic defects causing afibrinogenemia enzyme in RAS is the ACE which converts angiotensin I to the potent are truncating mutations, whereas only few missense mutations (4) vasoconstrictor angiotensin II . have been identified so far, all located in FGB . The I/D polymorphism of the ACE gene was investigated by PCR in In this study, direct sequencing of the fibrinogen genes in a 32-years- placentas from 41 childbirth women of without RSM and without PLI old afibrinogenemic Italian male identified the first missense mutation Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  (Met51Arg) located in the Aα-chain gene leading to a quantitative P0623. From childhood to adulthood: phenotypic variability in fibrinogen deficiency. The patient was a compound heterozygote for a neurodegenerative disorders due to GFAP mutations previously described frameshift mutation (1215delT) in the same gene . C. Mignot1, L. Burglen2, I. Desguerre3, E. Bertini4, P. Castelnau5, F. Gautier6, Met51Arg involves a residue located at the very beginning of the coiled- G. Bruneteau7, M. Bourgeois8, M. Pineda9, D. Grabli7, L. Hertz-Pannier10, B. coil domain, in a region previously demonstrated to play a pivotal role Fontaine7, G. Ponsot1, T. Billette de Villemeur1, D. Pham-Dinh11, O. Boespflug- in hexamer formation . In-vitro expression experiments in COS-1 cells Tanguy6, D. Rodriguez1,11; showed that Met51Arg abolishes secretion of the hexameric molecule, 1department of neuropediatrics, hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 2department even though traces of not completely assembled trimeric intermediate of genetics, hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 3department of neuropediatrics, were found in conditioned media . Western blot analysis performed on hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 4Hospital Bambino Gesu, Rome, Italy, 5depart- the proband’s plasma confirmed the presence in vivo of the trimeric ment of neuropediatrics, Tours, France, 6Inserm UMR 384, Faculté de Méde- fibrinogen, further supporting the hypothesis that the mutation alters cine, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 7Federation de neurologie, Pitié-Salpétrière, the final steps of fibrinogen assembly. Paris, France, 8department of neurosurgery, hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 9Neuropédiatrie, San Joan de Deu, Barcelone, Spain, 10department of radiology, P0621. Dysferlin interacts with AHNAK: secondary reduction of hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 11Inserm U 546 Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France. AHNAK in dysferlinopathy patients Alexander disease is related to mutations in the GFAP gene encoding Y. Huang1, S. H. Laval2, A. van Remoortere3, J. Baudier4, C. Benaud4, L. Ander- the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), a major intermediate filament son2, V. Straub2, A. Deelder3, R. R. Frants1, J. den Dunnen1, K. Bushby2, S. M. of mature astrocytes. Identification of the molecular defect allowed to van der Maarel1; describe the phenotypic spectrum of the disease, first reported in early 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, childhood . Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Institute of Human Genetics, International Centre We identified mutations in GFAP gene in 16 patients . In 13 patients onset for Life, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Department of Parasitology, of the disease occurred before 2 years: all of them had a suggestive Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4INSERM EMI-104, MRI, 9 a progressive megalencephaly and 7 at least one episode of DRDC CEA, Grenoble, France. seizures . Only 2 had a classical infantile course with regression before Mutations in dysferlin cause Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy (LGMD) 2 years while others patients displayed non specific mental retardation 2B, Miyoshi myopathy (MM) and distal anterior compartment myopathy . before onset of seizures or motor impairment . In 2 patients disease Dysferlin is primarily localized at the sarcolemma in skeletal muscle and begun in adulthood with palatal myoclonus . Precocious puberty and has been implicated in membrane repair processes . Its homologue, paroxystic dysphagia were the first symptoms in one patient affected myoferlin localizes to the sarcolemma and the nuclear membrane and with juvenile-onset disease . Surprisingly MRI revealed a tumoral is highly expressed during development. To further define the dysferlin chiasmatic lesion in an infantile Alexander patient . The association protein complex in skeletal muscle and to obtain functional insight in of Alexander disease and glioma, two primitive astrocytic diseases, dysferlin, we selected two single-domain antibody reagents (VHH) that seems not to be fortuitous and has been discussed in literature . recognize different epitopes of dysferlin . In conclusion, Alexander disease could be revealed by classical Co-immunoprecipitation coupled to MALDI allowed the identification infantile onset but also by atypical symptoms like non specific mental of proteins that interact with dysferlin . Amongst these was AHNAK, retardation, brainstem dysfunction, spinocerebellar atrophy or anorexia, previously implicated in cortical actin cytoskeleton organization and precocious puberty, tumor-like lesion on MRI . cell membrane cytoarchitecture . GST-pull down and co-IP studies confirmed the direct interaction between AHNAK and dysferlin or P0624. A functional study of a novel GFAP complex allele myoferlin. Moreover, immunofluorescence microscopy revealed a detected in a familial adult form of Alexander disease secondary reduction of AHNAK at the sarcolemma in dysferlinopathy T. Bachetti1, F. Caroli1, P. Balbi2, M. Seri3, A. Salmaggi4, R. Biancheri1, M. Filo- patients . As AHNAK does not contain transmembrane domains, we camo1, R. Ravazzolo1,5, I. Ceccherini1; propose that dysferlin and myoferlin anchor AHNAKs to the membrane, 1Istituto Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2Istituto Salvatore Maugeri, Montescano (PV), which provides a link between dysferlin and actin filaments. Italy, 3Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Istituto Besta, Milano, Italy, 5Univer- sità di Genova, Genova, Italy. P0622. characterization of the intracellular location of AiD Alexander disease is a rare neurological genetic disorder characterized isoforms by progressive white-matter degeneration associated with presence L. Barrio-Real1, S. Roa1, A. Fernandez-Medarde2, R. Gonzalez-Sarmiento1; in astrocytes of cytoplasmic aggregates, called Rosenthal fibers, 1Unit of Molecular Medicine. Department of Medicine. University of Salamanca, including the intermediate filament glial acid fibrillary protein (GFAP). Salamanca, Spain, 2Centro de Investigacion del Cancer, Salamanca, Spain. Infantile, juvenile and adult forms of the disease have been defined on A B-cell specific molecule, activation-induced cytidine deaminase the basis of age of onset and most of them have resulted to be caused (AID), has been recently shown to be essential and sufficient for B-cell by heterozygous GFAP mutations . affinity maturation processes such as somatic hypermutation (SHM) We have analyzed the GFAP gene in 12 Italian families, two of them and class-switch recombination (CSR) . This protein is also involved in with more than one affected over two generations, identifying ten gene conversion, which occur in the chicken . different alleles carrying 11 missense mutations . Interestingly, two of The functional model proposed for the AID protein suggests that it these, lying coupled on the same allele, were detected in the affected generates mismatch of DNA base pairs directly through DNA edition or members of a family characterized by recurrence of an adult onset of indirectly through RNA edition . Alexander disease . We have analyzed by RT-PCR AID expression in B and non-B cell To investigate the functional effect of this latter complex allele and a lines and characterized five differents isoforms: complete AID, possible cumulative effect of the two mutations, we have generated AIDdel(ex4)(30bp) lacking 30bp from 5’ end of exon 4, AIDdel(ex4) expression constructs encoding the wild type GFAP and its mutant lacking exon 4, AIDins(IVS3) including intron 3 and AIDdel(ex3,4), a forms (namely the double mutations, the two single mutations and a novel isoform lacking exons 3 and 4 (GenBank accession numbers: mutation, R239C, already known to display deleterious effects) in frame NM020661, AY536516, AY536517, AY541058, AY534975) . All isoforms with the Green Fluorescent Protein coding sequence . After transfection maintain the N-terminal region and differ at the carboxi-termini . We next in astrocytoma U251 cells, fluorescence microscope analysis revealed created constructs containing each isoform with a FLAG-epitope and that the construct carrying the two coupled GFAP mutations produced we transfected these constructs into COS7 cells. Inmunofluorescence patterns of GFAP aggregates characterized by intermediate severity analysis showed that all isoforms located at the cytoplasm . However, between the wild type and R239C GFAP proteins . Our results are in 20% of transfected cells, isoforms lacking exon 4 were present therefore consistent with a phenotype-genotype correlation between also in the nucleoli . Thus, our results indicate that AID isoforms may the severity of the disease and the in vitro amount of GFAP mutation have different intracellular location and suggest that they may exhibit dependent formation of cytoplasmic aggregates . different function .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P0625. investigation of the HLA-DRB1 locus in alopecia areata to be identified using one temperature range. The data is analysed B. Blaumeiser1, P. Entz2, R. C. Betz3, J. Lambert1, S. Ritzmann4, S. Han- using Revelation software which is specifically designed for the neken4, R. Kruse4, P. Nürnberg2, M. Nagy5, M. M. Nöthen6; identification of heteroduplexes. This enables traces to be overlaid and 1University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Max Delbrück Center for Mo- shifts identified. lecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 3University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Uni- Heteroduplex peak shifts are characterised by sequence analysis to versity Hospital Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 5Charité University Hospital, identify pathogenic mutations and to eliminate changes caused by Berlin, Germany, 6University of Bonn, Antwerp, Germany. polymorphisms . The COL4A5 gene is well suited to this approach as To further evaluate the nature of the HLA association with alopecia it has a low number of polymorphisms . Using this approach mutations areata (AA), we investigated the HLA-DRB1 locus in 161 AA patients have been identified in 14/48 patients, 5/14 males and 9/34 females. and 165 matched controls from Belgium and Germany . HLA- . DRB1 typing was performed by a recently established method that employs a combination of PCR-SSP (sequence specific priming) and P0628. Analysis of mitochondrial haplogroups in Persian PyrosequencingTM technology . patients with Alzheimer‘s disease No significant differences were observed for HLA allele groups DRB1 F. Fasahat1,2, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi1, M. Houshmand1, K. Gharagozli3, F. *01, *15, *16, *11, *13, *14, *07, *09, and *10 . HLA-DRB1*03 was found Mirzajani1; to confer a protective effect (7 .5% versus 13 .6%, p=0 .011) . Additional 1Department of Medical Genetics, National Institute for Genetic Engineering genotyping at the allelic level revealed a significant difference of and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Khatam Uni- HLA-DRB1*0301 between patients and controls (6 .8% versus 11 .2%, versity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of neurology, Loghman p=0.048). The DRB1*04 allele group was confirmed as a risk factor Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. for the development of AA (20 .8% versus 13 .3%, p=0 .012) with the Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia in allele DRB1*0401 accounting for the greatest proportion of the effect the elderly in which interplay between genes and the environment are (13 .4% versus 7 .3%, p=0 .014) . Results obtained after subgrouping of supposed to be involved . Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has the only the patients according to age at onset, severity and family history of non-coding regions at the displacement loop (D-loop) region that the disease suggests that the genetic effects of the HLA system are contains two hypervariable segments (HVS-I and HVS-II) with high strongest in familial cases of the disease . polymorphism . mtDNA has already been fully sequenced and many subsequent publications have showed polymorphic sites, haplogroups P0626. the detection of large rearrangements on 16p13.3 and haplotypes . Haplogroups could have important implications to causing AtR-16 by multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe understand association between mutability of the mitochondrial genome Amplification. and disease . To assess relationship between mtDNA haplogroup and C. L. Harteveld1, M. Kriek1, E. K. Bijlsma1, Z. Erjavec2, A. Voskamp1, D. Balak1, AD, we sequenced the mtDNA HVS-I in 30 AD patients and 100 control P. C. Giordano1; subjects. We have found that haplogroups H and U are significantly 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Delfzicht Zieken- more abundant in AD patients (P= 0 .016 for haplogroup H and huis, Delfzijl, The Netherlands. P=0 .0003 for haplogroup U) . Thus, these two haplogroups might act Genomic deletions involving the α-globin gene cluster on chromosome synergistically to increase the penetrance of AD disease . 16p13.3 are the most common molecular cause of α-thalassemia (approx . 80-90% of cases) and Alpha-thalassemia Mental Retardation P0629. investigation of polymorphisms and common deletion Syndrome (ATR-16) . At present the molecular tests commonly used in coding region of human mitochondrial DNA in 20 Persian to identify deletion types of α-thalassaemia or ATR-16 are gap- patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) PCR, Southern blot or Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) H. Hassani Kumleh1, F. Fasahat1,2, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi3, K. Gharagozli4; analysis . However, the applicability of these techniques is limited to 1Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic known deletions, may involve radio-activity, is dependent upon the Republic of Iran, 2Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Depart- hybridization probes available and may require time consuming and ment of Medical Genetics-National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Bio- laborious cell culture to generate metaphase chromosome spreads . technology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of neurology, Logh- We have developed a rapid and simple technique based on Multiplex man Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification for high resolution mapping of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia in rearrangements involving the tip of the short arm of chromosome 16 . the elderly in which interplay between genes and the environment We identified three deletions causing ATR-16 in Dutch patients suffering are supposed to be involved There are several disparate lines of from mild to moderate mental retardation . Because of its robustness evidence pointing to mitochondrial involvement in AD . Somatic mtDNA and simplicity, this technique should become the standard for the rearrangement mutations have been observed to be increased in detection of (large) rearrangements causing hemoglobinopathies, AD brains . Also, certain germ line mtDNA mutations have been also ATR-16 and other diseases, in laboratories capable of performing associated with late-onset AD, For example, the nucleotide pair (np) automated DNA fragment analysis . 4336 mutation in the tRNAGln . It has been observed that common 5- kb mtDNA deletion is elevated about 15-fold in AD patient brains . We P0627. Identification of mutations in X-linked Alport Syndrome analyzed 20 unrelated AD patients for mitochondrial mutation T4336C by temperature Gradient capillary Electrophoresis using the 96- beside mutations in the complete regions of ND1, tRNALeu, ND2 and capillary spectrumedix platform 16s rRNA by sequencing method . We also investigated common J. C. Pagan, R. Beevers, D. Ellis, F. Flinter, S. Abbs; deletion in the blood samples of AD patients . The sequences were Guy’s & St Thomas’ NHS Foundation trust, LONDON, United Kingdom. aligned upon the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS) and X-linked Alport syndrome is a hereditary neuropathy associated with any incompatibilities were recorded single base substitutions (SBS), haematuria, progressive renal failure, sensori-neural deafness and insertions and deletions (Indels) . The mtDNA A4336G mutation and characteristic eye signs . It is caused by mutations in the COL4A5 gene mtDNA common deletion were not present in AD patient but our results and revealed 6 new polymorphisms which had not been reported before approximately 65% of mutations reported are point mutations . Small in the mitochondrial databases . Our study suggests that the A4336G insertions and deletions account for 20% of mutations with gross mutation were not associated with an increased risk of AD but other rearrangements also described . mtDNA mutations may contribute the risk factor to idiopathic AD . We have developed a mutation scanning approach for Alport syndrome by amplifying all 51 exons in 24 non-flourescent multiplex PCR assays. P0630. Generation and characterization of recombinant hGSK-3β TGCE is performed on the SpectruMedix machine, a high- throughput and htau over-expressing EcR-293 cells 96-capillary platform which uses ethidium bromide staining to identify D. Kurko, A. Boros, P. Dezso, Z. Urbanyi, J. Nagy, G. Ignacz-Szendrei; heteroduplexes . Gedeon Richter Ltd., Budapest, Hungary. The COL4A5 gene has GC rich fragments and can be problematic for The regulation of microtubule-associated protein Tau phosphorylation heteroduplex analysis but the TGCE technology allows heteroduplexes seems to be an important factor in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 6 disease. In vitro studies have shown that glycogen synthase kinase-3β applied to 171 relatives of the HSR+ patients . Variance component (GSK-3β) plays an important role in the regulation of this process. analysis using these 14 families suggests that genetic differences A cell-based assay has been developed to study GSK-3β-mediated may explain 61% of the phenotypic variability of plasma APP activity Tau hyperphosphorylation in EcR-293 cell line . EcR-293 cells were (p<0 .001) . Furthermore, we show that a polymorphism (C-2399A) at co-transfected with human GSK-3β and human tau cDNAs using the the XPNPEP2 locus is a significant predictor of APP activity among the inducible mammalian vectors . Cell colonies were tested for hGSK- HSR- controls (p=0.029). In addition, there was a significant difference 3β and hTau mRNA as well as protein expression using quantitative in mean APP activity by genotype (p<0 .001), using a recessive genetic RT-PCR and flow cytometry based immunocytochemistry. Protein model for the A allele. Finally, our results define the non-specific expression was three- to fivefold over the basal level in the transfected inhibition of recombinant APP by some ACEi drugs . In conclusion, and induced clones. Clone H11 exhibited the highest GSK-3β and tau our study highlights the complexity of HSR, its multifactorial nature levels; therefore it was chosen for investigation of tau phosphorylation and expression of genetic variation in response to the environment using phosphorylation-site specific anti-tau antibodies. and drugs, suggesting an ecogenetic character for these rare, but life- In H11 cells pre-treated with the inducing agent muristerone A (MuA), threatening adverse events . a significant increase in tau phosphorylation at specific GSK-3β- dependent phosphorylation sites (Ser 202 and Ser 396) was detected . P0633. Association between APOA5 -t1131c mutation and Flow cytometry analysis revealed a dose-dependent up regulation of triglyceride level in Hungarian patients with metabolic syndrome tau hyperphosphorylation with increasing concentration of MuA . In and diabetes mellitus addition, the GSK-3 selective inhibitor LiCl reduced tau phosphorylation K. Horvatovich1, L. Magyari1, A. Maász1, B. Faragó1, B. Laczy2, L. Markó2, I. in a concentration dependent manner . Wittmann2, B. Melegh1; Thus, the established cell line stably and inducibly co-expressing 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, Pécs, Hungary, 22nd hGSKβ and hTau is a useful tool to investigate the effect of GSK-3β Department of Internal Medicine, Pécs, Hungary. inhibitors on Tau phosphorylation . Objectives: The T>C SNP in the promoter region of the apolipoprotein A5 (apoA5) gene at position -1131 is strongly associated with elevated P0631. Possible influence of oleic acid on fibrillogenesis of plasma triglyceride level (TG); thereby the C variant means a risk lysozyme factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD) . The prevalence of ischemic V. V. Egorov; cardiovascular disease is known to be higher amongst metabolic Institute for Experimental Medicine, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. syndrome patients and patients with diabetes . Patients and methods: In our study we research the influence of different substances on We studied the distribution of this substitution using a PCR-RFLP fibrillogenesis of model proteins such as human alpha-lactalbumin assay in 120 Hungarian patients with metabolic syndrome, 68 with (hLA) and chicken egg white lysozyme (CEWL) . There are lot of factors type 2 diabetes mellitus and 280 non-diabetic controls . Results: which can play role in fibrillogenesis in vivo but do not present in vitro. The level of TG was increased in the metabolic syndrome patients Fatty acids are one of these components . In silico analysis of CEWL (2 .99±0 .30) and in diabetic patients (2 .21±0 .15) compared with the structure lead us to model in which surface of fatty acid drop can take controls (1.29±0.64 mmol/l; means + SE, p< 0 .05) . The frequency of part in hiding of hydrophobic residues and increasing of local protein the C allele was also increased in patients with metabolic syndrome concentration to critical value . Oleic acid (C18:1) is known as agent (13 .4%) and diabetic subjects (14%) compared with the controls (5%) . that can interact with non-native form of hLA . So we decide to prove Conclusions: Our results suggests that increased prevalence of the a role of oleic acid on initial stage of CEWL fibrillogenesis. CEWL(2 apoA5 T1131C variant in metabolic syndrome and diabetic patients mg/ml) under denaturing conditions (pH 2 .0, 100mM NaCl, 55 ºC) was can be a cause of the increased CVD incidence rate in these diseases covered with oleic acid drop . After 2 hours of incubation we observed via the increased TG levels . a thin white film appearance on phase interface. We add Thioflavine T(ThT) to solution under oleic acid film. Fluorescent microscopy of 2 P0634. Apolipoprotein E gene polymorphism and plasma lipid phase system including this film shows presence of ThT fluorescence levels in obese and dislipidemic turkish children on edges of oleic acid drops . Fluorescence of ThT is the evidence A. .. Ulgenalp1, E. Yilmaz1, E. Bora1, O. Giray1, M. Coker2, D. Ercal1; for amyloid fibrils presence. We do not observe any fluorescence on 1Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics-Division phase interface of control probe without any proteins or with bovine of Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of serum albumin. Role of fatty acids on initial stages of fibrillogenesis Pediatrics-Division of Endocrine and Metabolism, Izmir, Turkey. is discussed . The aim of this study was to search the relation between apolipoprotein E gene polymorphism and plasma lipid levels in obese and nonobese P0632. Ecogenetic nature of hypersensitivity reactions during Turkish children and apoE gene polymorphism in dislipidemias hemodialysis coexisting with obesity . Q. Duan1,2, G. Molinaro3, M. Chagnon4, N. Gervais3, M. Dubé5, P. Simon6, P. The study population was composed of genetically nonrelated children Clavel7, G. Boileau8, Y. Lepage4, J. Chanard9, G. A. Rouleau1, A. Adam3; who were having primary obesity in 57 and nonobese 18 . In obese 1Centre de recherche du CHUM, Université de Montréal, Montreal, PQ, Ca- children apo A1 levels were higher . In obese and nonobese group, the nada, 2Dept. of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, PQ, Canada, distrubition of E2/E3 was 10,5%, 27,8% ; E3/E3 80,7%, 61% ; E3/E4 3Faculté de pharmacie, Université de Montréal, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 4Dépar- 7%, 5,6% respectively . E2/E4 was 1,8% in obese group and E4/E4 tement de mathématiques et de statistiques, Université de Montréal, Montreal, 5,6% in nonobese group . Allele frequency in obese and nonobese PQ, Canada, 5Institut de cardiologie de Montréal, Université de Montréal, Mon- group was 6,1%, 14% for epsilon 2 (ε2) allele, 89,5% and 7,8% for treal, PQ, Canada, 6Service de Néphrologie, CH La Beauchée, Saint-Brieuc, epsilon 3 (ε3) allele, 4,4% and 8% for epsilon 4 (ε4) allele. In obese France, 7Service de Néphrologie-Hémodialyse, ARPDD, Reims, France, children, ApoB level was higher in group E3 . 8Département de biochimie, Université de Montréal, Montreal, PQ, Canada, The distribution of Apo E allele and phenotype in obese and healthy 9Service de Néphrologie, CH Universitaire-Reims, Reims, France. children was similar . Apo E phenotype distribution of study population Angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) are associated with showed similarity to Mediterranean societies . increased risk of hypersensitivity reactions (HSR) during hemodialysis In obese group total cholesterol, Apo B, Apo A1 level found to be higher . using negatively charged membranes . We hypothesize that this side- We determined that 44% of the obese children had hyperlipidemia, effect of ACEi therapy is ecogenetic in nature . Our study measured and in comparison with the nonobese children, we found higher levels aminopeptidase P (APP) activities in the plasma of 14 patients who of ApoB which had atherosclerotic property and Apo A1 which had suffered an HSR (HSR+) and control group (n=39) who did not develop anti-atherosclerotic effects in obese group . In the nonobese healthy any side effect (HSR-) during dialysis with an AN69 membrane while children, mean total cholesterol and LDL levels were higher in group simultaneously treated with an ACEi. We hereby report a significantly E4 than group E3 and E2 . decreased (p=0 .013) plasma APP activity and an altered degradation (lower β value, p<0.001) of endogenous des-Arginine9-Bradykinin among HSR+ subjects . The same analytical approach was also Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P0635. High resolution analysis by X chromosomal array identified: 11 nonsense mutations, 15 deletions/insertions, 5 splice comparative genomic hybridisation (array-cGH) in patients with site mutations, and 39 missense mutations . To classify missense XLmR variants we combined evolutionary conservation, using the human, I. Madrigal1, L. Rodríguez-Revenga1, L. Armengol2, E. González2, X. Estivill2, chimpanzee, dog, mouse, chicken and frog Pkhd1 sequences, with M. Milà1; the Grantham score for chemical differences . Thirty-three missense 1Servei de Bioquimica i Genètica Molecular. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, mutations were considered pathogenic and 7 were classified as rare, 2Genes and Disease Programme, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, probably pathogenic variants . In 31 index patients two mutations were Spain. found, in 6 patients one mutation was found, leading to a mutation The molecular basis of the X-linked metal retardation (XLMR) is poorly detection rate of 87% . More families are currently under investigation . understood due to the hight genetic heterogenity of this disorder; The analysis of amino acid conservation as well as applying the nowadays OMIM lists 359 entries about XLMR although only 44 X-linked Grantham score for chemical differences allowed us to determine the genes are known to cause XLMR (syndromic and non-syndromic) . In pathogeneity for nearly all new missense mutations and thus proved to order to screen for submicroscopic aberrations in patients afected by be useful tools to classify missense variants . XLMR, we have constructed a full coverage X chronosome BAC array In addition to sequence analysis, MLPA was used to identify multiple for comparative genomic hibridization (array CGH) that consists of exon deletions . We selected 9 probes equally spread over the gene 1,600 genomic clones derived from the X chromosome . The sensitivity but did not find deletions, indicating that large deletions in the PKHD1 and specificity of the array were tested in a series of normal versus gene are not a frequent cause of ARPKD . normal experiments and a series of patients with known chromosome X copy number aberrations (including an Xp11 .4 deletion, Xq22-q26 P0638. mutational analysis of the BBS gene involved in Bardet- duplication and Xp11-p21 duplication) . The presence of DNA copy Biedl syndrome in spanish patients number aberrations in XLMR was investigated in a cohort of 30 XLMR I. Pereiro1,2, D. Valverde1,2, C. Ayuso3, G. Antiñolo4, J. M. Millán5, M. Carballo6, patients . Preliminary analysis detects . a) Two deletions: one affecting M. Baiget7; OPHN1 gene (Xq12) and the other affecting FLNA, EMD and TAZ genes 1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2EsRetNet, Vigo, Spain, 3EsRetNet, Madrid, (Xq28) . b) 9 duplications:7 cases harbouring segmental duplications in Spain, 4EsRetNet, Sevilla, Spain, 5EsRetNet, Valencia, Spain, 6EsRetNet, Ter- Xq26 .2 and Xq28, one duplication affecting NXF3 and BEX1 genes rassa, Spain, 7EsRetNet, Barcelona, Spain. (Xq22.1) and other affecting EDA2R gene (Xq12). Confirmation by Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS; OMIM 209900) is a heterogeneous others methods and clinical and molecular characterization are being pleiotropic human disorder with the main clinical features of retinopathy, performed . Array CGH assays has become a powerful tool for the obesity, polydactyly, hypogenitalism, mental retardation and renal genome wide screening for copy number aberration and will facilitate abnormalities . These patients have an increased incidence of diabetes the diagnosis and identification of novel genes involved in X-linked mellitus, hypertension and congenital heart malformations . Although mental retardation . (FIS 04/1126, V2003-REDC-07, REDG-098) BBS is rare in the general population (about 1/160,000 in West Europe), there is a considerable interest in its study because the components P0636. investigation of mitochondrial deletions and of its phenotype are very common . Until now, nine involved genes Haplogroups in Persian Ataxia-telangiectasia patients have been identified (BBS1-9) and several pieces of evidence have B. Hooshiar Kashani, M. DehghanManshadi, S. Saber, S. Raes zadeh, M. suggested their role in ciliary function . BBS is a complex inheritance ShafaShariat Panahi, M. Houshmand, M. Sanati; disease and it has been proposed as a triallelic trait in some families, National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- where three mutated alleles in two genes are necessary to exhibit the lamic Republic of Iran. phenotype . The BBS2 gene has 17 exons and is situated on 16q21 . Ataxia-Telangiectasia (AT) is a rare human neurodegenerative BBS2 displays a wide pattern of tissue expression, however there is autosomal recessive multisystem disease that is characterized by a no information available regarding the specific function of this gene. wide range of features including, progressive cerebellar ataxia with We analyzed the involvement of mutations in BBS2 for 44 patients onset during infancy, occulocutaneous telangiectasia, susceptibility by PCR-SSCP . An abnormal pattern of SSCP was detected in exons to neoplasia, occulomotor disturbances, chromosomal instability 2 and 3 . The results show an implication of BBS2 in less than 5% and growth and developmental abnormalities . Mitochondrial DNA of our pool of patients . It has been described that 40% of the BBS2 (mtDNA) has the only non-coding regions at the displacement loop families presents mutations in other related genes . The patients with (D-loop) region that contains two hypervariable segments (HVS-I and mutations in the BBS2 gene lack mutations in BBS1 and BBS6 genes, HVS-II) with high polymorphism . We investigated mt-DNA deletions previously analyzed by some of the authors, suggesting that the and haplogroups in AT patients . In this study, 24 Iranian patients triallelic inheritance is not present in the families studied . affected with AT and 100 normal controls were examined . mt-DNA was extracted from whole blood and examined by 6 primers for existence P0639. Functional analysis of a novel KcNQ2 gene variant found of any mitochondrial deletions. We also amplified and sequence the in a large pedigree with benign familial neonatal convulsions mtDNA HVS-I by standard sequencing techniques . mtDNA deletions (BFNc). were present in 13 (76%) of our patients (9 .0 kb deletion in all samples, L. Volkers1, M. B. Rook2, W. A. Groenewegen2, B. P. C. Koeleman1, M. J. A. 5 .0 kb in one and 7 .5 kb in two patients), representing mtDNA damage van Kempen1, D. Lindhout1,3; which may be due to oxidative stress in mitochondria . Our results 1Clinical Genetics Section or Complex Genetics Section, DBG-Department of showed that there is no association between mtDNA haplogroups and Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, AT . Our results may explain involvement of mitochondrial damage in 2Department of Medical Physiology, Heart Lung Centre Utrecht, University the pathogenesis of the AT Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Epilepsy Institute of the Netherlands, Heemstede, The Netherlands. P0637. molecular Diagnostics for Autosomal Recessive Benign Familial Neonatal Convulsions (BFNC) is a rare epilepsy Polycystic Kidney Disease. disorder with autosomal dominant inheritance . Mutations in the voltage M. Losekoot, C. Haarloo, S. J. White, C. Ruivenkamp, M. H. Breuning, D. J. gated potassium channel genes KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 are highly M. Peters; associated with BFNC . KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 subunits form functional Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands. tetrameric voltage gated channels . Assembly of the conserved A- Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney Disease (ARPKD) is a domain located in the carboxy-terminus of the proteins, results in a severe form of polycystic kidney disease characterized by enlarged classical M-current . In many neurons, the M-current is important in kidneys and congenital hepatic fibrosis. It is caused by mutations in regulating excitability and in reducing repetitive action potential the Polycystic Kidney and Hepatic Disease 1 (PKHD1)-gene, which discharges . Previously, we have reported a splice-site mutation in consists of 86 exons that are variably assembled in a number of the KCNQ2 gene in a BFNC family with 13 affected members . This alternatively spliced transcripts . Mutation analysis was performed by mutation (c .IVS14-6(C>A)) creates a new, preferentially used, splice direct sequencing of the 67 exons encompassing the largest open site, that results in a premature stop codon and a predicted protein reading frame . So far, in 39 families the following mutations were truncation (p .R588X) . Here we report the biophysical properties of this Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  mutant . Whole-cell voltage clamp analysis reveals the presence of a Brachydactyly type B1 (BDB1) is an autosomal dominant skeletal large M-type potassium current in transfected HEK293 cells which disorder characterized by abnormal development of the distal phalanges overexpress wild-type KCNQ2/KCNQ3 heteromeres . In contrast, and nail dysplasia . This disorder is caused by mutations of the orphan cells transfected with KCNQ2/KCNQ3 and mutant KCNQ2 cDNA in receptor tyrosine kinase ROR2 that is encoded by the ROR2 gene a 1:2:1 ratio, show a large reduction in M-current (wild-type 781±170 (9q22) . ROR2 consists of extracellular immunoglobilin-like, cysteine- pA/pF (n=7); mutant 224±53 pA/pF (n=7)). Furthermore, the voltage rich, kringle, transmembrane domains and cytoplasmatic tyrosine dependence of channel activation in cells expressing the mutant is kinase domain, distally located serine-threonine-rich and proline- shifted in the depolarizing direction by 6mV . These changes may result rich domens. Only mutations flanking tyrosine kinase domain result in hyper-excitability of neurons in which the M-current is important in in BDB1 phenotype, in all other mutations localization the autosomal modulating the resting membrane potential . recessive Robinow syndrome develops . We have investigated one BDB1 family in which two affected members had typical features of P0640. Gender Difference in the DAt1 -67 t-Allele Homozygosity diseases . DNA sequence analysis of ROR2 gene exons concerned with and Predisposition to Bipolar Disorder BDB1 revealed heterozygous 2-bp deletion in exon 9 . This mutation M. Ohadi1, M. R. Keikhaee1, A. Javanbakht2, M. R. Sargolzaee2, H. Najmabadi1; led to frame shift due to 1397-1398 delAA and located proximal to the 1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Ebne-Sina Psy- tyrosine kinase domain . The 1398insA mutation in the same position chiatric Center, Mashad University of Medical Sciences, Khorassan, Islamic has been reported previously . Republic of Iran. BACKGROUND: Linkage and association studies implicate the P0643. Novel application of sNPlex Genotyping assay for breast dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) in the etiopathophysiology of cancer mutation screening bipolar disorder . We have recently reported the association between J. McCauley, S. Abbs, S. Yau; the DAT1 core promoter -67A/T polymorphism and this disorder in a Guy’s & St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. sample of Iranian patients. For the first time, these data support sex There is widespread pressure for genetics laboratories to undertake difference in the homozygosity for the -67 T-allele between male and faster mutation screening of the full BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in female affected cases . METHODS: The present study was undertaken patients with a family history of inherited breast/ovarian cancer . We will with a larger sample size of cases (N = 240) and controls (N = 213) achieve this using a pre-screen approach combining the SpectruMedix to determine whether there is consistent difference between male and Temperature Gradient Capillary Electrophoresis (TGCE) Reveal female patients and homozygozity for this allele . RESULTS: The results system to detect point mutations by heteroduplex analysis followed by are consistent with our preliminary observation that homozygosity for sequence analysis to characterise them and MLPA analysis to detect the T-allele is a predisposing factor in male patients, but not in females whole exon deletions and duplications . A consequence of this screen (χ2= 8 .825, df = 1, p ≤ 0.003, 95% CI, OR = 3.624). CONCLUSION: will be the identification of a large number of SNPs (147 SNPs are This finding may reflect one of the proposed neuroprotective effects recorded in the databases in 83 BRCA amplicons) . Our solution to of estrogen upon the negrostriatal dopaminergic system through reduce the amount of sequencing is to utilize the Applied Biosystems antagonizing the dopamine transporter protein in females . SNPlex Genotyping System 48-plex assay to genotype all our patients for 45 of the most common SNPs and three most common P0641. BmP4 expression and it’s role in the rib cage Ashkenazi Jewish mutations . After mutation analysis amplicons development would be prioritised for sequencing if they have a heteroduplex but A. Radulescu1, M. Puiu2, D. Vasilie1, O. Adam1, V. David1; are not heterozygous for a SNP . SNPs were selected if they had a 1Childrens Hospital Louis Turcanu, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine heterozygosity >3% and only one SNP was chosen from SNPs known and Pharmacy “Victor Babes “- Department of Human Genetics Timisoara, to be in linkage disequilibrium . The SNPlex assay uses oligonucleotide Romania, Timisoara, Romania. ligation assay combined with multiplex PCR to discriminate between Background: Recent data shows that the Bmp4 plays significant alleles and target amplification, while GeneMapper software provides roles in a large number of developmental processes, including bone automated data processing . This highly automated technology will formation and development . allow us to genotype 384 samples in 72 hours . Objective: The purpose of this study was to identify the Bmp4 expression and its role in the development of ribs and sternum and P0644. A novel Notch3 gene mutation in a patient with cADAsiL analysis of the skeletal phenotypes caused by the genetic inactivation from southern italy of Bmp4 . along with the study of it’s expression patterns . C. Ungaro, M. Liguori, F. L. Conforti, T. Sprovieri, G. Di Palma, A. Patitucci, A. Design and methods: Bmp4 lacZ mice, where expression of the Magariello, A. L. Gabriele, M. Muglia, R. Mazzei; inserted lacZ is controlled by the entire endogenous Bmp4 gene, were Institute of Neurological Science National Research Council, Mangone (CS), used for mapping all Bmp4 expression domains in the bones that form Italy. the thorax . Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts To examine the onset of endogenous Bmp4 expression in ribs , and Leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is a late-onset syndrome heterozygous Bmp4 lacZ newborn mice ( PN1 ) were utilized for characterized by subcortical ischemic strokes, attacks of migraine analysis of ß-gal activity . with aura, and vascular dementia . Subcortical dementia, in all cases B-Galactosidase staining was assessed in newborn mice using associated with pseudobulbar palsy, is the second commonest clinical newborn mice who were fixed with ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde for manifestation of CADASIL . Epilepsy has been reported in 2-10% of 30 min to 1 h, and then washed three times with PBS for 5 min each . patients, most often following strokes . All individuals, both symptomatic The specimens were then stained overnight in freshly made X-Gal and asymptomatic, have prominent signal abnormalities on brain solution (1 mg/ml) at 320 C . Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) . Results: Asynchronous ossification of inferior sternal segment 5 was CADASIL is caused by single missense mutations, small in-frame recorded .This ossification segment differed from all the other four deletions, or splice site mutations in the Notch3 gene encoding a centers and had a modified shape . We have noticed that in some transmembrane receptor . All previously reported mutations resulted in cases this center was redused in size and in others fused with segment an odd number of cysteine residues within one of the 34 epidermal 4 giving it an unusual shape . growth factor (EGF)-like repeats in the extracellular amino-terminal conclusions: These results indicate that Bmp4 gene dosage is region of the Notch3 receptor . essential for the normal development of the sternal bone and ribs . Here we report the apparently sporadic case of a 65 years-old woman with moderate cognitive deficit and diffuse leukoencephalopathy at the P0642. Identification of the mutation in the Receptor Tyrosine MRI scans . The evaluation of Notch 3 gene revealed a novel mutation Kinase Gene ROR, which causes Brachydactyly type B1. in exon 11, located within the extracellular domain of the gene and J. Kuropatkina1, V. Fedotov2, S. Tverskaya1, A. Polyakov1; predicted to result in a gain of a cysteine residue in position 574 . As 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Vo- this mutation segregates with the neurologic and clinical phenotype, ronezh diagnostics Center, Voronezh, Russian Federation. we suggest that it is the disease causative mutation in our patient .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  This study provides the first evidence of a mutation in Notch3 gene P0647. Biochemical and genetic analysis of spanish patients exon 11 in a subject from southern Italy. Furthermore, the finding of with congenital disorder of glycosylation a new mutation contribute to enlarge the spectrum of Notch3 gene B. Pérez, A. I. Vega, F. Leal, C. Pérez-Cerdá, M. Ugarte; mutations . Centro de Biología Molecular, CEDEM, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Ma- drid, Spain. P0645. Molecular findings in CAPN, DYSF and GNE related to Congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG) is a heterogeneous various muscle diseases genetic group of metabolic inherited disorder, clinically characterized M. Krahn1, C. Pécheux1, K. Nguyen1, G. Bassez2, C. Beroud3, B. Eymard2, E. by a central nervous system dysfunction and multiorgan failure . Most Hammouda4, V. Labelle1, A. Urtizberea4, F. Leturcq5, R. Bernard1, N. Levy1,6, F. of these disorders are associated with several enzymatic defects rench Network on LGMD7; involved in N-glycosylation of proteins . We present the biochemical 1Departement de Genetique medicale, Hopital d’enfants La Timone, Marseille, and genetic study of a cohort of 17 affected patients identified using France, 2Institut de Myologie, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, % CDT (carbohydrate-deficiency trasferrin) level and typical isoelectric France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Génétique Humaine, focusing pattern. We have identified six patients belonging to the most Montpellier, France, 4AFM et Généthon, Evry, France, 5Laboratoire de Bio- common type CDG-Ia and one patient CDG-Ib . Up to now the remaining chimie Génétique, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 6Inserm U491 : «Génétique patients are still unclassified. Fibroblasts phosphomannomutase Médicale et Développement», Faculté de Médecine Timone, Marseille, France, (PMM) activity from the six CDGIa patients ranged between 0 .8- 7-, -, France. 2 .3 mU/mg (control range 6 .5±1 .7) . Eleven allelic variants of the 12 The identification of mutations in large-sized genes is challenging on mutant alleles analyzed have been identified by sequencing of the a routine basis in clinical diagnostic settings . Methods for mutation entire coding region of the PMM2 cDNA and the corresponding gDNA screening are particularly adapted to this task . regions. We have identified eight different mutations, two of them are Here, we report our experience in mutation screening using DHPLC novel, one being a missense change (D209G) and the variant allele analysis and subsequent sequencing of detected variants, in the large- IVS7-9T>G located in the polypirimidine tract (U) of last intron of sized genes encoding calpain-3 (CAPN3, 15q15 .1-q21 .1, 24 coding PMM2 gene . The T to G change in the U tract of intron 7 likely disturbs exons), dysferlin (DYSF, 2p13 .1-p13 .3, 55 coding exons) and UDP-N- the binding site of the splicing factor U2AF. We have also identified one acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE, CDG-Ib patient bearing the already described change R219Q in MPI 9p12-13, 11 coding exons), in three cohorts of respectively 48, 93, and gene . The residual mannose phosphate isomerase activity measured 31 myopathic patients . in patient’s fibroblasts was 2.1 mU/mg (control range 12.8±2.7). Based Mutations in CAPN3 and DYSF cause the most frequent forms of on the clinical, biochemical and genetic results, we will discuss the autosomal recessive Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMD2), phenotype-genotype correlation . respectively LGMD2A and LGMD2B . The most common form of autosomal recessive (AR) hereditary inclusion-body myopathy (HIBM) P0648. the investigation of cFtR gene mutations in cohort of is caused by mutations in GNE . infertile men from Ukraine Patients were included after initial clinical and pathological assessment, Y. Puziy, V. Pampuha, O. Fesai, L. Livshits; allowing to select the subsequent molecular analyses . A resume of the Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics (National Academy of Sciences of results of the molecular analyses are presented in the table below . At Ukraine), Kiev, Ukraine. least one pathogenic allele was detected in >85% of patients included It was supposed that apart from cystic fibrosis, mutations in the for CAPN3 and DYSF analysis . The lower mutation detection rate cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene observed for GNE may be correlated to genetic heterogeneity and/or are also involved in male infertility . To study the possible association difficulties in defining phenotypic criteria for the inclusion of patients. between CFTR gene mutations and spermatogenesis we have Mutations identified in the CAPN3 and DYSF genes were compiled in analyzed the delF508(10exon), R117H(4exon), 621+1G-T(4exon), the locus-specific databases UMD-CAPN3 and UMD-DYSF, adapted N1303K(21exon), CFTR2,3del21kb, P1290S(20exon) mutations and from the generic software UMD (Universal Mutations Database) . poly -T sequence (8 intron) in the group of 365 patiens with azoospermia and oligospermia(involved in ICSI programme), none had pulmonary P0646. Functional analysis of new Blau syndrome-associated or gastrointestinal manifestations of cystic fibrosis and in 474 healthy cARD15 mutations. valantiers . The CFTR gene mutations were analyzed by PCR-based M. M. van Duist1,2, M. De Marchi1; methods, poly-T alleles were determind by fluorescent-sequencer 1Medical genetics, University of Torino, Orbassano, Italy, 2Current address: (ALF express) method . Nobody from analyzed patients determined as Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment, Candiolo, Italy. a carrier of AZFa, AZFb and AZFc regions (long arm chromosome Y ) . Blau ssyndrome (BS) is a very rare autosomal dominant syndrome 5T allel (8intron) of CFTR gene associated with CBAVD was detected characterized by early onset granulomatous arthritis, uveitis and skin in 5 .3% in our group of patients .The same frequency of 5T allel was rash, caused by high penetrance mutations in the CARD15 gene detected in common populations of different countries . The frequency encoding a cytoplasmic receptor of bacterial peptidoglycan natural of CFTR gene mutations carriers detected in our group of patients immunity . In contrast with the common Crohn’s disease-associated (8.22%) was statisticaly significant higher (P=0.017) than in control SNPs, which are located in the final ligand binding domain and impair group (2.53%). More over, R117H mutation identified in the group ligand recognition, the identified Blau s. mutations are all in the central of infertile men was revealed neither in cystic fibrosis patiens nor in nucleotide binding domain and may activate ligand independent control group from Ukraine . signals, in accordance with the lack of intestinal involvement . The obtained data produce the evidence of the possible involvement of In an Italian BS family we recently described the CARD15 E383K CFTR protein in spermatogenesis . To specify the association between mutation (van Duist et al . 2005) . The position in the NBD close to a CFTR gene mutations and pathogenesis of spermatogenesis the other magnesium binding site, its segregation with the disease, its absence CFTR gene mutation and polymorphisms analysis in unfertile men in 100 healthy controls and its conservation in other NBD containing require continued practical and theoretical research . genes and in homologous genes of different species, suggested this mutation to be pathogenic . P0649. Y chromosome microdeletions and cFtR gene mutations Here we report the functional analysis of this variant by a gene reporter in serbian infertile men assay, that proved this mutation to be gain-of-function . The E383K A. Nikolic1, J. Dinic1, J. Kusic1, A. Divac1, M. Ristanovic2, D. Radojkovic1; variant showed a 3 fold increased NF-kB activity compared to the wild 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and type protein, slightly lower than the previously identified mutations Montenegro, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Medical faculty, University of Bel- (R334Q/W, L469F = 4 fold) . Similar investigation is underway for grade, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. another never earlier described NBD variant W490L we identified in a The most frequent genetic causes of male infertility are considered to BS affected child born from healthy parents (Patient from A .Martini and be Y chromosome microdeletions and mutations in the Cystic Fybrosis M .Gattorno, Gaslini Institute, Genova ) . Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR) gene . This study has encompassed 33 infertile men (10 with obstructive azoospermia, Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 11 with impaired spermatogenesis or sperm maturation and 12 with detect mutations of the CHM gene, all 15 exons were amplified by PCR unknown cause of infertility) who were screened for the presence of Y and the products directly sequenced . Fundus examination in affected chromosome microdeletions and CFTR gene mutations . The presence males revealed mottling of the RPE without macular involvement of microdeletions in the AZF region of Y chromosome was analyzed typical of CHM. There was evidence of differences in fundus findings by multiplex PCR analysis . The screening of the CFTR gene was between some carrier females . CHM gene analysis revealed a novel performed by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) method . C to T mutation at nucleotide 838 in exon 6, which predicts a R270X The presence of the 5T allele of CFTR Tn polymorphism was analyzed nonsense mutation. This is the first description of molecular analysis by PCR-mediated Site-directed Mutagenesis (PSM) method . Deletions in Mexican patients with CHM; our results expand the mutational on Y chromosome were detected in 4 patients . Three CFTR mutations espectrum of the CHM gene in choroideremia . (F508del, 711+3A/G and D1152H) were detected on 8 chromosomes, while the presence of 5T variant was detected on 6 out of 66 analyzed P0652. Genetic testing in czech patients with ‚idiopathic‘ and chromosomes . The presence of Y microdeletions and/or CFTR hereditary chronic pancreatitis mutations was detected in 6 of 11 patients obstructive azoospermia, M. Koudová, J. Anguelová, M. Macek Jr.; in 3 of 12 patients with impaired spermatogenesis or sperm maturation Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic. and in 3 of 13 patients with unknown cause of infertlity . This study has The aim of our study was to evaluated the profile of genetic mutations confirmed that both Y chromosome microdeletions and CFTR gene in patients with hereditary and idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and to mutations play important roles in etiology of male infertility, as well as compare it with the healthy controls in the Czech population . that they are found more often in men with more severe spermatogenic Methods: We have screened for common PRSS1 (R122H, N29I), defect . SPINK1 (N34S) mutations in a total of 124 chronic pancreatitis (CP) cases (“idiopathic” CP-ICP /incl . criteria: N Engl J Med 1998, 339: P0650. multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PcR) of short 653; 46 children,49 adults/; “hereditary” CP- HP /EUROPAC incl. tandem repeats analysis of chimerism after allogeneic bone criteria: Med Clin North Am 2000, 84: 575; 11 children, 18 adults/ and marrow transplantation compared their frequency to 227 random controls /112F, 115M; age D. Ambrasiene, V. Popendikyte, R. Mikalauskas; range 18-45 years ./) . Biomedical Research Centre, Vilnius, Lithuania. Results: The frequency of R122H and N29I PRSS1 mutations was Monitoring the engraftment of donor cells after allogeneic bone significantly increased in both children/adults (8/58) with HP (p < marrow transplantation (allo-BMT) is important for the early diagnosis 0 .001), but not in all ICP cases (2/190) compared to controls (0/454) . of graft failure or relapse of disease . Short tandem repeats (STRs) as However the SPINK1 N34S mutation was found at both HP (4/58) and highly polymorphic DNA sequences in the human genome have been adults ICP, the frequency was increased only in children (8/92) with used for monitor BM engraftment after allo-BMT . Engraftment analysis ICP (p < 0 .001) compared to controls (8/454 chromosomes) . requires one or more informative STR loci that distinguish recipient Conclusions: Our data indicate that mutations in PRSS1/SPINK1 genes from donor . are associated with ICP /HP .In cases with positive screening results For monitoring of the engraftment, a quantitative, non-isotopic method genetic counseling and long-term monitoring for the development of the using PCR of STR marker has been started up in our laboratory of adenocarcinoma of pancreas (in HP) should be provided . Supported Biomedical Research Centre in July of 2005 . by MZCR: 000000064203; MSMT: #111300003. DNA samples from pretransplant recipient’s and donor’s peripheral blood were amplified with the AmpFlSTR Identifiler PCR Kit, which P0653. twirler, human chromosomal rearrangement, adhesion contains 16 STR markers and PCR products were analyzed in ABI molecules and cleft palate. PRISM 310 Genetic Analyzer . Informative STR alleles which can E. Ruiz-Casares1,2, Z. Tümer2, N. Henriques-Gil1, M. Kirchhoff3, V. Kalscheuer4, distinguish donor from recipient have been selected as markers . N. Tommerup2; Posttransplant DNA genotypes of recipients have been analyzed by 1Laboratorio de Genetica, Universidad San Pablo CEU, Madrid, Spain, 2Wil- using DNA from peripheral-blood and BM samples . helm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Copenhagen, Den- 159 PCR-STR analyses had been carried out during July-December mark, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, of 2005 . Were monitored 36 patients after allo-BMT (88 PCR-STR 4Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. analyses) . Complete chimerism has been detected in 20 patients, In 1958 Lyon first described the spontaneous semidominant mutation fluctuations of chimerism status in 8, mixed chimerism - in 7. Donor “twirler” in mice presenting craniofacial and inner ear malformations . cells were absent only in one patient after 40 days of allo-BMT . Ting et al . (1993) found equivalent phenotypic traits in mice with the In summary, this method provides an accurate, versatile, quantitative, transgene-induced mutation 9257, and they managed to map the Tg- and early assessment of mixed chimerism in posttransplant patients . 9257 region to human 18q11 . Such information may be useful to guide implementation of additional We present a proband with unilateral cleft lip and palate, congenital treatment to circumvent graft failure or relapse in future . cataract, and locomotor clumsiness, 46,XX,t(8;18)(q2?;q11.2). The breakpoint on chromosome 18q11 .2 has been mapped down to P0651. Novel nonsense REP-1 R270X mutation in a familial case 150kb . Within the 2,5Mb surrounding this breakpoint, two candidate of choroideremia genes have been described (in both human and mouse): LAMA3 J. C. Zenteno, R. Garnica-Hayashi, M. A. Quiroz, F. Graue-Wiechers; gene, coding for α3 chain of the adhesion molecule Laminin-5, which Institute of Ophthalmology “Conde de Valenciana”, Mexico City, Mexico. strongly promotes adhesion, migration, and scattering of cells through Choroideremia (CHM; MIM #303100) is an X-linked recessive binding to integrins α3β1, α6β1 and α6β4; and ROCK1 gene, coding progressive chorioretinal degeneration . Night blindness and for a Rho-associated coiled-coil forming kinase, involved in integrin progressive loss of peripheral vision become evident by the second and integrin-associated structure organization . and third decade of life in most patients with progression to tunnel It seems possible that the chromosomal localization of these two vision or complete blindness by middle age . The disease results from genes might be important for their expression, and so a chromosomal mutations in the CHM gene, located in Xq21 . The product of this gene, rearrangement involving the region between them could affect their Rab escort protein (REP)-1, is involved in the posttranslational lipid transcription. If so, the translocation identified in proband B2157 that modification and subsequent membrane targeting of Rab proteins, separates LAMA3 and ROCK1 genes, could be the cause of a reduced small GTPases that play a key role in intracellular trafficking. All adhesion capacity of the epithelial cells, which are directly involved mutations in CHM result in the truncation or absence of the normal in the adhesion and fusion of the palatal shelves in the formation of protein product . We describe the clinical and molecular analysis of a the secondary palate . The consequence of this lack of adhesion and Mexican family with CHM including 3 affected males, 2 obligate carrier fusion would be the appearance of a cleft palate . females, 6 asymptomatic females and 4 asymptomatic males . The ophthalmologic examination included best-corrected visual acuity, color vision tests, slit-lamp examination, fundus examination, Goldmann visual fields, electroretinography, and fluorescein angiography. To Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 P0654. Early onset X-linked charcot-marie-tooth disease. two CMTX disease-associated Cx32 gene mutations are not only unable to novel mutations in the GJB1 gene one associated with abortion restore GJIC but also down-regulate wild-type Cx32 protein functions . G. J. Braathen1,2, J. C. Sand2, G. Bukholm1,3, M. B. Russell1,3; In our study we detected a family with 3 males and 1 female affected 1Faculty Division Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, 1474 Nord- CMT . Reviewing the pedigree and electrophysiological studies showed byhagen, Oslo, Norway, 2Institute for clinical epidemiology and molecular biol- that this disorder is suspected to be X-linked CMT . Therefore we ogy (Epi-Gen), Akershus University Hospital, 1478 Lørenskog, Oslo, Norway, checked Cx32 by PCR method and sequencing for confirming our 3Department of Research and Development, Akershus University Hospital, detection . 1478 Lørenskog, Oslo, Norway. X-linked Charcot-Marie Tooth (CMT) is caused by mutations in the P0657. PcR-based diagnosis of cmt1A duplication and HNPP connexin32 gene (GJB1) . The gene encodes a polypeptide which is deletion in Belarus arranged in hexametric array and form gap junctions . We describe two K. Mosse, T. Asadchuk, N. Rumyantseva; novel mutations in the connexin32 gene in two Norwegian families . Republican Scientific-Practical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. Family 1 had a 225delG which cause a frameshift and premature stop Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1 (CMT1) is the most common codon at position 247 . This probably results in a polypeptide which is not hereditary peripheral neuropathy, occurring with a prevalence of ~1 in arranged in a hexametric array due to the change in protein structure . 2500 . About 70% of individuals with CMT1 have a duplication of PMP22 This family had a female preponderance of X-linked CMT and several gene as the origin of disorder (CMT1A form) . One of the most effective abortions were observed. Family 2 had a 536 G→A transition which strategies for molecular diagnosis of CMT1A is based on quantitative cause a change of the highly conserved cysteine residue to tyrosine PCR analysis of short tandem repeats (STRs) . To establish the at amino acid position 179 . One man had pathological VEP and three diagnostic potential of this method we used 3 STR markers, from within affected had markedly balance problems of probable central nervous the CMT1A duplicated region - D17S2218, D17S2223 and D17S2229 . system origin. The mean age at onset was in the first decade in both A multiplex PCR protocol was developed to amplify simultaneously genders. Clinically the affected had symmetrical findings, while the all 3 dinucleotide repeats . Products were analysed by automated neurophysiological examination revealed minor asymmetrical findings capillary electrophoresis on the ABI Prism 310. First we amplified in nerve conduction velocity in 6 of 10 affected . We conclude that the these sequences in a cohort of unaffected individuals from Belarus two novel mutations in the connexin32 gene are more severe than the population and assessed the heterozygosity and number of alleles for majority of previously described mutations . each of STR . Heterozygosity values of the selected STRs were 78%, 65 % and 76% respectively . Then markers informativeness was tested P0655. charcot-marie-tooth syndrome. two novel mutations in in a group of 58 patients with presumable clinical diagnoses of CMT the myelin protein zero (mPZ) gene neuropathy and 68 their family members. We identified the PMP22 G. J. Braathen1,2, J. C. Sand2, G. Bukholm1,3, M. B. Russell1,3; gene duplications in 9 families with a total number of 20 affected 1Faculty Division Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, 1474 Nord- individuals . In all positive cases we were able to detect three different byhagen, Oslo, Norway, 2Institute for clinical epidemiology and molecular biol- alleles of at least one STR and clear semiquantitative dosage effect in ogy (Epi-Gen), Akershus University Hospital, 1478 Lørenskog, Oslo, Norway, other . Additionally one family with hereditary neuropathy with liability 3Department of Research and Development, Akershus University Hospital, to pressure palsy (HNPP) was identified. This is the first experience 1478 Lørenskog, Oslo, Norway. of CMT1A diagnosis in Belarus, which show fidelity and applicability of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is characterized by distal muscle quantitative PCR-based analysis . wasting and weakness, sensory loss with reduced tendon reflexes and foot deformity . It is the most common inherited disorder of the P0658. Polymorphism of the five new STR markers within the peripheral nervous system with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 2,500 . 17p11.2 genomic region in Russian siberian population and its CMT is a heterogeneous disorder with respect to clinical features, application for molecular diagnosis of cmt1A neurophysiology, pathophysiology and genetics . The number of O. Odinokova; identified CMT genes is still expanding. So far the majority of the CMT Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. genes encodes either neuronal or Schwann cell proteins . The myelin Hereditary motor and sensor neuropathies (Charcot-Marie-Tooth protein zero (MPZ) gene is expressed in the compact layer of the disease) is a heterogeneous group of disorders of which CMT type Schwann cells . We present two new mutations in the MPZ gene as 1A is the most common, and more than 70% cases of CMT1 are well as the clinical features in the affected Norwegian families . associated with 1,5-Mb duplication in 17p11 .2 . With an aim to estimate the polymorphism of new potentially more informative for molecular P0656. Detection of cmtX in an iranian family diagnosis STR markers within the 17p11 .2 genomic region in Russian P. Rostami, M. Rostami, S. Saber, M. DehghanManshadi, T. Majidizadeh, M. Siberian population we studied 5 STRs with tri- (D17S2228), tetra- Houshmand; (D17S2224, D17S2226) and pentanucleotide repeates (D17S2227, National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- D17S2230) [Badano J . et al, 2001] . Allele typing was performed using lamic Republic of Iran. PCR and subsequent high-resolution PAAG electrophoresis . We have The Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) syndrome is a heterogeneous group analysed 107-119 DNA samples from unrelated subjects and observed of neurological disorders that produce hereditary peripheral neuropathy 6 alleles (187-207 bp) of D17S2224 locus, 8 alleles (116-144 bp) of associated with symmetrical distal muscle weakness and atrophy, D17S2226 locus, 10 alleles (239-284 bp) of D17S2227 locus, 5 alleles sensory loss, and frequently depressed tendon reflexes, high arched (164-176 bp) of D17S2228 locus, 17 alleles (217-297 bp) of D17S2230 feet, and abnormal electrophysiological testing . Approximately one in locus, and observed heterozygosities were 0 .730, 0 .826, 0 .763, 0 .626, every 2500 people is affected and the onset of the disease usually and 0 .826, respectively . Genotype frequency distributions were occurs in the second or third decade of life. Some classifications consistent with HW equilibrium in all groups . According to our results in are based on the type of the neuropathy, which may be axonal or Russian Siberian population the polymorphic potential of D17S2230, demyelinating, and on the mode of inheritance . D17S2226, D17S2227, D17S2224 markers are the most useful for Electrophysiological studies are necessary to determine the type of molecular diagnosis of CMT1A in Siberian region . The 5 STR marker neuropathy . Different modes of inheritance are observed: autosomal panel was greatly informative in Russians and was applied for analysis dominant, X-linked, dominant, autosomal recessive . of 17p11 .2 duplication in CMT patients . Their use allows to increase The X-linked form of CMT (CMTX) is associated with mutations in the reliability of DNA-diagnosis in families. We present our first experience connexin 32 (Cx32) gene, which maps to chromosome Xq13 . Xq13s (3 cases) in prenatal diagnosis of CMTA1 performed in Siberian region are often reduced in CMTX males (< 40 m/s), but ranged from slightly (100% information). These markers provide new tools for efficient reduced to normal values in females . Neuropathy in CMTX is primary diagnosis of CMTA1 . axonal or demyelination with secondary axonal degeneration . CMTX involves defective Schwan cell function . So far, 33 kinds of mutation in 30 sites in the Cx32 gene have been found in CMTX disease patients .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P0659. Polymorphic short tandem repeats for diagnosis of the clinically classified as ‘certain’ and ‘probable’, while no mutations were charcot-marie-tooth 1A duplication. not found in patients classified as ‘possible’. V. C. Sacara; National Centre of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Re- P0661. An inhibitory sequence in human collagen XViii promoter public of Moldova. modulates its transcription in hepatocytes Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) and hereditary neuropathy with L. M. Armelin-Correa1, C. Masotti1, E. Kague1, C. J. Lin2, M. Sogayar3, M. liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) are the most frequent inherited Passos-Bueno1; disorders of the peripheral nervous system . They are clinically and 1Bioscience Institute - University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Hospital das genetically heterogeneous . Molecular genetic studies have made Clinicas FM - University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Chemistry Institute major breakthroughs in unraveling the underlying gene defects, and - University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. DNA diagnosis can now be offered to a large number of families with Collagen XVIII is an heparan sulfate proteoglycan constituent of distinct forms of hereditary peripheral neuropathies . liver basal membrane . Proteolytic cleavage of its c-terminal region 58 families with increased risk of autosomal dominant CMT1 passed originates endostatin, a potent angiogenesis inhibitor . Angiogenesis clinico-neurological, electrophysiological examination, and molecular plays a crucial role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression . study, which were included in long-term registry of Moldova . Some Reduced Collagen XVIII expression is associated with larger and genetics features of the disease have been revealed (intrafamilial higher vascularized HCC tumors and, lower endostatin serum levels polymorphism of different degree, effect of the ancestor in the dominant in the blood of HCC patients have been associated with larger tumors . forms) . Electrophysiological peculiarities of the separate clinical- Elucidating the factors that control Collagen XVIII expression in genealogical variations of the pathology were found . Most of this hepatocytes is important to understand its role in HCC progression . families were Moldavian by origin . We test 3 STRs located within the We recently showed that Sp1, Sp3 and YY1 bind human Collagen duplication (D17S921, D17S122, D17S834) . STRs were selected and XVIII promoter controlling liver expression . We characterized a SNP used to test a set of 99 unrelated CMT1A patients and were compared in this region, -700 T/G, which influences transcription level. Allele G, with nonduplicated controls . most common among African descendents (55%), has higher (39%) The CMT1A duplication was determine in 68 .75% cases (gene dosage transcription activity than allele T, most common among European for heterozygous samples- different fluorescent intensity and /or three descendents (58%). Sp3 has higher affinity for the G allele, while YY1 alleles . The most informative STR in our group was D17S834 locus- has higher affinity for the T allele (Armelin-Correa et al., Matrix Biol. 37 .6%, and the less informative was D17S921-27% . Using 3 markers 2005; 24:550-9). Sp3 and YY1 can activate or inhibite transcription in instead of two, which we used in our practices a few years ago allow to different contexts . Deletion of a sequence of 40bp containing the SNP- increase the determination of duplication . 700 caused 31% increase in promoter activity when compared with the Conclusion: Combined use of the three STRs allows robust diagnosis promoter containing the T allele . These results suggest that these 40bp with almost complete informativeness . In our routine diagnosis for contain an inhibitory element . We are now performing cotransfection CMT1A, they have replaced the use of other polymorphic markers . experiments to elucidate the role of Sp3 and YY1 in Collagen XVIII expression in hepatocytes and, to verify if the different interactions of P0660. molecular analysis of the COH1 gene in cohen YY1 and Sp3 with both alleles of SNP-700 are responsible for their syndrome. difference in transcriptional activity . FAPESP/CEPID,CNPq C. Pescucci1, E. Katzaki1, F. Mari1, C. Speciale1, F. Ariani1, M. Zeviani2, M. Bu- giani3, M. B. Petersen4, P. Gasparini5, M. Bedeschi6, P. Veggiotti7, R. Fischetto8, P0662. sonic Hedgehog Dependent Proliferation in A series Of R. Grasso9, R. Ghilardi10, A. Selicorni10, D. Milani10, M. Di Rocco11, M. Manto- Human colorectal cancer Patients van12, M. Priolo13, A. Mendicino14, R. Tenconi15, A. Renieri1; S. Moutereau1, R. Douard2, P. Pernet3, M. Chimingqi4, Y. Allory5, P. Manivet6, 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Molecular Neurogenetics Division, Istituto M. Conti7, M. Vaubourdolle3, P. Cugnenc2, S. Loric4; Besta, Milano, Italy, 3Neurology, Istituto Besta, Milano, Italy, 4Dept. of Genetics, 1Clinical Biochemistry-Genetics Laboratory & INSERM, Créteil, France, 2Gen- Aghia Sophia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 5Medical Genetics, Trieste, eral Surgery Department, APHP Georges Pompidou University Hospital, Paris, Italy, 6Medical Genetics, ICP, Clinica Mangiagalli, Milano, Italy, 7Child Neuro- France, 3INSERM U538 & Clinical Biochemistry A Laboratory, APHP Saint-An- psychiatry Department, Neurological Institute Casimiro Mondino Foundation toine University Hospital, Paris, France, 4Clinical Biochemistry-Genetics Labo- IRCCS University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 8Metabolic Disorders- Medical Genetics ratory & INSERM EMI 0337, APHP Henri Mondor University Hospital, Créteil, Division, Ospedale Regionale Pediatrico Giovanni XXIII, Bari, Italy, 9Scientific France, 5Pathology Department, Hopital Henri Mondor AP-HP, Créteil, France, Institute Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy, 10Clinical Genetics Ambu- 6Clinical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, APHP Lariboisière latory, Clinica Pediatrica de Marchi, Milano, Italy, 11Pediatrics II, Istituto Gaslini, University Hospital, Paris, France, 7Clinical Biochemistry Laboratory, APHP Genova, Italy, 12Child Neuropsychiatry, Azienda Ospedaliera Careggi, Firenze, Bicêtre University Hospital, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France. Italy, 13Medical Genetics, Azienda Ospedaliera Bianchi-Melacrino- Morelli, Reg- Background : The Hedgehog (Hh) gene family activation, known gio Calabria, Italy, 14Genetics, AUSL RME, Roma, Italy, 15Medical Genetics, to regulate stem cells, is responsible for the induction of GLI1 Dept. Pediatrics, Universiy of Padova, Padova, Italy. protooncogene and subsequent cellular proliferation . Sonic Hedgehog In 1973, Cohen et al . described a new syndrome whose main features (SHh), one of the Hh family members promotes . SHh is also expressed were truncal obesity, hypotonia, mental retardation of variable degree, in colonic stem cells at the base of the colon villi . As differentiated colonic characteristic craniofacial dysmorphisms ( down slanting palpebral cells arose from the constant renewal of Hedgehog-expressing colonic fissures, short philtrum, open mouth, prominent upper central incisors, stem cells, SHh could be involved in human colonic carcinogenesis . prominent nose) and abnormalities of the hands and feet . Beside the Methods: Tissue-samples of colorectal adenocarcinoma (T) and facial gestalt, major diagnostic criteria of Cohen syndrome include adjacent normal colon tissue (NT) were drawn for each of 44 retinal dystrophy and neutropenia . This syndrome is transmitted as an consecutive colorectal cancer patients . Transcription of SHh, GLI1 autosomal recessive trait, with considerable variability of expression . and FOXM1 were quantified using RT-PCR. Similar mRNA in vitro Recently, mutations in COH1 gene (locus 8q22-q23) have been measurements of GLI1 and FOXM1 after specific induction by SHh-Np reported in patients with Cohen syndrome . were performed in the HT-29 colorectal tumor cell line . We have collected a cohort of 21 patients, originating from different Results: SHh was overexpressed in colorectal adenocarcinomas countries . A diagnostic rating of ‘certain’ (10 patients), ‘probable’ of 86% patients . In vivo GLI1 and FOXM1 transcription levels were (5) and ‘possible’ (6) was assigned on the basis of clinical criteria . correlated with SHh induction (SHh vs . GLI1 r=0 .77*, GLI1 vs . FOXM1, DHPLC mutation analysis of the COH1 gene is ongoing . Until now, r=0 .68*, SHh vs . FOXM1, r=0 .79*, *p<0 .0001) . In parallel, in vitro SHh we have analyzed 20 exons out of 62, identifying mutations in four induction of HT-29 colorectal cell line induces cell proliferation supported patients: three point mutations in genetic compound state and one by GLI1 then FOXM1 mRNA production . SHh overexpression did not homozygous intragenic deletion spanning from exon 6 to exon 16 . In correlate with the patient characteristics evaluated . addition, mutation analysis revealed three intronic variants of unknown Conclusions: We demonstrated SHh activation in human colonic significance (IVS 2-60 A>G, IVS 17+61 C>A, IVS 21-86 A>T). At adenocarcinomas and in a colorectal cell line with subsequent GLI1 present, mutations in the COH1 gene were identified in patients and FOXM1 activation known to promote cell proliferation . This Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  activation within human colorectal adenocarcinoma tissue confirms the known genes . We are currently screening all our CDH probands for proliferating role of the Hh pathway in colorectal carcinogenesis and 1q41-q42 .12 and 15q26 .1-q26 .2 microdeletions or microduplications suggests a potential therapeutic target of Hh blockade in colorectal using customized MLPA synthetic probes, as this assay is efficient and cancer . reliable for dosage screening of multiple loci in a single reaction . P0663. the prevalence of connexin 26 (GJB) gene mutations in P0665. Identification of mutations causing congenital muscular turkey dystrophies M. Ozcan Caliskan1, F. Silan2, O. Alper1, N. Nal1, C. Zafer3, G. Luleci1; R. A. Mein1, C. L. Godfrey1, C. Jimenez-Mallebrera2, L. Feng2, M. Brockington2, 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and F. Muntoni2, S. Abbs1; Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Abant İzzet Baysal University, Faculty of Medicine, 1Guy’s & St Thomas’ NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Imperial College, Department of Medical Genetics, Duzce, Turkey, 3Abant İzzet Baysal University, London, United Kingdom. Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Duzce, Turkey. The congenital muscular dystrophies (CMD) are a heterogeneous Congenital sensorineural hearing loss (deafness) is a complex disorder group of autosomal recessive disorders. It is often difficult to establish that involves a high number of genes and environmental factors, a definite clinical diagnosis and offer prenatal diagnosis without which affects approximately 1/1,000 live births . Recently, there has identifying the causative mutations in one of a number of possible been enormous progress in non-syndromic deafness research with candidates . the identification of over 50 loci and 15 genes. Among these, GJB1, We currently offer a mutation screening service for the LAMA2, FKRP GJB2, GJB3, and GJB6, encode for connexin proteins as Connexin32, and SEPN1 genes. Causative mutations have been identified in 20/79 Connexin26, Connexin31, and Connexin30, respectively . Mutations individuals screened for FKRP mutations, 13/77 for SEPN1 mutations in these genes cause autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant or and we have identified LAMA2 mutations in 18/45 cases, but analysis X-linked hearing impairment, both syndromic and non-syndromic . is incomplete for the 27 cases without identified mutations. Four The mutations in GJB2 gene have been described as a major cause patients with FKRP mutations were originally referred with a diagnosis of congenital deafness and account for about 50% of all congenital of Becker muscular dystrophy, demonstrating the clinical overlap cases . with other muscular dystrophies . Linkage analysis combined with The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of GJB2 gene immunohistochemical analysis has enabled us to carry out 9 prenatal mutations in Turkey . We have studied 100 affected cases with prelingual diagnoses for MDC1A in the absence of characterised LAMA2 severe-to-profound deafness . The entire coding region of the GJB2 was mutations . directly sequenced in all patients for detection of GJB2 mutations . Of A subset of CMDs (including Walker-Warburg syndrome, Muscle-Eye- these 100 cases, 30 cases (30%) had at least one mutant GJB2 allele . Brain Disease and Fukuyama CMD) are associated with mutations Among these, twenty cases were homozygous for 35delG mutation, in genes coding for proteins that are putative or demonstrated three cases were heterozygotes for 35delG mutation, four cases were glycosyltransferases . We have set up a protocol to simultaneously heterozygotes for D50N mutation, one case was homozygous for screen for mutations in five of theses genes; POMT1, POMT2, P173S mutation, one case was compound heterozygotes for 35delG/ POMGnT1, Large and Fukutin, in 100 patients to ascertain frequency delE120/K122I and one case was compound heterozygotes for and severity spectrum of these conditions . We are using multiplexed 35delG/312del14bp mutation . Besides, multiple polymorphisms such PCR and heteroduplex analysis using Temperature Gradient Capillary as E42E, E114G, G12G, G160S, V27I were also detected . Electrophoresis (TGCE) on a Reveal Discovery System (SpectruMedix) In conclusion, the high prevalence of mutations in GJB2 in some which uses ethidium bromide detection of heteroduplex PCR fragments . populations provides the tools for molecular diagnosis, carrier This approach is also used to screen LAMA2 whilst the smaller genes detection, counselling and prenatal diagnosis of congenital hearing such as FKRP and SEPN1 are screened by direct sequence analysis . impairment . P0666. CHRND mutation causes a congenital myasthenic P0664. screening of 1q41-q42.12 and 15q26.1-q26.2 regions syndrome by impairing coclustering of the acetylcholine by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) in receptor with rapsyn patients with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (cDH) J. S. Müller1, S. K. Baumeister1, U. Schara2, S. Krause1, M. von der Hagen3, A. S. Kantarci1, P. Kozlowski2, Y. Shen1, M. Klaassens3, A. de Klein3, D. Tibboel3, Huebner3, H. Lochmüller1, A. Abicht1; P. Dickman4, J. Wilson5, C. Lee2, B. R. Pober1,5, P. K. Donahoe1; 1Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Neuropediatrics; 1MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, Staedtische Kliniken;, Neuss, Germany, 3Children’s Hospital, Technical Univer- United States, 2Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, sity, Dresden, Germany. Boston, MA, United States, 3Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Neth- Mutations in various genes encoding proteins expressed at the erlands, 4Phoenix Children’s Hospital, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 5Children’s neuromuscular junction may cause a congenital myasthenic syndrome Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. (CMS) . Mutations of acetylcholine receptor (AChR) subunit genes Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (CDH) is characterized by incomplete lead to endplate AChR deficiency or to altered kinetic properties of formation/muscularization of the diaphragm, often accompanied by the receptor . Mutations in the alpha, beta and delta subunits of the lung hypoplasia and pulmonary hypertension . It has an incidence of AChR are less frequent than mutations of the epsilon subunit and often ~1/3000 live births . In most cases the etiology is unknown . associated with a severe phenotype . In our ongoing study entitled “Gene Mutations and Rescue in Human In a sporadic CMS patient of German origin, we identified two Diaphragmatic Hernia”, we have recruited over 173 patients . Ninety- compound heterozygous mutations in the CHRND gene encoding nine cases were classified as having isolated CDH, while the remainder the delta subunit of the AChR: a novel point mutation in the long had complex CDH . cytoplasmic loop, CHRND E381K, and a 2 .2 kb microdeletion disrupting Our aCGH and FISH studies demonstrated a de novo 1q41-q42 .12 the CHRND gene . As the cytoplasmic loop of the AChR subunits is deletion in a Fryns syndrome [OMIM # 229850] patient with CDH . known to be essential for AChR-rapsyn coclustering, we studied the Another Fryns -like patient with CDH had a cytogenetically visible interaction of AChR containing the CHRND E381K mutation with deletion overlapping this region where several different chromosome rapsyn . Interestingly, the mutated receptor showed severely reduced abnormalities have been previously reported in CDH patients . We cluster formation compared to the wildtype receptor . By contrast, the suggest that deletion or disruption of gene(s) in this locus can lead corresponding amino acid substitution in the cytoplasmic loop of the to CDH, Fryns syndrome, or a Fryns syndrome phenocopy . A 5 Mb AChR epsilon (CHRNE E376K) as well as a recently reported CMS chromosome 15q26 .1-q26 .2 deletion interval containing four known mutation affecting this domain (CHRNE N436del) had no impact on genes has recently been reported as another potential critical CDH cluster formation . region . Conclusion: CHRND mutations are a rare cause for CMS but should Using Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) (MRC- be considered in patients with a severe, early-onset disease form, Holland, E2 kit) we have confirmed, and more precisely delineated with recurrent episodic apneas . Our results suggest that impairment the 1q41-q42 .12 deletion interval to a 6 .5 Mb region containing 29 of AChR-rapsyn coclustering - a well-known molecular mechanism Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  for rapsyn mutations - could also result from mutations in the AChR copper metabolism . The expression of genes coding for copper subunits . transport proteins was studied in hypothalamus, hippocampus and amygdala in Wister line’s rat with EDAT resulting from the administration P0667. A large deletion involving the connexin 26 gene in fourth ventricle of cerebrum 15 aminoacid peptide corresponding to D. Feldmann1,2, L. Jonard1, F. Fellmann3, P. Thierry4, R. Couderc1,2, E. N. Gara- β-amyloid from 10Y to -V25 . The copper-transporting proteins are: 1) bédian5,2, F. Denoyelle5,2, S. Marlin6,2; CTR1, a high affinity copper importer; 2) two Cu-transporting ATPases 1Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Biologie Moléculaire, CHU Trousseau, AP-HP, P1 type: ATP7A and ATP7B, participated in metabolic inclosing of Paris, France, 2INSERM U587, Unité de génétique des déficits sensoriels, copper in cuproenzymes; 3) soluble ceruloplasmin (Cp) and GPI- Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, 3Service de Génétique, Hôpital Saint Jacques, anchored Cp; 4) precursor of β-amyloid (APP) and cellular prion Besançon, France, 4Service de Pédiatrie, CH Vesoul, Vesoul, France, 5Service (PrPc), having a capacity for a high affinity binding of copper ions and d’ORL et de Chirurgie Cervico-Faciale, CHU Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, catalyze the reduction Cu(II)→Cu(I) necessary for import via CTR1. 6Unité de Génétique Clinique, CHU Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France. The formation of β-amyloid aggregate was detected histologically, Mutations in the GJB2 gene coding connexin 26 are the most frequent development of dementia was checked by the decrease of conditioned cause of congenital non-syndromic hearing impairment (NSHI) in reflex making, relative mRNA concentrations were determined by Caucasian populations . Recently two large deletions involving the semiquantitative RT-PCR, the Cp content was measured by rocket connexin 30 gene were described in NSHI patients with a GJB2 immunoelectrophoresis, copper concentration was detected by mutation in trans. We report here for the first time a deletion of GJB2 atom-absorption spectrometry . We determined that expression of in a patient with congenital, profound hearing impairment associated copper-transporting genes in the brain departments has a region- with developmental delay . specific character. Only cells of hypothalamus expressed mRNA of all Screening for GJB2 mutations was carried out by denaturing high- studied copper-transporting genes . In rat with EDAT, no Cp neither performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) followed by sequencing . ATPases were found in any brain department . The mRNA of CTR1, The patient appeared to be homozygous for a new GJB2 mutation APP and PrPc were depleted in several folds . Simultaneously, any c .250G>A, p .Val84Met . Known GJB6 deletions analyzed by specific abnormalities of copper metabolism in liver and in blood of these rats PCR were absent and no mutation was founded in the first non-coding were not detected. The influence of β-amyloid aggregate on copper exon of GJB2. The mutation p .Val84Met is potentially deleterious metabolism is discussed . because Valine 84 is evolutionarily highly conserved and was not observed in 200 chromosomes of normal-hearing individuals . The P0670. Father-to-daughter transmission of cornelia de Lange mutation was heterozygous in the patient’s father, but absent in syndrome caused by a mutation in the 5’ untranslated region of the mother and in the maternal grand parents . Uniparental disomy the NIPBL gene was excluded by genotyping with a set of 8 markers from the long G. Borck, M. Zarhrate, J. P. Bonnefont, A. Munnich, V. Cormier-Daire, L. Col- arm of chromosome 13 . A set of 6 microsatellite markers in 13q12- leaux; 11 analysed in the family confirmed a large deletion involving GJA3 Department of Medical Genetics and INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker- Enfants (CX46), GJB2 (CX26) and GJB6 (CX30) in the patient and his mother . Malades, Paris, France. Our results indicated that the patient was compound heterozygous Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a developmental disorder for [pVal84Met]+[del(GJA3-GJB2-GJB6)] and that this genotype can characterised by typical facial dysmorphism, growth and mental induce deafness . This observation shows the importance of GJB2 retardation, microcephaly, behavioural problems, and malformations analysis patients with hearing impairment and the segregation study of the upper extremities . Mutations in the NIPBL gene were recently of the GJB2 mutations . found to cause CdLS . NIPBL anomalies are detected in ~40% of reported cases, suggesting genetic and/or further allelic heterogeneity P0668. GJB2 gene analysis in non-syndromic hearing loss in a in CdLS, some mutations being not detected by current screening sample of mexican patients methods . To test whether mutations in the 5’ untranslated region R. Rivera, M. Leyva, L. Gonzalez, S. Kofman, P. Berruecos, M. Lopez, S. Cue- (5’UTR) and proximal promoter of the NIPBL gene could contribute to vas; the pathogenesis of CdLS, we screened a cohort of 21 CdLS patients Hospital General de Mexico, Fac. de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico DF, Mexico. with no previously identified mutation by direct sequencing of this part Non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) can be caused by mutations in of the gene . any one of a large number of genes . Half of severe childhood deafness This work allowed the identification of a small heterozygous deletion- is due to mendelian inheritance, about 87% of this group presents an insertion mutation in exon 1, 321 nucleotides upstream of the translation autosomal recessive inherited pattern . Mutations in the GJB2 gene, initiation codon, in one affected girl and in her mildly affected father . encoding the connexin 26 gap-junction protein, account for a significant This mutation, which altered a nucleotide that is highly conserved proportion of NSHL . Different population distributions of more than 70 across species, occurred de novo in the father . Moreover, it was not GJB2 gene defects have been described in the literature . The aim of detected in 388 control alleles . Using real-time quantitative PCR, we the present study was to investigate the prevalence of mutations in showed that NIPBL mRNA expression was lowered in both patients’ the GJB2 gene, especially 35delG mutation, in patients with NSHL lymphocytes compared to control samples . in a sample of Mexican population . The study was approved by the Our results demonstrate that mutations in the 5’ non coding region Ethics Committee of the General Hospital of Mexico . We ascertained of the NIPBL gene may be involved in the pathogenesis of CdLS . 8 unrelated families with NSHL showing an apparently autosomal Moreover, the mutation reported here expands the spectrum of recessive pattern . Informed consent was obtained from all participants NIPBL anomalies in CdLS and suggests that mutations affecting the and their parents . Audiometry was performed in all patients . DNA regulatory or untranslated region of the gene might be associated with was extracted from peripheral blood while GJB2 gene analysis was a mild phenotype . performed in ABI PRISM 310 genetic analyzer . GJB2 mutations were detected only in one family, this mutation was present as heterozygous P0671. mutations causing craniosynostosis, cleidocranial state . This study revealed that Mexican population presents a low dysplasia and parietal foramina detected by the craniofacial prevalence of GJB2 sequence variations causatives of NSHL . molecular service in Oxford, UK T. Lester1, L. J. Williams1, A. W. O. O’Rourke1, L. Ramos2, M. Venancio2, D. P0669. Depletion of copper transporting gene transcription in rat Robinson3, M. B. Petersen4, A. Seller1, A. O. M. Wilkie5; brain with experimental dementia of Alzheimer type (EDAt) 1Clinical Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United N. Tsymbalenko1, N. Platonova2,1, J. Fedotova1, P. Babich1, N. Sapronov1, L. Kingdom, 2Servico de Genetica Medica, Hospital Pediatrico de Coimbra, Coim- Puchkova1; bra, Portugal, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Wales, Cardiff, United 1Research Institute of experimental medicine, RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Rus- Kingdom, 4Dept of Genetics, Aghia Sophia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, sian Federation, 2Dulbecco Telethon Institute / CNR-ITB, Milan, Italy. 5Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, Present-day conception of neurodegenerative disease pathogenesis United Kingdom. suggests that leading role in the process belongs to disturbance of The craniofacial service was set up in Oxford, UK in 2002 to provide Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  molecular testing of the FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3 and TWIST1 genes the 3120+1Kbdel8 .6Kb previously found in the Palestinian arabs . in patients with syndromic craniosynostosis and their relatives . In The IVS16+3316_IVS18+644del5288 bearing chromosomes had 2004 this service was extended to provide molecular testing of the a common intragenic haplotype . This mutation causes an in frame RUNX2 gene in cases with cleidocranial dysplasia and of the MSX2 deletion of 160 amino acids that are part of the transmembrane and ALX4 genes in patients with parietal foramina . Most recently a domain 2 of the CFTR protein . Clinical evaluation of homozygotes molecular testing service for the EFNB1 gene in cases with X-linked (n=2) and compound heterozygotes (n=2) indicate that this deletion craniofrontonasal syndrome has been set up, and a new craniofacial represents a severe mutation associated with positive sweat test, MLPA kit developed to test for deletions and duplications of all these pancreatic insufficiency and early age at diagnosis. In conclusion, we genes . have shown that this novel gross genomic rearrangement is the fourth Since 2002 we have analysed 214 new cases with craniosynostosis most common mutation in CF patients from RI . and identified pathogenic changes in 28.5%. Familial testing has been carried out in 102 relatives with 33 .3% found to carry the familial P0674. Cystic fibrosis diagnostics in Kaunas Medical University mutation. Of the mutations identified, 7 are novel - 3 in TWIST1, 3 Hospital (Lithuania) in FGFR2, and 1 duplication of RUNX2 detected by MLPA and L. Kucinskas1, D. Urboniene1, R. Sereikiene1, J. Jeroch1,2; confirmed cytogenetically. Brief case histories of 2 of the novel FGFR2 1Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Institute for Biomedi- mutations (p .E565A and p .N549T) and the RUNX2 duplication will be cal Research, Kaunas Medicine University, Kaunas, Lithuania. presented . Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is one of the most common inherited disease in Since 2004 we have also identified mutations in 13 out of 16 cases European population . 2004 - 2005 years 22 patients suspected with (81 .3%) with cleidocranial dysplasia and 1/3 cases (33 .3%) with CF diagnosis were tested in Kaunas Medical University Hospital . parietal foramina. A brief summary of the mutations identified will be We analysed patients DNA from blood samples for simultaneous presented . detection and identification of the commonest 19 Cystic Fibrosis Fransmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR) gene mutations in P0672. Identification of a novel missense mutation in the CRYGD European population (with INNO - LiPA CFTR 19 kit, INNOGENETICS, gene causative of nuclear congenital cataract Belgium) . L. Gonzalez, O. Messina, S. Cuevas; Results: 3 patients (13,6 %) had genotype F508del/F508del . 5 Hospital General de Mexico, Fac. de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D,.F., Mexico. patients were heterozygotes for mutation F508del (genotype F508/N; Cataract is the leading cause of reversible blindness in childhood with N - normal) . 14 patients had neither F508del nor another mutations an occurrence of 1-6/10,000 live new born . Cataracts are characterized from the 19 tested mutations .conclusion: The frequency of F508del/ by the location and structure of opacities, i .e . shape, size, color and F508del homozygotes (13,6 %) is lower than in Western European refractive quality . Cataract may be an isolated anomaly or part of a CF patient’s groups . The explanations of results could be different syndrome . The majority of inherited non-syndromic cataracts are frequency or (and) another mutated alleles in Central and Eastern, and transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait . Mutations in the CRYG Western European population or incorrect clinical suspicion of Cystic genes, which encode the main cytoplasmic proteins of the human Fibrosis lens, have been associated with cataracts of various appearances . The aim of the present study was to identify the disease locus for P0675. molecular genetic analysis of sLc3A1 and sLc7A9 genes nuclear congenital cataract in a non-consanguineous family with two in Greek cystinuric patients affected members . DNA from leukocytes and bucal swab was isolated E. Louizou1, E. Μixelakaki2, F. Komianou3, E. Κaragiotis4, A. Μpisas4, N. Papa- to analyze the CRYGA-D cluster genes and to discard paternity galanis5, G. Νtatsis5, L. Bisceglia6, G. Dedoussis1; through gene scan with several highly polymorphic markers . DNA 1Harokopio University, Department of Dietology and Nutrition, Athens, Greece, sequencing analysis of the two affected members showed a novel 2Harokopio University of Athens, Ιnstitute of Child Health, Athens, Greece, 3Α΄ heterozygous missense mutation in the CRYGD gene . Analysis of the Pediatric Clinic Paidon Hospital ‘Agia Sofia’, Athens, Greece, 4Sismanoglio two unaffected members of the family and the normal parents showed Hospital, Athens, Greece, 5Hospital ‘Red Cross’, Athens, Greece, 6Servizio di a normal sequence of the CRYGA-D cluster genes . Analysis of highly Genetica Medica IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. polymorphic markers shows no evidence for non-paternity . This Cystinuria is one of the most common inheritable disorders of amino mutation was not found in a group of 120 unrelated controls . In this acid transport with an incidence of 1:7000 . It is caused by the defective study we describe a novel mutation in the CRYGD causative of nuclear transport of cystine and three other dibasic amino acids in the brush congenital cataract . Besides, our data strongly suggest that the origin border membrane of proximal venal tubules and intestinal track . It is of the mutation was in the germinal line of one of the parents . characterized by the development of cystine stones . Up to date two genes are mainly involved in cystinuria, SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 . The aim P0673. Novel large rearrangement in the cFtR gene in cystic was to identify the mutations in these two genes in a cohort of Greek fibrosis patients from Reunion Island patients. We obtained DNA form 18 Greek patients and 7 first-degree J. Nextoux1, M. P. Audrezet2, M. Viel3, C. Leroy3, F. Cartault4, O. Raguenes2, C. relatives . All patients had formed cystine stones and were subjected in Ferec2, J. F. Lesure5, M. Renouil6, T. Bienvenu1; surgery . With PCR and DGGE analysis we found four different mutations 1Institut Cochin, U567, Paris, France, 2U613, CHU Brest, Brest, France, 3Labo- in the SLC3A1 including one novel one, 2 missense mutations (T216M, ratoire de Biochimie et Genetique Moleculaire, Hopital Cochin, Paris, France, M467T), and one duplication (Duplication exon 5 - 9) . In the SLC7A9 4Service de Genetique, CHD Felix Guyon, St Denis, Reunion, France, 5Service gene we found 2 missense mutations (S379R G105R), one deletion des Petits Enfants, Hopital d’Enfants, St Denis, Reunion, France, 6Service de (c1388delA) and four polymorphisms (1143 C/C, c399 C/T, c411 T/C, Pediatrie, CHS Sud Reunion, France. 1365 C/T). The results were confirmed by sequencing analysis. The The Reunion Island (RI) is a French province, 800 kms to the east most frequent mutations found were M467T and T216M . Moreover of Madagascar, and 200 kms to the west of Mauritius . In RI, the birth 15 patients were diagnosed as compound heterozygotes, which prevalence of the Cystic fibrosis (CF) is particularly high in the population shows the molecular heterogeneity of the disease . The distribution of of European origin . In a previous study we have demonstrated that mutations that cause cystinuria in Greek patients can contribute to the the screening of the 27 exons of the CF transmembrane conductance estimation of the frequency of the disease in Greece . In addition, it regulator (CFTR) gene by DHPLC allowed the detection of 93% of the will enable genotype-phenotype correlations, which can lead to career molecular defects present in RI. Unidentified CF mutations may lie in identification and targeted prenatal diagnosis. introns or in regulatory regions, or correspond to gene rearrangements at the heterozygous state which escape detection using current PCR based techniques . Using a combination of different methods, 6 of the 13 unidentified CF alleles were found to harbor a novel deletion of 5288 bp, spanning the exons 17a, 17b and 18 . This accounts for 46% of unidentified alleles. Identification and examination of the breakpoint sequences showed that this deletion is different from Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 6 P0676. mutation screening of the basal promoter and of exon 1 bon, Lisbon, Portugal, 3College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, of GJB in hearing impaired patients with monoallelic mutations Setúbal, Portugal. in exon 2 A deletion not affecting GJB2 but truncating the neighbouring GJB6 T. Matos1, H. Teixeira1, O. Dias2, M. Andrea2, H. Caria1,3, G. Fialho1; gene, (encoding connexin 30), was identified in 2001, and hypothesized 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of to also contribute to DFNB1 related hearing loss . Effectively, this Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Center of ORL, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lis- deletion, later called del(GJB6-D13S1830), was shown to be the bon, Lisbon, Portugal, 3College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, accompanying mutation in many cases in which affected subjects Setúbal, Portugal. were GJB2 heterozygotes, thus only carrying one mutant allele . GJB2 related deafness is mostly due to recessive mutations . However, These findings led many research groups all over the world to mutation screening of GJB2 has revealed a significant percentage of screen their patients with non-syndromic prelingual deafness, and hearing impaired patients with only one recessive GJB2 disease-causing carrying one or null GJB2 mutant allele, for the presence of del(GJB6- mutation, or one mutation with uncertain pathogenic significance, D13S1830) The results obtained, namely in a large multicenter study, which could not clearly account for the hearing loss by its own . Most involving patients from nine countries, revealed that the GJB6 deletion of those studies performed to date only involved the analysis of the is present in most of the screened populations, but with quite different GJB2 coding region . Therefore, mutations in non-coding regions may frequencies . have been missed . In fact, there are no sequence variants described In a preliminary study previously performed in our laboratory, the in the exon 1, and there are only a few polymorphisms reported in the deletion was absent in the 74 unrelated patients then tested (0/148 promoter . chromosomes), in a clear contrast with the high prevalence observed At least four mutations in non-coding regions of GJB1 gene have in Spain, but in accordance with its scarcity in Italy . already been described in patients affected by X-linked dominant In order to better elucidate these differences and establish a precise Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy, three of which have been found in picture of the Mediterranean countries, the aim of the present work the nerve-specific promoter and the fourth one in the 5’ UTR of the was thus testing a larger Portuguese sample for del(GJB6-D13S1830) mRNA. Taking into account these findings in GJB1, the existence of mutation . disease-related mutations in the promoter or in the exon 1 of GJB2 On the total, we have screened over 150 unrelated patients with non- gene appears to be likely . syndromic hearing loss, heterozygous for a recessive GJB2 mutation In order to investigate that possibility, in the present study we have or with null mutation in GJB2, using Multiplex PCR . analysed the GJB2 basal promoter and exon 1 of Portuguese hearing None of the individuals was a carrier of the del(GJB6-D13S1830) impaired patients who presented with only one pathogenic or uncertain mutation, which indicates that this mutation, if at all present, is very mutation in GJB2 coding region . rare in the Portuguese deaf population . Within our results, we present a substitution (-3224C>A) in exon 1 of a normal hearing control subject, which is, to our knowledge, the first P0679. incidence of GJB2 mutations in the Greek population. sequence variant of GJB2 exon 1 described to date . H. Kokotas1, M. Grigoriadou1, T. Antoniadi2, P. Girginoudis1, A. Pampanos1, J. Economides3, V. Iliadou4, M. B. Petersen1; P0677. spectrum and carrier frequency of GJB (cx26) 1Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, Car- mutations associated to deafness in Portuguese families diff, United Kingdom, 3’’Aghia Sophia’’ Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, A. Rodrigues*1, C. Trincão*1, H. Teixeira1, H. Caria1,2, G. Fialho1; 4Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University About one in 1000 children is affected by prelingual deafness . In of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 2College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of developed countries at least 50% of the cases is due to genetic defects . Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal. Among genetic deafness, most frequent are the non-syndromic forms Many disease-causing mutations have been described in the GJB2 (70%), of which autosomal recessive inheritance predominates (80%) . gene, and several populations have recurrent mutations, such as the More than 40 DFNB loci for non-syndromic autosomal recessive 35delG among Caucasians, 235delC in the Japanese, and 167delT deafness have been mapped to human chromosomes and 23 of the mutation in the Ashkenazi Jews . Because of the high frequency of genes have been identified to date. The major recessive locus is GJB2 mutations in most populations, mutation analysis of this gene DFNB1 with the responsible gene GJB2 encoding connexin 26 and is widely available as a genetic diagnostic test . However, the mutation with one frameshift mutation (35delG) responsible for the majority (until spectrum in GJB2 can diverge substantially between populations . 85%) of GJB2 deafness mutations in Caucasians . We have previously Therefore, studies are needed to determine the contribution of GJB2 determined a carrier frequency of the 35delG mutation of 3 .5% in the variants in different populations . healthy Greek population and found biallelic GJB2 mutations in 33 .3% In a previous study we have investigated a dataset from Portuguese of Greek children with non-syndromic prelingual deafness . Other families with non-syndromic, bilateral, sensorineural hearing loss, and GJB2 mutations than 35delG seem to have different geographical biallelic mutations in GJB2, in order to estimate the prevalence of distributions . In the present study we determined the frequency of four these variants in the Portuguese impaired population, and to assess already identified recurrent mutations in the Greek population (W24X, variability among subjects enabling to establish a possible genotype- L90P, delE120, and R184P) . Easy screening techniques for the four phenotype correlation . different mutations (ARMS-PCR and PCR-RFLP) were developed . In the present study we have investigated all the Portuguese affected The material consisted of 200 unrelated hearing Greek controls and families previously screened for GJB2, in which we have identified at 26 Greek sib pairs with non-syndromic, prelingual deafness, tested least one mutation in this gene . The aim of the study was to determine negative for 35delG . The L90P mutation was found in 4/200 controls the spectrum of GJB2 variants identified so far and to estimate its and might be frequent in the Greek population, as previously found in carrier frequency in a sample of about 100 unrelated, normal hearing Austrian deafness patients . individuals . Estimation of 35delG carrier frequency had already been performed in our lab, involving a larger control sample . P0680. the GJB R75Q (c.224G>A) mutation is associated The molecular methodologies have included DNA extraction and with variable phenotype and spread among different genetic amplification, SSCP, enzymatic restriction, allele-specific PCR and backgrounds. automated sequencing . O. Posukh1, N. Pallares-Ruiz2, V. Tadinova3, M. Claustres2, A. F. Roux2; * A .R . and C .T . contributed equally to this work 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Molécu- P0678. Prevalence of the del(GJB6-D13s1830) mutation in laire, Institut Universitaire de Recherche Clinique, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, the DFNB1 locus in Portuguese patients with non-syndromic France, 3Republican Altai Children’s Hospital, Gorno-Altaisk, Russian Federa- hearing loss tion. H. Teixeira1, T. Matos1, O. Dias2, M. Andrea2, G. Fialho1, H. Caria1,3; The GJB2 mutations, the most common cause of autosomal recessive 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of hearing loss, are also involved in rare cases of autosomal dominant Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Center of ORL, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lis- deafness and/or deafness with dermatological features . The dominant mutation R75Q (c.224G>A) has been so far identified in several families: Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  one Turkish case, two French families, and a family of mixed origin provide genetic testing for carrier screening or prenatal diagnosis . from Siberia . These published cases show that variable hearing loss In order to find out the prevalence of GJB2 mutations in Indian is observed and is associated with variable manifestation or absence population, we analyzed DNA samples from 220 individuals who have of skin alteration . We described a multiplex family with dominant and congenital, bilateral, severe-profound, sensorineural non-syndromic pseudo-dominant deafness resulted from combination of different hearing loss and family history consistent with DFNB . Contrary to GJB2 mutations . Now we focus on this family branch where c .224G>A the major contribution from GJB2 mutations, our data revealed that was first found as the sole mutation or in trans of the recessive GJB2 homozygous or compound heterozygous GJB2 mutations contributed mutations . Nevertheless, all affected family members carrying the for only 19% (42/220) of DFNB . Heterozygous GJB2 mutations were c .224G>A mutation (grandfather, son, daughter, and two grandsons) detected in 21% (47/220) . The common mutations included W24X, present a uniform deafness phenotype: prelingual severe-profound R127H, W77X while M1V, V27I, 35insG were only occasionally found . hearing loss . Documented dermatological examination did not reveal Sequencing of the non-coding exon 1of GJB2 did not reveal any any skin disorder in the grandfather and his daughter both genotyped pathological variation in families analyzed to date . Currently, we are [c .224G>A]+[=] nor in his son with the [c .224G>A]+[c .235delC] analyzing GJB6 gene both for the common 342 kb deletion or other genotype, though mild keratosis manifestation was detected on mutations and plan to perform linkage analysis for all the known loci the grandsons’ legs both genotyped [c .224G>A]+[c .313_326del] . for DFNB . Because of variable penetrance regarding skin disorder symptoms, There is a need to expand the search for other DFNB genes in India in the c .224G>A status (nonsyndromic and/or syndromic) remains order to find out the major players apart from GJB2 and offer a panel ambiguous . Our data suggest that the phenotypic variability of hearing of common mutations for genetic testing and primary prevention of loss caused by c .224G>A observed among other affected families may NSHL . The results of our ongoing study will be discussed in the current rather reflect the effect of modifier genes and/or environmental factors paper . than the c .224G>A genetic background . P0683. study of Dystrophin gene‘s hotspots in 23 iranian P0681. Detection of mtDNA mutations in 12s rRNA gene families suspected to DmD or BmD (mtRNR1) and tRNA-ser(UNc) gene (mtts1) using DHPLc in M. Dehghanmanshadi, T. Majidizadeh, M. Rostami, B. Hooshiar kashani, S. patients with nonsyndromic hereditary hearing impairment Saber, M. Houshmand; P. Primignani1, L. C. Trotta1, P. Castorina1, F. Lalatta1, U. Ambrosetti1,2, L. Gara- National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- velli3, D. Degiorgio1, F. Sironi1, M. Travi1, D. A. Coviello1; lamic Republic of Iran. 1Fondazione Policlinico Ospedale Maggiore, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, The dystrophinopathies_Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD)and Italy, 2ENT Audiology Department University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Medical Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD)_are the most common inherited Genetic Service - Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy. disorders of muscle . Although reliable prevalence data are lacking, Since 2001 we have analysed 601 subjects, affected by neurosensorial the prevalence of DMD is generally estimated at 1:3,500 live male deafness with various degrees of hearing loss . Mutations in the GJB2 births . Both DMD and BMD are due to mutations in the dystrophin gene, encoding for the gap-junction protein Connexin26 (Cx26), are gene , located at Xp21,which comprises 79 exons and 8 tissue- responsible for the majority of non-syndromic recessive deafness specificpromoters distributed across ~2 .2 Mb of genomic sequence_ and among these the 35delG allele is the most common in the making dystrophin the largest gene yet described . Mediterranean population. In our cohort of patients we identified 169 Dystrophin gene deletions are found in ~55%of patients with BMD and subjects affected by Cx26 and/or delta(GJB6-D13S1830) deafness; 65% of patients DMD; point mutations account for ~30% of mutations, among these 102 (60,3%) exhibited a 35delG homozygous genotype, and duplications account for the remainder . 47 (27,8%) were compound heterozygous 35delG/not-35delG while16 Genetic testing for deletions relies on a multiplex PCR technique, with patients (9,5%) were compound heterozygous not-35delG and 4 amplification of fragments containing 20 of the gene’s 79 exons and showed a dominant mutation . with deletions detected as absent or size-shifted bands on poly Acryl Mutations in MTRNR1 gene (A1555G, 961delT), encoding 12S amide gel analysis . Because deletions tend to occur in “hotspots” ribosomal RNA, account for most of the cases of hereditary deafness within the dystrophin gene, analysis of this limited number of exons induced by amino glycoside’s administration . We screened all the can detect 98% of dystrophin deletions . affected patients, with one or without Cx26 recessive mutations, for Hot spots are exons3-19 and 42-60 .We studied all of these exons for the A1555G substitution by DHPLC, and the positive samples were 23 Iranian families . subjected to sequencing analysis . We found 5 patients carrying the In our study most common of deletion were in exon6, exon44, exon50, A1555G and the subsequent family analysis led to the identification of exon4 respectively . this mutation in 6 relatives (4 of these were pre-symptomatic) . Mutations in the MTTS1 gene, encoding the Serine tRNA, are an additional cause P0684. Modifications of chromosome 21 gene expression levels for nonsyndromic maternally inherited hearing impairment with onset in lymphoblastoid cell lines from Down syndrome patients in childhood . E. Aït Yahya Graison1,2, J. Aubert3, L. Dauphinot2, I. Rivals4, G. Golfier2, M. Until now at least 4 MTTS1 mutations have been described (A7445G, Prieur5, J. Rossier2, S. Robin3, J. M. Delabar1, M. C. Potier2; 7472insC, T7510C, T7511C) . We will discuss the results of the 1EA3508, Universite Denis Diderot, Paris, France, 2UMR CNRS 7637, ESPCI, analysis of this hot spot region in our 421 unresolved cases using the Paris, France, 3UMR INAPG/INRA/ENGREF, Paris, France, 4ESA, ESPCI, DHPLC screening method in order to investigate the prevalence of Paris, France, 5Service Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, these mutations in our population . France. Down syndrome (DS) is the most common genetic cause of mental P0682. Autosomal recessive, non-syndromic hearing loss in retardation in human . Although chromosomal abnormality has been india: a different story? characterised by Lejeune in 1959, molecular mechanisms by which total K. G. Godbole1, J. Hemavathi2, I. Mali2, C. J. Spurgeon2, N. Vaid3, G. R. Chan- or partial triplication of chromosome 21 (HSA21) leads to perturbation dak2, A. N. Pandit4; of the phenotype remain unknown . The elementary hypothesis about 1Clinical Geneticist, Dept of Pediatrics, K.E.M. Hospital and Research Center, triplicated gene expression is that they are 1 .5 fold overexpressed . Pune, India, 2Center for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India, We have chosen microarray technology to explore HSA21 gene 3Dept of E.N.T, K.E.M. Hospital and Research Center, Pune, India, 4Dept of expression in a cellular model of DS. A specific HSA21 microarray Pediatrics, K.E.M. Hospital and Research Center, Pune, India. containing 671 aminomodified oligonucleotides representing 275 Autosomal recessive inheritance contributes to 75-80% of prelingual, genes and orf, 119 predictions and 21 antisense transcripts was bilateral non-syndromic hearing loss of genetic etiology (DFNB) and designed using appropriate softwares (Golfier et al) and spotted on about 50% of these cases are attributed to homozygous mutations in CodeLink® glass slides . GJB2, worldwide . Although hearing impairment is an important health HSA21 gene expression in lymphoblastoid cell lines established problem and consanguineous marriages are relatively common, data from 10 patients (DS) and 11 controls (2N) was compared on the on the genetics of hearing loss in India are largely inadequate to HSA21 oligoarray after control of genomic stability of each cell line by Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  karyotyping . P0687. COL5A1 haploinsufficiency in Russian patients with Cell lines were analyzed using an experimental design which optimizes classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome to 40 the number of differential hybridizations between DS and 2N M. Kournikova1, O. Blinnikova2, A. Semyachkina3, G. Mutovin2, S. Tverskaya1, samples . The statistical modeling of HSA21 gene expression takes A. Polyakov1; into consideration three features: genotype, gender and biological 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian variability . Data were normalized using non HSA21 genes for which State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Pediatrics expression levels are not affected by DS . and Children’ Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. Among the 90 HSA21 sequences that were sufficiently expressed in cell Classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heritable disorder lines, differential analysis revealed that 46 genes were overexpressed of connective tissue of which the major diagnostic criteria are with DS/2N ratios from 1 .07 to 1 .73 . More surprisingly, 3 HSA21 genes hyperextensible skin, joint hypermobility and delayed wound healing were significantly classified as invariants. Finally this analysis showed with atrophic scarring . Mutations in the COL5A1 gene leading to a non- that biological variability has a significant effect on the expression of functional allele and resulting in COL5A1 haploinsufficiency have been 21 HSA21 genes . shown to cause the disorder in approximately one third of patients with classic EDS . Our study included 27 probands with clinical diagnosis P0685. Duplications in the DmD gene in DmD/BmD patients in of classic EDS. Cultured dermal fibroblasts and blood samples were serbia and montenegro obtained from all patients, and mRNA and genomic DNA were isolated T. Lalic1, R. H. A. M. Vossen2, J. Coffa3, J. P. Schouten3, M. Guc-Scekic1, D. subsequently . The expression of COL5A1 alleles was analyzed using Radivojevic1, M. Djurisic1, M. H. Breuning2, S. J. White2, J. T. den Dunnen2; three polymorphic sites in the COL5A1 coding region - PstI in exon 1Mother and Child Health Institute, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 2Center 5, Bsc4I in exon 58 and DpnII in exon 66 . The RFLP analysis was for Human and Clinical Genetics,Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The performed initially on genomic DNA, to determine the genotype of each Netherlands, 3MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. patient, and subsequently on cDNA . Of 27 patients, 23 (85%) were Although duplication mutations in the DMD gene were reported to be heterozygous for one or several polymorphisms in DNA samples . Four relatively frequent early on, the considerable effort to detect them made of these 23 patients (18%) showed complete or nearly complete loss them largely neglected . This situation has changed only recently with of expression of one COL5A1 allele in cDNA sample . The relatively the development of MAPH and MLPA, two easy and versatile methods low COL5A1 haploinsufficiency detection rate confirms genetic for the detection of both deletions and duplications .We present here heterogeneity of classic EDS . a retrospective study of 123 unrelated DMD/BMD patients (already screened for deletions in the hot spot regions using modified multiplex P0688. Arginine-to-cysteine substitutions in the pro-alpha-1(i)- PCR kits) .Rescreening these with MLPA revealed nine duplications, collagen chain result in propensity to arterial rupture dispersed over the whole gene . This corresponds to a duplication S. Symoens1, F. Malfait1, J. De Backer1, T. Le-Hermanns2, N. Sakalihasan3, C. rate of 17% among deletion-negative and 7% among all patients, an M. Lapière4, P. J. Coucke1, A. De Paepe1; ocerall duplication frequency comparable with what previous studies 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Bel- had suggested .The majority of cases contain a simple contiguous gium, 2Laboratory of Dermatopathology, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium, duplication, but we also detected one non-contiguous duplication/ 3Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, University Hospital of Liège, Liège, triplication . In most non-contiguous duplications reported thus far the Belgium, 4Laboratory of Connective Tissue Biology, University of Liège, Liège, 3’ end of the gene is affected . Whilst potentially disturbing the reading Belgium. frame of the mRNA, these mutations would go undetected using Type I procollagen is a heterotrimer consisting of two pro-alpha-1(I)- standard multiplex PCR screening. These findings emphasize the and one pro-alpha-2(I)-chains, encoded by the COL1A1 and COL1A2 importance of screening the entire gene for rearrangements and that genes . Mutations in these genes cause Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) duplications, compared to deletions, need to be treated with special or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), arthrochalasis type . The majority of care . structural mutations in OI are glycine substitutions in the collagen type I triple helix . In contrast, only two arginine-to-cysteine substitutions in type P0686. Autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy I collagen have been identified, respectively the p.R134C substitution (EDmD-AD) in a Bulgarian family: case report in two patients with classic EDS and the p .R836C substitution in three T. Todorov1, A. Todorova1, I. Tournev2, C. R. Mueller3, I. Kremensky1; families with Caffey disease and mild EDS-features . 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Neurology, Alex- We refer on three patients with arterial dissection in early adulthood, androvska Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Human Genetics, Biozen- who harbour an arginine-to-cysteine substitution in the alpha-1(I)- trum, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany. collagen chain . In addition, patient 1 (p .R134C) presented also classic Laminopathies are clinically extremely heterogeneous group of inherited EDS-features including fragile, hyperextensible skin, whereas patients disorders, caused by mutations in the same gene - lamin A/C (LMNA) 2 (p .R396C) and 3 (p .R915C) showed osteopenia with mild skin- and gene . Lamins A and C are nuclear envelope proteins, representing joint hypermobility . alternatively spliced forms of the LMNA gene. It was identified that SDS-PAGE of dermal fibroblasts showed disulphide-bonded dimeric- mutations in the LMNA gene cause inherited neuromuscular disorders alpha-1(I)-collagen chains which were variably secreted into the and/or cardiac conduction disturbances, lipodystrophies, peripheral medium . Experiments to evaluate the effect of these substitutions neuropathy and progeroid syndromes . on collagen type I maturation and stability showed a delay in amino- Here we report a Bulgarian family with EDMD-AD, caused by a unique propeptide-processing but a normal thermal stability . Ultrastructural mutation in the LMNA gene . Four family members (the index patient, his findings disclosed disrupted collagen fibrils, variable collagen fibril brother and his two daughters) were tested for mutations in the LMNA diameter and interfibrillar granulo-filamentous deposits, reflecting gene . The mutation p .Asn195Asp in exon 3 was detected in three of disturbed collagen fibrillogenesis and abnormal secretion of mutant them (one of the daughters was not a carrier) . On the other hand, collagen type I . pronounced clinical variability was noticed in this family . The index We demonstrate that arginine-to-cysteine substitutions in type patient showed disease onset at the age 16, while his carrier brother I collagen can result in a phenotype with EDS-like-features and at the age 30 did not demonstrate any symptoms . His carrier daughter propensity to arterial rupture in early adulthood . This has important demonstrates mild muscle weakness at the age 17 . The creatinekinase implications for genetic counselling and clinical follow-up of patients levels were normal to slightly increased . The progression was slow carrying non-glycine substitutions in collagen type I . to the age of 30s and more rapid afterwards . Muscle weakness and S . Symoens and F . Malfait contributed equally to this work . atrophy were more evident in biceps brachii . Contractions in elbows and ankles were present . Cardiac involvement was demonstrated as P0689. Severe factor V deficiency: identification and molecular conduction and rhythm disturbances, 1st degree AV block, left bundle characterization of three novel splicing mutations branch block Defibrillator was offered. R. Asselta, C. Dall’Osso, S. Duga, N. Locatelli, M. Malcovati, M. L. Tenchini; The pathophysiological mechanism of these tissue-specific Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, laminopathies as a result of mutations in a gene expressed all over, is Milan, Italy. unclear and all the data on this point is welcome . Severe factor V (FV) deficiency (MIM+227400) is a rare autosomal Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  recessive hemorrhagic diathesis, characterized by low or unmeasurable Clinical manifestations of Fanconi anemia are disorder of skin, levels of FV antigen and coagulant activity (1% or less) . This bleeding Cardiopulmonary system, kidney, head and face and thumb . Complete disorder has a prevalence of about 1 per million and is associated blood cell count may reveal trilineage pancytopenia or may only show with clinical manifestations ranging from mild to severe . Among rare red blood cells that are macrocytic for age . Thrombocytopenia or inherited coagulopathies, it is one of the least characterized from the leukopenia may precede full-blown aplasia . molecular point of view . The specific role of mutations in the FA genes in the pathogenesis of The mutational screening of the FV gene in three FV-deficient patients birth defects, bone marrow failure, or oncogenesis is not yet clear identified five genetic defects, three hitherto unknown (the splicing At least 11 genes are involved in the FA pathway . Forty variants are likely mutations IVS21+1G>A, IVS24+1_+4delGTAG, and IVS8+6T>C, to be pathogenic mutations and there are forty-five polymorphism. this last being the only one found in the homozygous state), and two Seventeen of these mutations are microdeletions/microinsertions already described (Arg1002ter and Arg2074His) . To demonstrate the associated with short direct repeats or homonucleotide tracts, a type pathogenic role of the newly identified splicing defects, transfections of of mutation thought to be generated by a mechanism of slipped-strand appropriate FV minigene constructs (either wild type or mutant) were mispairing during DNA . carried out in HeLa cells . RT-PCR analysis on mRNA extracted from For molecular diagnosis Sequence Analysis, ARMs-PCR analysis, transfected cells, demonstrated that the IVS8+6T>C transition causes Restriction analysis is recommended . the entire exon 8 to be skipped from the FV mRNA . Conversely, When a sequence variant was identified, additional family members both IVS21+1G>A and IVS24+1_+4delGTAG cause the activation of as well as normal chromosomes were screened by SSCP and/or cryptic donor splice sites, located in exons 21 and 24, respectively . In restriction analysis to determine if the variant was associated with the all cases, the splicing defect results in the generation of a premature FA phenotype . stop codon in the FV protein (p .Lys346SerfsX17, p .Gly1952ValfsX2, We investigated these deletions in our patients and we did not find p .Met2120IlefsX12, mature protein) . these deletions in non of our patients . In conclusion this study reports the molecular characterization of three novel splicing mutations responsible for FV deficiency, further P0692. molecular characterization of turkish patients with supporting the allelic heterogeneity of this disease . Fanconi anemia: Preliminary results This research program is supported by a “Bayer Early Career G. Balta1, F. Gumruk1, T. Patiroglu2, A. Gurgey1, C. Altay1; Investigator Award 2005” to Dr . Rosanna Asselta . 1Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey. Fanconi anemia (FA) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous P0690. mEFV mutations in tunisian patients suffering from autosomal recessive disorder characterized by bone marrow failure, Familial mediterranean Fever multiple congenital physical abnormalities, sensitivity to cross- H. Chaabouni1,2, M. Kossentini1, M. kharrat1, R. M’rad1,2, M. Chaabouni1, Z. linking agents and predisposition to cancer . At least 11 different Bahloul3, L. Ben Jemaa1, S. M’rad,4, I. Touitou5, N. Smaoui1; complementation groups has been described to date . In Turkey, the 1department of human genetic, tunis, Tunisia, 2Charles Nicolle hospital, Tunis, most prevalent group is FA-A (~70%), followed by FA-G (14%) and Tunisia, 3department of medecine, Sfax, Tunisia, 4department of medecine, La FA-E (10%) . The aim of this study is to evaluate Turkish patients Marsa hospital tunis, Tunisia, 5department of genetic, Montpellier, France. belonging to these complementation groups and to identify the OBJECTIVES To identify the frequency and distribution of FMF gene underlying pathogenic mutations of the patients belonging to the group (MEFV) mutations in Tunisian patients . A . The subjects of this study were 50 unrelated Turkish families (38 PATIENTS AND METHODS The study was performed in the Genetic consanguineous) . Linkage analysis indicated that 26 families showed Department of Tunis University Hospital . Patients were referred for homozygosity for the FANCA gene while only 2 and 1 patients were found genetic study, and counseling . A diagnosis of FMF was made according to show homozygosity for the FANCG and FANCE genes respectively . to published criteria . A diagnostic molecular test was performed for the Mutational analysis of the FANCA gene led to the identification of 3 5 common known mutations (M694V, V726A, M694I, M680I, E148Q) novel [homozygous C2932T substitution (CAG>TAG) in exon 30 and for A744S, R761H and I692del . The tests performed were PCR (Q978X); homozygous replacement of T2941C (TGT>CGT) in exon restriction-digestion for M694V, V726A, M680I, R761H, E148Q; ARMS 30 (C281R); ten base-pair deletion between the sequences1360-1370 for A744S, M694I and PCR-electrophoresis assay for I692del . at the 5’ end of the exon 15], and 3 previously described [homozygous RESULTS Of the 139 unrelated patients investigated, 61 (43 .88%) 3639delT in exon 37, heterozygous 3520-3522del in exon 36 had at least one mutation , studied mutations were absent for others . (W1174del); homozygous C3263T substitution in exon 33 (S1088F)] Of those with mutations, 28 were homozygous, 16 were compound mutations in 6 families . The preliminary results of this study indicated heterozygous, 2 had complex alleles, and 17 patients had only 1 that mutation analysis of the FANCA gene is highly difficult; among the identifiable mutation. Of the mutations, M680I , M694V, M694I ,V726A, patients studied only 6 mutations could be identified, and that mutation A744S, R761H , I692DEL and E148Q accounted for 31 .48, 26 .85, spectrum of the gene is highly heterogeneous in Turkish population . 12 .96, 5 .55, 2 .77, 0 .92, 0 .92 and 18 .51%, respectively . Five of our This study was supported by Hacettepe University Research Fund patients developed chronic renal failure . Homozygotes M680I patients (02G116). <gbalta@hacettepe.edu.tr> phenotype is less severe than M694V ones . CONCLUSION, our findings show that MEFV mutations profile in FMF P0693. Polymorphism G664A of atrial natriuretic peptide is Tunisian patients is different from other Arabs patients . The M680I is associated with lipid levels in familial hypercholesterolemia the most common mutation which is found to be at least third range G. V. Z. Dedoussis1, S. Maumus2, J. Skoumas3, D. M. Choumerianou1, C. in other Arab, non-Ashkenazi Jews, Turks, Armenians populations . Pitsavos3, C. Stefanadis3, S. Visvikis-Siest2; There is low frequency of V726A mutation and high frequency of 1Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Science of Dietetics-Nutrition, M694Vmutation . This provides important tools for adapting a molecular Harokopio University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2INSERM Unité 525, Faculté diagnostic test for our population and further investigation de Pharmacie, Centre du Médicament, Université Henri Poincaré, Nancy, France, 3Department of Cardiology, Hyperlipidemic Clinic Hippocratio Hospital, P0691. Detection of 1115-1118 Del and 3788-3790 Del in Fanconi Medical School of Athens, Athens, Greece. Anemia Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP or NPPA) is the precursor protein of N. Eskandari, S. Saber, T. Majidizadeh, A. Yazdi, M. DehghanManshadi, M. the amyloidosis form called isolated atrial amyloid (IAA) related to Houshmand; the increased incidence of cardiac pathological conditions in ageing . National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- Characteristics of familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) patients are the lamic Republic of Iran. high LDL-C levels, which frequently gives rise to premature coronary Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetically heterogeneous autosomal artery disease (CAD) . However, not all FH patients have the same recessive syndrome associated with chromosomal instability, clinical phenotype . The aim of the present study was to assess the hypersensitivity to DNA cross linking agents, and predisposition to relationship between ANP polymorphisms and apolipoprotein (Apo) A1 malignancy . There are 11 different genes for FA .The genes are termed levels on the likelihood of having CAD in FH patients . The effect of FANCA through FANCJ . transition T2238C, which leads to ANP with 2 additional arginines and Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 G664A resulting to a missense mutation Val7Met on lipid values and skeletal dismorphias of diverse severity . We sequenced the exons clinical phenotype were investigated, in 83 FH patients . ApoA1 and of filaminB gene of 59 patients with disorders resembling to known HDL-C levels were lower heterozygotes at position 664 compared to phenotypes and 64 of their healthy relatives . 11 new polymorphisms GG homozygotes at the same position (121 .66±16 .06 vs 141 .38±23 .6 were revealed, 6 of which were associated with amino acid changes . mg/dl, p=0.02; 37.02±5.87 vs 48.05±15.41, p=0.05, respectively). Most of them occurred also in at least one of the parents therefore are ApoA1 concentration remained significantly associated with ANP not likely pathogenic . One has de novo origin: C3176T (Ala1059Val) G664A polymorphism after adjusting for age and sex (p=0 .015) . No change in the exon 21 occurred in a 16-year old patient born with association was found between the G664A polymorphism and CAD diastematomyelia and myelomeningocele; it was not shown in any of in our population . Moreover, ApoA1 and HDL levels were not different parents . The patient has also shortened upper trunk, double scoliosis among the different genotypes of the T2238C polymorphism, even and composite developmental disorders of vertebrae . It is possible that after adjusting for age and sex . Our results suggest that the A allele at the observed nucleotide change may be a novel causative mutation to position 664 of the ANP gene is associated with lower levels of ApoA1 this kind of disorders of skeletal development . and HDL-C in FH patients, but not with CAD risk . Concerning the T2238C polymorphism, no effect could be evidenced neither on lipid P0696. mEFV mutations in patients with familial mediterranean parameters nor on CAD incidence . fever from the Aegean Region of turkey F. Ozkinay1, H. Onay2, S. Pehlivan3, E. Turker1, G. Itirli3, O. Cogulu1, C. Ozki- P0694. Phenotype-genotype correlations in filaminopathies A nay1; C. Goizet1,2, G. Sole1,3, I. Coupry1, C. Rooryck-Thambo1,2, C. Marchal3, V. Mi- 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, chel3, S. De-Bruxelles3, N. Phillip4, L. Olivier-Faivre5, O. Boute6, A. Dieux-Coes- Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, ler6, H. Journel7, G. Viot8, A. Toutain9, A. David10, M. C. Addor11, L. Villard4, D. Turkey, 3Ege University Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Izmir, Tur- Lacombe1,2, B. Arveiler1,2; key. 1Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine, Développement et Cancer, Université Vic- Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) which is mostly frequently present tor Segalen Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France, 2Service de Génétique Médicale, in Mediterranean populations is an autosomal recessive disorder . The Hôpital Pellegrin-Enfants, Bordeaux, France, 3Département de Neurologie, mutations in MEFV gene are responsible for the disorder . The MEFV Hôpital Pellegrin-Tripode, Bordeaux, France, 4Département de Génétique Médi- gene is located at 16p13 .3 and codes a protein, pyrin/marenostrin . cale, Hôpital Timone-Enfants, Marseille, France, 5Centre de Génétique, Hôpital More than 50 mutations have been defined in the MEFV gene. d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 6Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de We have restrospectively evaluated the molecular test results of 300 Flandre, Lille, France, 7Unité de Génétique Clinique, CH Bretagne Atlantique, FMF patients referred to the Molecular Genetics Laboratory of Medical Vannes, France, 8Consultation de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, Genetics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir/ France, 9Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France, Turkey in the last two years . Patients had been tested for 12 common 10Unité de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Mère-Enfant, Nantes, France, 11Service mutations in MEFV gene using the strip assay method (Innogenetics, de Génétique Médicale, CHU Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland. Belgium) . Introduction: Filamin A, encoded by the FLNA gene located on Out of 300 patients tested in the Aegean region in Turkey (600 allels), chromosome Xq28, is a cytoskeletal protein that cross-links actin 151 did not carry any mutations, while 82 patients (27 .33%) were in a regulated fashion . Mutations in FLNA have been associated either homozygous or compound heterozygous, 66 (22%) carried only with various phenotypes including periventricular heterotopia (PH), one detected mutation, and 1 (0 .33%) patient had three mutations . oto-palato-digital syndrome type 1 and 2 (OPD), Melnick-Needles Allelic frequencies for the four most common muatations in the syndrome (MNS) and frontometaphyseal dysplasia (FMD) . We have positive groups were 56% (M694V), 12 .75% (V726A), 12 .28% (M680I) analyzed the FLNA gene in 48 patients who presented clinical and/or , respectively . The rest of the allels (7 .57%) showed rare mutations brain MRI signs that belong to the spectrum of filaminopathies A. which were R761H, P369S, K695R, A744S, F475L . Material and Methods: Thirty-two patients had PH, ten had OPD, two The frequencies of mutations detected in our group compared to the had MNS and four had complex congenital malformation disorders . frequencies reported in the other regions of Turkey showed a two We used the dHPLC technology for an indirect search of mutation in fold increase in V726A mutation frequency . No patient showed a the entire coding region (47 exons), the 5’ and 3’ UTR regions, and in M694I mutation which is sometimes evident in other Mediterranean the intron-exon boundaries. All variants identified using dHPLC were populations . secondary sequenced . Results: We have identified nine novel different mutations in ten P0697. methylation analysis of the Fmr1 Promoter region in X- patients with PH . The p .Pro207Leu missense mutation was observed in Fragile patients six members of a large OPD family, and two novel missense mutations B. Lopez, E. Velasco, J. Telleria, M. Alonso, M. Duran, I. Fernandez-Carvajal; (p .N187Ser and p .Ser1199Leu) in two unrelated OPD patients . The IBGM-UVA, Valladolid, Spain. previously known p .Ala1188Thr mutation was observed in the two Fragile X syndrome (FRAXA) is the most common cause known of unrelated patients with MNS . inherited mental retardation . The hypermethylation of the expanded Discussion: We have identified eleven novel mutations in FLNA . CGG repeat and of the upstream promoter is associated with gene Our data corroborate previous findings concerning the existence of silencing and the absence of the FMR1 protein . phenotype-genotype correlations in filaminopathies A. Although PH is We have studied four male individuals: two X-Fragile (XF) patients and largely due to loss-of-function mutations, OPD and MNS are caused two normal controls by methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and bisulphite by mutations leading to the production of a full length protein and sequencing . providing a gain-of-function effect . The later mutations clustered within Bisulphite sequencing was performed by sodium bisulphite treatment a few regions and some are highly recurrent . with CpGenome DNA Modification Kit (Chemicon International) followed by PCR reaction. Purified PCR products were sequenced in P0695. New polymorphisms in the filaminB gene: novel an ABI 3100 automated capillary DNA sequencer with primers for the candidates for causing disease? antisense strand . G. C. Talián1, K. Horvátovich1, A. Maász1, L. Magyari1, T. Illés2, B. Melegh1; After bisulphite treatment, all cytosines must be converted to uracil 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, Pécs, except those that are mehylated (5´ methylcytosine) . Hungary, 2Department of Orthopedics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. This change was complete in controls and XF excluding three specific Filamins can bind to a great variety of intracellular proteins and play cytosines at 13518, 13551, 13561 positions (GenBank accession a role in diverse cellular processes like cytoskeleton organisation, number L29074 antisense strand) that were incompletely transformed membrane stabilisation, anchoring of transmembrane proteins and to U in XF patients . signalling molecules . Mutations in both filaminA and filaminB genes These findings suggest the possibility that FMR1 methylated promoter are in relationship with serious disorders of the skeletal system; could have targets for methyl specific repressor factors at this sites. This filaminB is demonstrated to associate with atelosteogenesis type I fact would explain the protection of these three cytosines surrounding and III, Larsen syndrome and spondylocarpotarsal syndrome causing CpG sites against bisulphite treatment .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 These results open the possibility of a coordinated transcription inhibition fragile X mental retardation-1 (FMR1) gene . The expanded CGG triplet between methylation and methyl-binding (protein) repressors . repeats are hypermethylated and the expression of the FMR1 gene Methylation could therefore inhibit FMR1 transcription not only by is repressed in patients with fragile X syndrome, which leads to the recruiting histone deacetylases but also by methyl-CpG-binding absence of FMR1 protein (FMRP) and subsequent MR . Estimate repressor proteins that specifically recognize specific methyl-CpG - prevalence of FXS is 1 in 4000…6000 males . Normal alleles vary binding sites . from 6 to approximately 50 CGG repeats . Intermediate alleles 45 - 55 repeats, premutation alleles 59 - 200 repeats (unmethylated), full P0698. markers of genetic susceptibility to gonadothropin mutation greater than approximately 200 repeats (methylated) . induced ovarian response. We analyzed a group of 171 unrelated males with MR referred from G. Livshits1, Y. Masliy2, A. Melnik1, L. Livshits1; clinical geneticists . Molecular diagnostic includes screening by PCR 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics (National Academy of Sciences of for a normal CGG repeat length and CGG repeat number detection Ukraine), Kiev, Ukraine, 2Clinica “ISIDA”, Kiev, Ukraine. by Applied Biosystems protocol on ABI Prism 310 . Three patients with Assisted reproductive technologies are widely used in treatment full mutation were detected. The final diagnosis confirmed by Southern of infertility, that’s why the problems of ovarian response to blotting with kindly help of prof . K . Eiklid, Oslo, Norway . One allele in gonadothropins GT - induced stimulation are updated . This response intermediate range was detected (50 repeats) . is tightly connected with ovarian reserve from one side and from the The estimation of AGG inserts structure and ATL1 SNP analysis for abilities of the individual to metabolize the exogenous GT . The aim of further investigation of Latvian FXS patients and their families are in our study was to investigate the associoation between FMR1, INHα1, progress . NAT2, GSTT1 and GSTM1 genes mutations and response to GT- FXS was detected in 1 .75% cases from analyzed patients with MR . stimulation in donor oocyte population . We investigated 194 healthy We suppose, that number of FXS patients must be higher . oocytes donors, wich were stimulated for oocyte retrieval with GT . The dosage of GT, and quantity of oocytes were valuated in these patients . P0701. molecular studies of FRAXA and FRAXE in s.indian non- It was found, that in women with INHa1 gene mutation 769G→A the specific MR cases. quantity of oocytes were significantly decreased in comparison to K. Lavanya1, B. Thelma2, V. Om Sai Ramesh3, V. Naga Ratna3, M. sujatha1, M. patients without such mutation . It was also shown, that in patients Anandaraj1; with “slow” acetylation NAT2 genotype and GSTT1 gene deletion the 1Institute of Genetics & Hospital for Genetic Diseases, Hyderabad, India, 2Delhi dosage of GT necessary for stimulation was significantly higher than in University, Delhi, India, 3National Institute for Mentally Handicapped, Secunder- patients with “quick” acetylation NAT2 genotype . Moreover in women abad, India. with FMR1 gene intermediate allels (≥ 40 CGG-repeats) in the second Fragile X syndrome is an X-linked disorder associated with moderate cycles the tendency to increasing of the daily GT-dosage was observed to severe mental retardation . Fragile X A syndrome (FRAXA) Our data demonstrated that FMR1 and INHα1 genes can be involved and fragile X E syndromes (FRAXE) are caused by trinucleotide in GT reception and biotransformation in turn “slow alleles” and GSTT1 expansions in FMR1 and FMR2 genes respectively . Based on the 0/0 genotype could modify the ovarian response to exogenous GT . size and methylation status of the expansion, individuals are classified into normal(2-60 CGG repeats), premutated (60-200 CGG repeats) P0699. Expansion, deletions and nonsense mutations in the and full mutated individuals(>200 CGG repeats) . When the repeat polyAlanine-containing transcription factor FOXL2 lead to number increases over 200, the gene gets hypermethylated and aggregation transcriptionally silenced, hence not producing the FMR protein . We L. Moumne, S. Caburet, M. Fellous, R. Veitia; have screened 203 individuals from south India with MR of unknown INSERM, Paris, France. etiology . All the individuals are clinically evaluated by a 15 item check Mutations of FOXL2, a gene encoding a forkhead transcription factor, list . Molecular diagnosis was carried out using PCR technique and have been shown to cause the blepharophimosis-ptosis epicanthus sizing of the amplicons were carried out by electrophoresis in denaturing inversus syndrome (BPES) . This genetic disorder is characterized polyacrylamide gel. The cases in which the amplification failed were by eyelid and craniofacial abnormalities and is often associated with suspected for the syndrome and were confirmed by southern blot premature ovarian failure . Several types of mutations have been found analysis using Stb12 .3 probe . Of the 203 cases screened, 7 are full in the open reading frame of FOXL2, including nonsense and missense mutated males and 5 carrier females for FRAXA and no cases of mutations and polyalanine expansions or deletion . Premature stop FRAXE has been identified. 5 individuals who harbored methylation full codons in FOXL2 have been considered so far as null alleles . mutations for FRAXA were studied for mRNA expressions using RT- However, we demonstrated that such nonsense mutations might lead PCR and found 2 individuals expressing 2-5 fold increase, 1 individual to the production of N-terminally truncated proteins by re-initiation of expressing almost equal and 2 individuals showing less expression translation downstream of the stop codon . Surprisingly, the truncated in comparison with the FMR1 mRNA levels of normal individuals . proteins strongly aggregate in the nucleus, partially localize in the This shows that full mutations always do not necessarily focus the cytoplasm and retain a fraction of the wild-type protein . Furthermore transcriptional silencing of the FMR1 gene . we have studied the effect of the polyalanine length variation . We showed that mutant FOXL2 with an expanded polyAlanine tract forms P0702. Basque heterogeneity in the fragile X mutation large aggregates both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm of transfected I. Arrieta, O. Peñagarikano, M. Telez, P. Flores, B. Criado, L. Valverde, A. Jo- cells, whereas the wild-type protein localizes in the nucleus in a ven, J. Ramirez, L. Lombardero, A. Gonzalez; rather diffuse manner . We have also shown that a complete deletion Dpto Genetica, Antropología Fisica y Fisiologia animal Facultad de Ciencia y of the polyAlanine tract of FOXL2 induces a significant intranuclear Tecnología, Bilbao, Spain. aggregation, sensitive to the action of chaperones . Our results The expansion of a trinucleotide repeat (CGG)n in the FMR1 X-linked show that at least three types of mutation in FOXL2 lead to protein gene is the main cause of Fragile X syndrome . Normal alleles consist aggregation and provide the first demonstration of protein aggregation of tracts of 9-10 CGG repeats interrupted with single AGG triplets . induced by nonsense mutations due to expression of an “unexpected” These tracts can become into longer uninterrupted repeats through a N-term truncated protein . gradual slippage or loss of an AGG, leading to unstable alleles prone to expansion to Fragile X mutation . We had previously reported the P0700. molecular diagnosis of fragile X syndrome in mentally existence of both types of mutational pathways among general Basque retarded patients from Latvia population (Arrieta et al 1999, Peñagarikano et al 2004), despite the Z. Daneberga1,2, Z. Krumina1, B. Lace1, N. Pronina1, R. Lugovska1; absence of the Fragile X full mutation . Basques represent one of the 1Medical Genetic Clinic University Children`s Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga Stra- oldest human isolates . The orography of their living area subdivides dins University, Riga, Latvia. them into different isolated groups with very little migration until Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the second most common cause of recently . This may have had an effect on allelic frequency distibutions mental retardation (MR) . FXS is mainly caused by massive expansion and, therefore, on the prevalence of the associated disorders . With the of CGG triplet repeats located in the 5‘-untranslated region of the aim to ascertain any genetic heterogeneity at the FMR1 locus among Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  Basques . In a previous work (Arrieta et al ., 2003) we have analyzed directly altering the genome . Methylation of C5position of cytosine the factors inplicated in CGG repeat stability in a sample from two residues in DNA has a great importance in epigenetic silencing . different and isolated valleys from the Biscay province . The results A growing number of human diseases have been found to be showed differences between the two valleys in that factors . In the associated with aberrant DNA methylation . Facioscapulohumeral present work we extend the study to a samples from five different and muscular dystrophy (FSHD, OMIM 158900) is an autosomal dominant isolated valleys from the Biscay, Guipuzcoa and Navarre provinces neuromuscular disorder . A contraction of the polymorphic D4Z4 repeat within the Spanish Basque region . The data show that differences in array located at 4q35 locus is associated with the disease . Several allele frequencies as well as in the distibution of the different mutational observations suggest an epigenetic aetiology in FSHD that causes the pathways are present among Basques . transcriptional deregulation of genes close to D4Z4 . Van Overveld at al . (2003) has tested this hypothesis by checking the methylation status of P0703. GAA repeat expansion mutation mouse models of the proximal D4Z4 unit at 4q35 and hypomethylation in DNA samples Friedreich ataxia exhibit a slowly progressive neuronal and of FSHD patients was detected . Aim of our study was to analyze the cardiac pathological phenotype methylation state of D4Z4 repeats in 20 Hungarian FSHD patients . S. Al-Mahdawi1, R. Mouro Pinto1, D. Varshney1, L. Lawrence2, M. B. Lowrie2, S. Samples from 20 healthy and 10 non-FSHD muscular dystrophy Hughes3, Z. Webster4, J. M. Cooper3, R. King3, M. A. Pook1; patients were also examined . Genomic DNA was isolated from 1Brunel University, Uxbridge, United Kingdom, 2Imperial College London, Lon- peripheral blood lymphocytes and digested with methylation sensitive don, United Kingdom, 3University College London, London, United Kingdom, restriction endonucleases (BsaAI and FseI) . Southern-blot analysis 4MRC CSC, London, United Kingdom. was performed using P32-labelled p13E-11 probe, specific for 4q35. Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused The intensity of the signals was measured and data were analysed by by an unstable GAA repeat expansion mutation within intron 1 of the a Mann-Whitney-U test. Significant difference was detected between FRDA gene . However, the origins of the GAA repeat expansion, its the methylation values of samples originating from FSHD patients unstable dynamics within different cells and tissues and its effects and healthy individuals, as well as FSHD patients and other muscular on frataxin expression are not yet completely understood . We have dystrophy patients . Our results support the observation that D4Z4 previously reported the establishment of two lines of human FRDA YAC proximal units are hypomethylated in samples of FSHD patients . transgenic mice that contain unstable GAA repeat expansions within the appropriate genomic context . We now describe the generation of P0706. FXtAs in spanish subjects presenting with ataxias FRDA mouse models by cross breeding both lines of human FRDA YAC M. Milà1, A. Sánchez1, M. Tintoré2, G. Martin3, B. Gomez4, E. Muñoz5, L. Rodri- transgenic mice with heterozygous Frda knockout mice . The resultant guez-Revenga1; FRDA mice that express only human-derived frataxin show reduced 1Servei de Bioquimica i Genética Molecular. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, levels of frataxin, decreased aconitase activity, oxidative stress and 2Servei de Neurologia. Hospital Vall Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servei de Neu- age-related neurodegenerative and cardiac pathological phenotypes . rologia. Hospital Verge de la Cinta, Tortosa, Spain, 4Servei de Radiodiagnostic. These mice represent the first GAA repeat expansion-based FRDA Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 5Servei de Neurologia. Hospital Clínic, Bar- mouse models that exhibit progressive FRDA-like pathology, and thus celona, Spain. will be of use in testing potential therapeutic strategies, particularly Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a newly GAA repeat-based strategies . described disorder that occurs in premutation carriers (55-200CGG repeats) in FMR1 gene . It is characterized by progressive intention P0704. Non-coding repeats expansions and pre mRNA tremor, ataxia, and hyperintensities of the middle cerebellar peduncles processing defects on T2-weighted MRIs . FXTAS was described in fragile X families, with F. Pagani; a suggested age-related penetrance higher that 75% in male carriers ICGEB, Human Molecular Genetics, Trieste, Italy. of 80 years or older . The incidence of FMR1 premutated carriers in Transcribed non-coding sequences contribute to a correct mRNA general population is relatively high and therefore FXTAS might formation by providing cis-acting elements that regulate pre-mRNA explain a considerably number of sporadic cases of late-onset ataxias . processing. These sequences are a significant source of human Several studies have been performed in order to determine the real variability and have a mutation potential whose role in causing role of FXTAS in undiagnosed patients with movement disorders . The diseases is largely unexplored . We focused on non-coding GAA repeat results obtained in European populations ranges from 0% to 4% . We expansions in the first intron of the frataxin gene associated with have performed a screening among 144 and 150 unrelated individuals Friedreich ataxia, to unravel basic and pathological mechanisms of (over 45 years) referred to our laboratory for genetic testing for pre-mRNA processing . Using hybrid minigenes assay we showed that spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) or Huntington disease (HD) respectively . the repeat expansion affect splice site selection in a position-dependent In these patients SCA 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, and DRLPA or HD were ruled manner . Repeats insertion downstream a reported exon resulted in its out. We have identified two patients carrying the permutation (113 complete exclusion from the mature mRNA . Further insertion at the CGG and 60 CGG) among the SCA, and none in the HD patients . 3 end or insertions in the upstream intron had no effect on splice site After MRIs and neurological examination we conclude that the one selection . Insertion of control TTC sequences did not affect splicing . is a definitive FXTAS while the other is a probable. To our knowledge In addition, the repeats placed in the first intron of a hybrid minigene, this is the first study performed with Spanish population and the at a location comparable to that found in frataxin gene, unexpectedly results obtained demonstrate that Neurologists might take FXTAS into resulted in the absence of mature mRNAs in a position dependent account . (SAF2004-03083, V2003-REDC-07, REDG-098) manner. This data indicates, for the first time, an association between GAA non-coding repeats and aberrant pre-mRNA processing and P0707. Molecular Identification of the Most Prevalent Mutation of suggests an alteration of the coordination between transcription and Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Gene in Deficient Patient pre-mRNA processing . Thus the current wisdom that ascribes the in sistan and Balochestan Province of iran defect to a transcription block may have to be revisited . The elucidation M. Noori-Daloii; of the basic molecular mechanisms that affect pre-mRNA processing Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. in relationship with non-coding repeat expansions will provide a useful Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) in humans is an X- insight into a new area with potential for therapeutic intervention in the chromosome-linked disorder and housekeeping enzyme, vital for the treatment of this severe degenerative disease survival of every cell . G6PD is known to be highly polymorphic from the biochemical characterization of enzyme variants, and more than P0705. Epigenetic influences in human diseases; Altered DNA 380 variants have been found . It catalyses the oxidation of glucose- methylation at 4q35 in FsHD1 patients 6-phosphate to 6-phospho gluconate in the first committed step of the J. Balog, H. Pikó, V. Karcagi; pentose phosphate pathway, which provides cells with pentoses and National Center for Public Health, Budapest, Hungary. reducing power in the form of NADPH . NADPH is required to protect the Epigenetic mechanisms, which involve DNA and histone modifications, cells (via glutathione and catalase) against oxidative damage . G6PD promote changes in gene expression in a heritable manner without deficiency is one of the most common inherited disorders of mankind Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  more than 400 million people being affected world wide . In this study in Gitelman Syndrome . Since heterozygous exonic deletions are not we have analyzed the G6PD gene in 92 patients with history of favism . detected with the currently used protocol, we plan to analyze the The extracted DNA was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) incidence of exon deletions in our patient population by multiplex and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) for known ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). The detection G6PD mutations such as; Mediterranean, Chatham and Cosenza. of a homozygous deletion of two SLC12A3 exons in one patient The results determined that, from the total 92 samples, 74 had G6PD demonstrates that exonic deletions significantly contribute to Gitelman Mediterranean (80 .42%) and 2 had G6PD Chatham (2 .17%), and syndrome . Cosenza mutation was not observed (17 .43%) . G6PD Mediterranean was the most prevalent mutation in Iran and other countries in tropical P0710. Prevalence of the 35delG mutation in the GJB2 gene in and subtropical areas . The frequency of Chatham was low in the Sistan Latvian patients with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss and Balochestan province in comparison with other provinces of Iran . O. Olhovaya1, N. Pronina1, I. Balode1, S. Kuske2, A. Krumina3, R. Lugovska1; In this paper we also try to document the commonly known mutations 1Medical Genetics Clinic, Latvian State University Children’s Hospital, Riga, in patients with G6PD deficiency, with a history of favism. Latvia, 2Latvian Childrens` Hearing centre, Riga, Latvia, 3Riga Stradins Univer- sity, Riga, Latvia. P0708. Expression of the gamma-glutamyl carboxylase Nonsyndromic hearing impairment (NSHI) is the most common form containing the Arg485Pro mutation found in two unrelated of deafness . Mutations in the GJB2 gene, which encodes gap-junction VKcFD1 patients beta-2 protein (connexin 26), are the main cause of recessive NSHI . It S. Rost1, A. Fregin1, V. P. Mutucumarana2, D. W. Stafford2, J. Oldenburg3, C. R. has been identified that one particular GJB2 mutation named 35delG Mueller1; is the most prevalent for the populations of the European origin . 1University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2University of North Carolina, We obtained DNA samples from patients with prelingual sensorineural Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 3University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. hearing loss in whom syndromic forms and environmental causes of The vitamin K-dependent gamma-glutamyl-carboxylase (GGCX) deafness had been excluded and their relatives . 37 unrelated patients catalyses the posttranslational modification of vitamin K-dependent with sensorineural deafness were screened for the 35delG mutation . proteins involved in blood coagulation (FII, FVII, FIX, FX, protein C, S This mutation was detected in 45of 74 (61%) tested alleles, 21 patients and Z), bone and tissue metabolism (BMP and MGP) and cell growth (57%) are homozygous and three patients (8%) are heterozygous for (Gas6) . A defect in the GGCX gene results in a very rare bleeding this mutation . Patients that have 35delG mutation in heterozygous state disorder, called “familial multiple coagulation factor deficiency type are suspected either to carry another GJB2 mutation in trans- condition 1” (VKCFD1) . So far, only two different mutations in the GGCX gene or they have GJB2-unrelated form of deafness . For 13 patients (26%) (Leu394Arg and Trp501Ser) could be proven to be causative for there was no 35delG mutation found . Four affected relatives of the VKCFD1 by recombinant expression and subsequent measurement screened probands found to be 35delG homozygous, one case was of the GGCX activity . detected prenatally . 26 from 50 unaffected relatives of the patients Here we report on the expression of a GGCX variant comprising the detected to be 35delG carriers. Our findings support the conclusion Arg485Pro mutation which has been detected in two unrelated patients . that the 35delG mutation is the most prevalent GJB2 mutation and GGCX activity assay was performed by adding vitamin K and either the that it is the common cause of hereditary nonsyndromic hearing loss artificial substrate FLEEL in combination with the propeptide ProFIX19, in populations of European descent . We are going to continue 35delG or FIXproGla as a more physiological substrate . Kinetic data show that molecular testing as a routine method of diagnostics and our next aim the Arg485Pro mutation has no effect on FLEEL carboxylation and on is to analyse heterozygous and 35delG undetected patients by direct vitamin K binding but it strongly affects propeptide binding . sequencing to reveal other GJB2 mutations in Latvian patients . Furthermore, the mutation is located in a highly conserved region of GGCX between amino acid residues 438 and 507 which could P0711. molecular screening of connexin 26 : six years of previously be demonstrated to comprise the propeptide binding screening domain . V. Geromel, S. Szpiro-Tapia, A. Bazin; Our results confirm previous reports on the location of the propeptide Pasteur Cerba Laboratory, Cergy-pontoise, France. binding site of the GGCX and verify the Arg485Pro mutation as Several studies have reported that mutations in GJB2 gene (connexion causative for VKCFD1 . 26, CX26) are a common cause of non-syndromic hearing impairment . More than 100 different mutations of the GJB2 are reported . Many of P0709. Molecular analysis in Gitelman Syndrome: identification them are “private” mutations, they have been observed in only one or of 44 novel mutations in a cohort of 139 patients. a few pedigrees, but examples of very common alleles have also been H. G. Yntema, J. Schoots, H. Scheffer, N. V. A. M. Knoers, L. H. Hoefsloot; reported in several populations . Dept. of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Ni- We present our findings from the molecular screening of the GJB2 gene jmegen, The Netherlands. over a six years period . Molecular studies were performed sequencing Gitelman Syndrome (MIM 263800) is an autosomal recessive the exon 1 and 2 of GJB2 gene . Over the last 6 years we have studied renal transport disorder, characterized by hypokalemic alkalosis in 2600 individuals primarily Caucasians presenting sporadic or inherited combination with significant hypomagnesemia and low urinary calcium. deafness . Pediatric cases present with transient periods of muscle weakness, Although a high heterogeneity of sequence variation was observed in fatigue, and symptoms of neuromuscular irritability . The causative patients, the 30delG mutation remains the most common pathogenic gene, SLC12A3, encodes the thiazide-sensitive NaCl co-transporter mutation in our population: 48 .6% of genotyped patients presented this (NCC) in the distal convoluted tubule of the nephron . More than 100 mutation in homozygous state and 25 .4% in heterozygous state . In the different loss of function mutations in the SLC12A3 gene have been remaining 26% we observed 55 sequences variations included a new reported . nucleotide variation (407insA) . In the past few years DNA samples of 139 Gitelman syndrome patients A 342-kb deletion in a gene adjacent to CX26, the GJB6 gene were analyzed by direct sequencing of all 26 exons of the SLC12A3 (connexion 30, CX30) has been reported to cause deafness in the gene. In total 76 different mutations were identified, 44 of which have homozygous state or in combination with heterozygous mutation in not been reported in literature before . These novel mutations contained CX26 . We decided to perform the analysis of CX30 gene for patients mostly missense mutations (30), but also splice site mutations (9), presenting the 30delG mutation in the heterozygous state and a severe nonsense mutations (3), and deletions (2) were detected . or profound hearing loss . In 71 patients two mutations were found . In another 20 patients one mutation was detected . In summary, in 65% of patients the diagnosis Gitelman syndrome was supported, and 162/278 (58%) of the alleles have been identified. Our results indicate that scanning the entire coding sequence of the SLC12A3 gene leads to the identification of the majority of mutations Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P0712. molecular study of Glycogen storage disease type ia in the factor VIII (fVIII) gene . More than 900 mutations within the coding tunisia: molecular diagnosis application and untranslated region of fVIII gene have been identified. The only W. Cherif1, N. Tebib2, E. Barkaoui2, C. Charfedine1, S. Chakroun1, M. F. Ben common gene defect is intron 22 inversion occurring in 45-50% of Dridi2, S. Abdelhak1; severe hemophilia A patients . Moderate and mild phenotypes usually 1Molecular investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases, Pasteur Institute of Tunis, result from missense mutations dispersed through the whole coding Tunis, Tunisia, 2Inherited Metabolic Diseases Unit, Pediatric department - La region, and are peculiar to individual families . Detection of these point Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia. mutations is important for precise genetic diagnosis as well as for Glycogen storage disease type Ia (GSD Ia, MIM 232200) is an inherited studying the genotype-phenotype correlation in this disease . metabolic disorder caused by the deficient of D-glucose-6-phosphatase During molecular characterization of hemophilia A in patients from (G6Pase) activity . GSD Ia is characterized by hypoglycemia, lactic Republic of Macedonia and Republic of Bulgaria, we have identified acidemia, hepatomegaly, hyperuricemia, hyperlipidemia and renal three novel missense mutations: Ser558Pro; Tyr2256Asp and dysfunction leading to chronic renal failure as a late manifestation of the Asn90Thr . disease. The confirmation of the clinical diagnosis is usually performed Ser558Pro mutation was found in a Macedonian boy with moderate by liver biopsy . Furthermore in Tunisia the biochemical diagnosis is form (fVIII:C 5%) of disease . The replacement of serine by proline, inaccessible so the molecular investigation may provide a time and destroys the fIXa binding site which span between codons 558 and cost effective and less invasive tool for diagnosis of GSD Ia . . 565 . Recently, by the study of the molecular basis of GSD Ia in Tunisian Tur2256Asp missense mutation was found in a Macedonian patient patients we have shown that R83C is relatively frequent (10/14 case, with mild form (fVIII:C 30%) of hemophilia A . This substitution alters 71,42 %) . Since the majority of the GSD Ia patients carriers this the conformation of C2 domain and disturbs the normal factor VIII mutation, a DNA-based diagnostic method was designed for the rapid binding site to phospholipide membranes of thrombocites . screening of patients suspected of GSD Ia . This molecular method Asn90Thr mutation was found in a Bulgarian hemophilia A patient and allows the confirmation of the clinical diagnosis and circumventing liver his cousin, with moderate form of disease (fVIII 3%) . The mothers biopsy and enzymatic investigation . We report here the result of this of both patients are carriers for the mutation, while their maternal molecular study and we propose the use of direct screening of this grandmother has normal DNA pattern . The maternal grandfather was mutation for rapid diagnosis of GSD Ia . by enzyme restriction digestion . not available for analysis, however clinically normal, thus suggesting a The simplicity of the test ensures a short turnaround time . “de novo” fVIII mutation in grandfather’s germ cells . Since the mutation spectrum in Tunisian patients has now been revealed, the post and prenatal diagnosis of GSD Ia can be made at P0715. A novel F8c acceptor splice site -3 c>G mutation leads to present by DNA analysis and avoiding liver biopsy . a 2 base-pair mRNA frameshift and severe hemophilia A We propose the use of direct screening of R83C mutation by enzyme I. K. Surkova1, M. Neerman-Arbez2, F. Boehlen3, I. Moix1, P. de Moerloose3, M. restriction digestion as a rapid and valuable tool for diagnosis of GSD A. Morris1; Ia in south Mediterranean populations . 1Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Service of Medical Genetics, University Hos- pitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine and Develop- P0713. Biochemical and molecular characterization of mutant ment, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Haemostasis Unit, Service of GM2 Activator deficiency gene in a Turkish family Haematology, University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland. H. Kayserili1, B. Wollnik1, O. Z. Uyguner1, M. Yuksel-Apak1, K. Sandhoff2; Hemophilia A is an X-linked bleeding disorder, caused by deficiency 1Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, in the activity of coagulation factor VIII due to mutations in the F8C Istanbul, Turkey, 2Kekulé-Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie der gene . The most common defects in patients are inversions involving Rheinischen Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universitat, Bonn, Germany. F8C intron 22 which account for approximately 45% of individuals with GM2-gangliosidosis, AB variant is a recessively inherited lysosomal severe Hemophilia A . A number of splice site mutations in severe or lipid storage disorder with progressive neurodegeneration leading to moderate Hemophilia A have been reported in the literature, however, in death in early childhood. The entity was first defined by Sandhoff in the great majority of cases, the effect of the mutation on mRNA splicing 1971 and localized to chromosome five by Burg et al. in 1985. GM2 has not been experimentally validated. In this study, we identified a activator (GM2A) deficiency can be confirmed by the total absence on novel acceptor splice-site mutation in intron 8 (c .1272-3C>G) in two the Western blot analysis or by the degradation rate of ganglioside GM2 . brothers with severe Hemophilia A . Expression and analysis of a mini- Since 1991, total of five different mutations in six affected individuals gene construct with the -3 C>G substitution in a transfected COS cell have been reported . The entity seems very rare or underdiagnosed model system demonstrated use of a novel acceptor splice-site two due to limited number of centers performing testing . bases upstream, leading not to exon skipping but to a 2 bp frameshift We here report the first case of GM2A deficiency from Turkey. 19 mos in the FVIII mRNA and proving the causative nature of the mutation . old girl was evaluated due to the history of neuromotor regression after 5 mos of age presenting with progressive hypotonia, myoclonic P0716. Novel SLC6A1 coding mutations: Hartnup disorder is seizures, startle response, bilateral macular cherry red spots . GM2 allelically heterogeneous gangliosidosis were the leading entities in the differential diagnosis list; D. N. Azmanov1, H. J. Rodgers1, C. Auray-Blais2, R. Giguère2, S. Broër3, C. Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff disease were ruled out by normal Hex A/B Bailey4, J. E. J. Rasko4,5, J. A. Cavanaugh1; enzyme levels leaving GM2 activator deficiency as the leading cause. 1Medical Genetics Research Unit, ANU Medical School, Canberra, Australia, Fibroblasts from the index was tested along with control samples for 2Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, PQ, Canada, 3ANU School of Bio- the degradation rate of ganglioside GM2 and the rate was comparable chemistry & Molecular Biology, Canberra, Australia, 4Centenary Institute of with controls of Tay-Sachs and AB variant. GM2A protein deficiency Cancer Medicine & Cell Biology, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 5Syd- was further confirmed by immunoprecipitation analysis. Four coding ney Cancer Centre, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia. exons of GM2A gene were all sequenced and a novel 2 base pair Hartnup disease with symptoms ranging from asymptomatic deletion in homozygous form was identified in exon two [c.226_227 aminoaciduria to severe neurological and dermatologic manifestations, del CT (p .75fsX37)] . has been proposed to be genetically heterogeneous, perhaps Additional family members were tested for carrier status and prenatal influenced by either modifier genes or environmental factors, including diagnosis was offered . diet1, 2 . So far, 10 mutations in a single novel gene, SLC6A19, have been shown to segregate in a recessive manner in unrelated families P0714. three new mutations in the factor Viii gene with Hartnup disorder originating from Caucasian and Japanese E. Sukarova Stefanovska1, O. Muratovska2, G. Petkov3, G. D. Efremov1; backgrounds3, 4 . However, two causative mutation alleles were not 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Macedonian detected in SLC6A19 in all affected individuals and no other genes are Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of reported to be involved . The initial incorrect sequence of SLC6A19 in Macedonia, 2Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Re- the public database prompted us to re-sequence all the coding regions public of Macedonia, 3Pediatric Clinic, Medical faculty, Stara Zagora, Bulgaria. in the families with only a single disease allele identified in this gene3 . Hemophilia A, an X-linked bleeding disorder, is caused by mutations in We also investigated four newly acquired families - 3 Australian and 1 Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  Canadian . We found 4 novel missense mutations, all of which are at chronic moderate anemia without abnormal hemoglobin fractions . DNA highly conserved sites in fugu, mouse and human and observed the analysis characterized common α+-thalassemia mutations in-trans to common D173N allele in 3 of the novel Hartnup families . All affected in-frame 3bp deletions in the α1-globin gene: 4 cases (2 unrelated individuals present with compound heterozygosity for mutations in children and 2 adult siblings) had codon36/37,delCCC (Hb Heraklion), SLC6A19 . We also screened 500 healthy controls to establish the and a further 2 unrelated adults had codon38/39,delACC (Hb Taybee) . frequencies of these new alleles in the healthy population using either To date Hb Heraklion has been observed in a single Greek case and PCR-RFLP or TaqMan® assay-by-design . Thus, we explain Hartnup Hb Taybee in sporadic Israeli-Arab cases . Three Hb Heraklion cases disorder in all our investigated families with allelic heterogeneity at a with the nondeletion IVS-1 donor splice-site mutation (αHphα) in trans single locus, confirming the recessive model of inheritance. had Hb levels 7-9.5g/dl; the fourth Hb Heraklion case and both Hb Taybee cases had α+-thalassemia 3 .7kb deletion in trans, maintaining 1 . ScriverC et al, 1987 Am J Hum Genet40:401 Hb levels around 10 .5g/dl . All cases had slight to moderate hemolysis (bilirubin 3-7x normal) and increased bone-marrow-activity indicating 2 . BröerS et al, 2005 Biochem Soc T33:233 dyserythropoiesis (serum erythropoietin and transferrin receptor levels 3-5x normal) . Absence of detectable abnormal hemoglobin 3 . SeowH et al, 2004 Nature Genet36(9):1003 fractions (includng Hb H) in such cases confounds diagnosis based on hematology alone, and definitive diagnosis is only achieved through 4 . KletaR et al, 2004 Nature Genet36(9):999 DNA analysis . P0717. Genetic Hemochromatosis (GH) in African mixed P0719. Recombinant expression fo c1-inhibitor protein variants populations and 3-D modelling S. Pissard1, A. Lopez1, T. Henni2, M. I. Belkaid2, M. Goossens1, F. Cartault3; T. Foerster1, K. Schleinkofer2, J. Oldenburg3, C. R. Müller1; 1INSERM U654 -AP-HP, creteil, France, 2lab Hematologie, CHD F. Guyon, St 1Department of Human Genectics, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Ger- Denis la Reunion, Reunion, 3lab de Genetique, CHD F. Guyon, St Denis la many, 2Department of Bioinformatics, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Reunion, Reunion. Germany, 3Institute of Experimental Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Due to history and slave trade, the population of the Reunion Island University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. is originated in part from Europe and from Africa and highly mixed . C1-Inhibitor (C1INH) is a single-chain glycoprotein of 105 kDa that Ferroportin (FPN) is a membrane protein involved in iron homeostasis belongs to the family of serine protease inhibitors (Serpins) . and encoded by the SLC40A gene (2q32) . It is involved in the Hereditary Angioedema (HAE) (OMIM: 106100), an autosomal transfer of iron from enterocytes or macrophages to the circulation dominant disease with incomplete penetrance occurs due to mutations upon the control of Hepcidin . Mutation of FPN gene are associated in the C1INH gene . C1INH deficiency may result in recurrent episodes with ”hemochromatosis type 4” (HFE 4 :OMIM : 606069) which is of acute, local, circumscribed edema of the skin or mucosa . characterized by a dominant transmission and variable biological Five years ago, we started a routine genetic testing protocol for HAE . patterns . HFE 4 is suppose to be one major genetic determinant of Over the years, we have analysed DNA samples from almost 400 GH in African population . Denaturating HPLC was used to screen patients suspicious for HAE . About 30% of our patients present with SLC40A gene mutation in a large “white Creole” family and where amino acid substitutions . Since there are some known polymorphisms a severe iron overload was diagnosed in 6 patients from 9 persons in the gene which also lead to the substitution of amino acids (e .g . and over 3 generations . We found that, two already characterized V458M) it is impossible to predict the causality of the alterations SLC40A mutations (G490D and Q248H) were respectively carried by offhand . Therefore, we have tested for the functional effect on C1INH the grandmother and the grandfather and transmitted in the family . activity of a series of C1INH mutations in a recombinant expression No HFE 1 genotype were found in the family . Biological phenotypes system (HEK-293-cells) . Most substitutions studied so far resulted in at diagnosis for heterozygotes were comparable with medium ferritin an almost complete loss of inhibitor activity of the recombinant proteins level of 4200 mg/L and TfSat : 28 .4 % .One patient was found to be while some mutations (e .g . A-21V and S233T) retained a reduced compound heterozygote for the two mutations and displayed a ferritin activity when compared to wildtype protein . level much more higher than in other patients : 12620 mg/L and TfSat Since the crystal structure of C1INH has not been elucidated yet, : 36 .8 % . This observation suggest that : 1- FPN mutation behalf in we used data from other serpins to build an analogous 3-D model a semi-dominant manner .2- It is likely that SLC40A mutations are of the protein . This model was used to predict whether the observed frequently involved in GH in such populations . amino acid substitutions introduce significant changes in the protein structure . P0718. The first observation of the hyperunstable Hb Taybee In summary, recombinant expression of mutated C1INH protein is a (α1cd38/39delACC; Thr>0) in Greece and 3 new cases with the useful tool to characterize the role of individual amino acid residues rare hyperunstable Hb Heraklion (α1cd36/37delCCC; Pro>0): for C1INH activity . distinct phenotypic expression when co-inherited with α+- thalassemia P0720. Rearrangements detected by QmPsF, mLPA and cGH J. R. Traeger-Synodinos1, D. Liapi2, A. Stamoulakatou3, I. Papassotiriou4, A. array represent a common cause for holoprosencephaly, leading Tsilimigaki5, M. Mavrokosta5, E. Kanavakis1; to a novel diagnosis strategy 1Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Hematol- C. Dubourg1,2, C. Bendavid1,2, I. Gicquel1, L. Pasquier3, S. Mottier1, M. Durou2, ogy, “Venizelion” Hospital, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, 3Department of Hematolo- C. Henry4, S. Jaillard4, S. Odent3, V. David1,2; gy, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4Department of Clinical 1UMR 6061 CNRS, IFR 140, Faculté de Médecine, Rennes, France, 2Labora- Biochemistry, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 52nd Depart- toire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 3Unité de ment of Pediatrics, “Venizelion” Hospital, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, 4Laboratoire de Cytogénéti- Alpha-thalassemia mutations are of the commonest in humans . que, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France. Amongst >80 α-thalassemia mutations, more common are deletions, Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a common birth defect (1/16.000 live births; partially or completely removing the α-globin gene cluster (16p13.3, 1/250 conceptuses) caused by the failure of anterior ventral midline ζ2-ψζ-ψα -ψα-α-α-θ). Point-mutations within either α-globin gene formation, and affecting the forebrain and the face . Screening of the 1 2, 1 2 1 (nondeletion mutations) are less common . Nondeletion mutations four main genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF) by DHPLC-sequencing usually reduce α-globin synthesis by impeding RNA processing and QMPSF revealed point mutations in 18% and microdeletions in or translation, but some cause post-translational hyper-instability 7% of HPE cases . This relative high frequency of microdeletions in the of the abnormal polypeptide, mimicking α-thalassemia through an main HPE genes incited us to search for candidate HPE genes using overall reduction of α-globin synthesis. Interaction of nondeletion α- deletion cartography . thalassemia determinants usually causes HbH disease, a chronic As two of the main HPE genes and six other candidate loci are located moderate anemia in which excess β-globin chains form HbH (β4). in subtelomeres, we first searched for microrearrangements in these We observed 6 Greek cases with an atypical thalassemia phenotype: regions using SALSA MLPA kits (MRC-Holland) .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 6 This analysis in 100 foetus and 140 live-born infants with HPE revealed with syndactyly and brachydactyly types D and E involve shortening subtelomeric rearrangements in known HPE loci (7q, 18p, 1q, 20p, of digits . GLI3 disorders have distinct clinical features but all have 21q) but also in novel loci (1p, 5q, 7p, 8p, 9q, 17q, 18q and 22q) . Some polydactyly; Pallister-Hall syndrome is characterised by insertional of these deleted regions (7p, 7q, 1p) were narrowed by quantitative polydactyly, hypothalamic hamartoma and bifid epiglottis, Grieg PCR . Cephalopolysyndactyly has preaxial polydactyly, wide big toes and A number of samples consisted of an association between a duplication thumbs, syndactyly and macrocephaly/hypertelorism, and postaxial and a deletion in two chromosomal subtelomeres, like (7pdup;7qdel). polydactyly type IV is an isolated polydactyly . The finding of such double rearrangements in a same patient reinforces Testing involves sequencing of specific hotspots or whole genes the multigenic and multihit origin already evocated for HPE and will also depending upon the disorder . At present dosage testing for GLI3 is offer another explanation for the wide phenotypic spectrum described being developed, together with a mutation screening service for FLNA, in this developmental disorder . mutations of which lead to a range of severe congenital disorders So the search for microrearrangements must be integrated into the involving limb abnormalities . diagnosis of HPE, and the first results obtained by CGH array prove the relevance of this pangenomic approach to identify loci of novel P0723. mitochondrial Deletions in Huntington disease candidate genes . M. Rostami, M. Banoei, M. DehghanManshadi, T. Majidizadeh, M. ShafaShari- at Panahi, M. Houshmand; P0721. Evidence for a critical role of the modifying subunit of National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- glutamate-cysteine ligase in homocysteine pathophysiology lamic Republic of Iran. S. G. Heil1, L. A. Kluijtmans1, A. S. De Vriese2, M. den Heijer3, R. Pfundt4, H. J. Huntington disease (HD) is as a neurodegenerative disorder with Blom1; autosomal dominant inheritance is characterized clinically by 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Laboratory of Pediatrics and behavioral disturbance, chorea, dementia and ataxia . HD is caused Neurology, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, by expansion of the CAG repeat in huntingtin gene . Actual function of Belgium, 3Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of Endo- huntingtin is not clear but its role is cofactor and mediators in neuronal crinology, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Radboud University Nijmegen Medical cells . Also huntingtin is a highly conserved protein and expression is Centre, Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. required for normal development . Nowadays oxidative stress effects Background Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) is associated with have considered in pathogenesis associated with HD . impaired endothelium-dependent vasodilatation and an increased risk In this study mixed individuals of HD patient and who just showed of atherosclerosis and thrombosis . Despite intensive research, the clinical manifestation screened for four defined mtDNA deletions (A, pathophysiology of this association remains conjectural . To unravel the B, C and D) . mechanism involved we performed gene-expression profiling in aorta We found one of A, C and D mtDNA deletions in at least 60% of samples of diet-induced hyperhomocysteinemic rats . , no one showed deletion B . 10% showed both A and D deletion and Methods and Results Rats were fed a high-methionine diet in 30% showed A deletion that all of them had expansion allele . Also C combination with a low B-vitamin diet to induce hyperhomocysteinemia . mtDNA deletion has been observed in 18% of both samples of HD and Application of oligonucleotide arrays demonstrated that the modifying non HD individuals . subunit of glutamate-cysteine ligase (GCLM), which is involved in Mitochondrial dysfunction could explain that recorded symptoms glutathione synthesis, was 2 .7-fold up-regulated in the aorta of HHcy from several different organs may be the first manifestation of mtDNA rats compared to control rats . In addition, we showed by HPLC deletion disorder . As well as complication followed by mitochondrial analysis that total levels of the anti-oxidant glutathione were increased deletion in HD; Its likely that mitochondrial dysfunction in HD is caused in serum of HHcy rats . As GCLM has been shown to be up-regulated by excitotoxicity and the consequent generation of NO and free in conditions of oxidative stress, we hypothesized that a hampered up- radicals, with inhibition of Complexes II/III and aconitase by NO and regulation of GCLM increases the risk of vascular diseases . To test this ONOO. This would account for the severity of the defect reflecting the hypothesis we examined a functional single-nucleotide polymorphism pathological involvement in HD . (SNP) in the human GCLM gene (-588 C>T) in a case-control study consisting of 185 venous thrombosis patients and 500 controls . We P0724. symptoms and aggregate distribution in Huntington‘s demonstrated that the presence of the -588 T allele increased the risk disease of venous thrombosis more than 2-fold when also homocysteine levels W. M. C. van Roon-Mom1, V. M. Hogg2, H. J. Waldvogel2, L. J. Typpett2, R. L. were elevated (OR 2.5 [1.04-6.11]), which confirmed our hypothesis. M. Faull2; Conclusions These data suggest that adequate functioning of GCLM 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, is required as a compensatory mechanism for protection against the Leiden, The Netherlands, 2University of Auckland, Department of Anatomy with adverse oxidative effects of elevated homocysteine on the vascular Radiology, Auckland, New Zealand. wall, and thus describe a previously undefined role for GCLM in Huntington’s disease is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder where homocysteine toxicity . an expansion in a stretch of CAG repeats in the IT15 gene is translated into an expanded stretch of glutamines in the mutant huntingtin P0722. Development of a UK genetic diagnostic service for limb protein . Insoluble protein aggregates have been considered a development disorders pathological hallmark of Huntington’s disease and other polyglutamine M. Oldridge1, T. Lester1, A. Seller1, A. Wilkie2; disorders . In this study the number of aggregates was assessed by 1Oxford Molecular Genetics Laboratories, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Weatherall immunohistochemistry in the superior frontal gyrus and motor cortex Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom. of 7 Huntington’s disease cases . The number of aggregates was Congenital abnormalities of the limb occur in 1 in 500 livebirths as compared to the symptoms (motor/mood) these patients displayed isolated malformations or as part of a syndrome . The molecular bases during the course of the disease . Clinical data were collected of many of these disorders have been elucidated and the Oxford retrospectively from family members using a semi-structured interview Molecular Genetics Laboratory is now developing a genetic diagnostic and a questionnaire . Regardless of the pattern of symptoms present service for a number of these limb development disorders to aid clinical in the patients, there was a consistently higher number of nuclear management and genetic counselling of patients and their families . and non-nuclear aggregates in the superior frontal gyrus than in the Diagnostic services have been set up for mutations of ROR2, HOXD13 motor cortex . The regional difference in density of aggregates was and GLI3 . Mutations within ROR2 cause 2 disorders; Dominant not reflected in the variable symptomatology between cases, which brachydactyly type B1, characterised by aplasia or hypoplasia of the questions the significance of the localization of aggregates as an index terminal portions of the digits, and recessive Robinow syndrome, a of pathogenesis and neurological deficit in Huntington’s disease. severe skeletal dysplasia with abnormalities of the ribs and vertebrae, dysmorphic facies and genital abnormalities . Expansions, truncating and missense mutations within HOXD13 can cause a variety of disorders; Synpolydactyly is an insertional digit duplication associated Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P0725. Giant and bi-focal forms of adenomatous hyperplasia in failure and sudden cardiac death . Genetic data suggest that 50-60% of congenital hyperinsulinism the adults with HCM have mutations in one of eigth genes that encode I. Giurgea1, C. Sempoux2, C. Bellanné-Chantelot3, L. Hubert4, C. Nihoul-Féké- different components of the cardiac sarcomere: β-myosin heavy chain, té4, P. de Lonlay4; cardiac Troponin-T, cardiac Troponin-I, α-tropomyosin, cardiac myosin 1Hopital Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 2Université Catholique de Louvain, binding protein C, essential and regulatory myosin light chains and Brussels, Belgium, 3Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France, 4Hopital Necker En- cardiac actin . fants Malades, Paris, France. Results Here, we present the preliminary results of frequencies and Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) may associate histologically with types of mutations in 58 unrelated patients with typical phenotype of either diffuse insulin hypersecretion or focal adenomatous hyperplasia . HCM . In all patients a systematic mutation screening was performed in Whereas diffuse CHI is of autosomal recessive inheritance, focal CHI three sarcomeric genes for which HCM mutations have been described is sporadic . Germ-line, paternally-inherited, mutations of the SUR1 or most frequently (MYH7, TNNT2 and MYBPC3) using the DHPLC and KIR6.2 genes (encoding sub-units of the pancreatic ATP-dependent sequence analysis . A population of 50 healthy individuals were also potassium channel) together with somatic maternal haplo-insufficiency included . for 11p15 .5 were shown to result in focal CHI . Unusual focal forms or We report three novel mutations and one previously describe mutation pluri-focal CHI are rare, and the underlying determinism has not been present in 9 patients and affecting two genes (MYH7 and TNNT2) . Six thoroughly investigated . of our patients harboured the same novel mutation and the other three We here report two patients with bi-focal CHI as evidenced by had different mutation . relapsing hypoglycaemia following removal of the first focal lesion and conclusions Most of the sarcomeric protein gene abnormalities are the detection of a second, distinct, focal adenomatous hyperplasia to a missense mutations that results in a single amino acid substitution later surgery (Patients 1 and 2), and a patient with a giant focal lesion within or close to important functional domains . The mutations describe involving the major part of pancreas (Patient 3) . in our study are agree with that, but the frequency distribution of In the three patients, a germ-line, paternally-inherited, mutation mutations founded in this work suggest the need for a more extensive of SUR1 was found. In Patients 1 and 2, haplo-insufficiency for the HCM mutation screening in Spanish population . maternal 11p15.5 region resulted from a somatic deletion specific for Acknowledgments Microelectrónica Española and FIS Project each of the focal lesions, as shown a diversity of deletion breakpoints . RTIC05 . In Patient 3, an identical somatic maternal deletion was shown in two independent lesion samples, as shown by similar breakpoints, P0728. mutation analysis of beta myosin heavy chain gene suggesting a very early event during pancreas embryogenesis . in children and young adults suffering from hypertrophic conclusion: The rare patients with pluri-focal or other variant focal cardiomyopathy CHI may follow the same paradigm as focal CHI with small solitary L. Losonczi1, R. Sepp2, K. Kádár3, K. Németh1, J. Szabolcs1, T. Constantin1, A. lesions . Independent somatic events or a early event during pancreas Temesvári3, E. Horváth4, M. Csanády2, G. Fekete1; embryogenesis provide a rationale for the observed histological 12nd Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, diversity within the focal forms, and for apparent failure of surgery . Budapest, Hungary, 22nd Department of Internal Medicine and Cardiology Cen- ter, Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 3Gottsegen P0726. structural alterations on chromosome 12p in autosomal- György Hungarian Institute of Cardiology, Budapest, Hungary, 41st Department dominant hypertension with brachydactyly: interphase FisH of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. sheds light on the darkness Objectives: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by S. Baehring1, M. Kann1, A. Rauch2, M. Gong1, F. C. Luft1; asymmetrical septal hypertrophy, rhythm disorders and an increased 1Charité Campus Berlin-Buch, Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, risk of sudden cardiac death . Genetic origin including mutations Helios Clinics, Berlin, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Friedrich-Alexan- of beta myosin heavy chain (MYH7) gene with 30% of incidence is der-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. common . Our aim was to analyze mutations of MYH7 gene in children The aim of our study is to identify the molecular basis of autosomal- and young adults (< 35 years) . dominant hypertension, brachydactyly type E, and short stature . The Patients and methods: 19 patients (13 boys, 6 girls, age: 1 month hypertension resembles non-salt-sensitive primary hypertension in the - 28 years, mean: 12 years) suffering from HCM were examined with general population . Untreated affected individuals die of stroke at age molecular genetic methods . After isolating DNA from peripheral blood, <50 years . The gene(s) reside on a 3 .15 Mb, chromosome 12p region . polymerase chain reaction with primers specific to the head and the We sequenced all known and predicted protein-coding genes to no hinge region of MYH7 gene (exon 3-23) was made . Mutation analysis avail. However, interphase fluorescence-in-situ-hybridization (iFISH) (exon 3, 5-12, 14, 16, 19, 21) was performed using denaturing high studies, using a five-clone BAC array spread across the locus, showed performance liquid chromatography, then positive chromatograms an inversion, deletion, and reinsertion mutation in lymphoblastoid cell were sequenced . lines in the original Turkish family . We now extended iFISH-analysis to Results: Two mutations were first detected in Hungarian patients. three other families and one sporadic case (all non-Turkish), with a 24- The Val606Met (exon 16) mutation was found in more members of clone, contiguous BAC array. We confirmed complex rearrangements one family . In one member of another family, Arg249Gln (exon 9) at chromosome 12p . Surprisingly, all affected persons had an inversion mutation was found . In two further patients, 3 silent mutations (exon of the centromeric part of the locus with a shared region . However, 3: Thr63Thr, exon 8: Phe244Phe, exon 12: Asp376Asp) and 1 intronic there were no common breakpoints and no disruptions of any known polymorphism (intron 2: base 2477 G/T) were also detected . coding sequences . The sporadic case also had a partial deletion of the conclusion: We could detect Val606Met and Arg249Gln mutations in inverted sequence that was reinserted in the telomeric part of the locus . Hungarian patients for the first time. Knowing the confirmed genetic We conclude that chromosome 12p rearrangements are responsible etiology in children and young adults and having the possibility to for the hypertension-brachydactyly syndrome . Possible causes remain analyze the MYH7 gene with specific and sensitive methods, it is unknown genes or non-coding RNA . A position effect must also be advised to make molecular genetic examination in children suffering considered that could alter the interplay between a regulatory element from HCM, especially if the disease shows familial occurrence . and its respective gene . P0727. Genetic study of spanish families affected by hypertrophic cardiomiopathy P. Cabello, E. Garcia-Galloway, J. Moya, G. Moreno, E. Ramos, C. Moro, C. San Román; Ramon y Cajal hospital, Madrid, Spain. Background Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy is typically an autosomal- dominant disease characterized by left ventricular hypertrophy and myofibrllar disarray. The clinical and pathological manifestations are diverse, and range from asymptomatic clinical courses to severe heart Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P0729. Hereditary Hypophosphatemic Rickets with P0731. common polymorphism in mtHFR gene and etiology of Hypercalciuria (HHRH) is caused by mutations in the sodium/ Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON). phosphate cotransporter gene sLc34A3 S. Rezaee, A. Aleyasin, M. Ghazanfari, M. Hoshmand; A. Benet-Pages1, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, G. Eckstein1, Y. Tenenbaum-Rak- National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic over2, J. Wagenstaller1, D. Tiosano3, R. Gershoni-Baruch3,4, N. Albers5, P. Lich- Republic of Iran. tner1, D. Schnabel6, Z. Hochberg3,4, T. M. Strom1,7; Medical Genetic Group, National Institute for Genetic Engineering 1GSF National Research Center, Institute of Human Genetics, 85764 Neuher- and Biotechnology, P O Box: 14155-6343, Tehran, Iran . Tel: 0098- berg, Germany, 2Ha’mek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, 3Meyer Children’s 21-4580383; fax: 0098-21-4580395, LHON is an inherited form of Hospital, Haifa, Israel, 4Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, bilateral optic atrophy and loss of central vision . The primary cause of 5Children’s Hospital, Osnabrück, Germany, 6Department of Pediatric Endocri- neuropathology and vision loss is mutation in the mtDNA but unknown nology Charité, Berlin, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts secondary genetic and/or epigenetic risk factors are suggested . This der Isar, Technical University, Munich, Germany. is the first study has examined folate gene alterations as possible There are several hereditary disorders that result in isolated renal genetic risk factor for LHON . Frequencies of common mutations phosphate wasting, including X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), of C677T and A1298C of the MTHFR gene have been tested in 14 autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR), and hereditary unrelated LHON patients and 145 normal controls . Strong linkages hypophosphatemic ricktes with hypercalciuria (HHRH) . The genes have observed among LHON syndrome and C677T MTHFR (P<0 .000, mutated in XLH and ADHR have been identified as PHEX (The HYP χ2>25) mutation. However, no significant linkage was found between Consortium, Nat Genet 11, 1995) and FGF23 (The ADHR Consortium, A1298C MTHFR mutation and LHON syndrome . A relationship Nat Genet 26, 2000), respectively . between C677T MTHFR mutation and LHON neural degeneration HHRH is a rare autosomal recessive form that is characterized by etiology can be speculated. This finding help in better understanding reduced renal phosphate reabsorption, hypophosphatemia and rickets . of mechanism involve in neuropathology of vision loss and treatment It is distinct from other forms of hypophosphatemia by increased serum of LHON patients . level of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D resulting in hypercalciuria . Using SNP array genotyping, we mapped the disease locus in 2 consanguineous P0732. Analysis of complete mitochondrial genomes from families to chromosome 9q34 . The candidate region contained a Finnish LHON pedigrees renal sodium/phosphate cotransporter gene, SLC34A3 . Sequence P. Hämäläinen1, A. Puomila1, M. Savontaus1, E. Nikoskelainen2, K. Majamaa3, analysis revealed disease-associated mutations in 5 families including K. Huoponen1; 2 frameshift and 1 splice site mutation . 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Depart- We also show that the circulating phosphaturic factor FGF23, which ment of Ophthalmology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 3Department of is increased in XLH and carries activating mutations in ADHR, has Neurology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. normal to low normal serum levels in HHRH patients, further arguing Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON, MIM #535000) is a for a primary renal defect. Identification of the gene mutated in HHRH maternally inherited disease that leads to bilateral visual failure in adds the protein SLC34A3, to the group of proteins - PHEX, FGF23, young adult life . The majority (95 %) of LHON patients have one of SLC34A1, and GALNT3 - involved in the regulation of phosphate three mtDNA point mutations (3460G>A in MTND1, 11778G>A in homeostasis . MTND4, 14484T>C in MTND6) in genes coding for complex I subunits We found no mutation in PHEX, FGF23, and SLC34A3 in 4 families with of the oxidative phosphorylation system . In addition to these primary autosomal recessive inheritance of hypophosphatemia, suggesting mutations several additional mtDNA mutations have been identified. further heterogeneity . Carrying out a genome-wide scan in these Men are more likely to be affected as approximately 77 % of patients families should result in the identification of more genes involved in are males . The penetrance of LHON is 27 % for men and 8 % for phosphate metabolism . women . The aim of this study is to elucidate the role of mtDNA variation in P0730. molecular characterization of NEmO abnormalities in the etiology of LHON . We have sequenced the entire mtDNA from 35 spontaneously aborted iP males foetuses Finnish LHON patients (19 with 11778G>A in MTND4, 4 with 3460G>A E. Bal1, C. Cluzeau1, S. Hadj-Rabia2, A. Goldenberg3, J. P. Bonnefont1, A. Mun- in MTND1, 1 with 14484T>C in MTND6, 1 with 9101T>C in ATPase6, nich1, A. Smahi1; and 10 with no primary mutation) . Eight patients were found to belong 1U 781 INSERM, Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 2service de Der- to haplogroup J . We aim to clarify whether the amount of mtDNA matologie, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 3Unité de génétique clinique, CHU de variation is increased in LHON patients . Sequence analysis may also Rouen, Rouen, France. reveal mutations that could explain LHON in the 10 families where Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is an X-linked dominant genodermatosis, no primary mutation was found . We are also looking for mutations lethal for males during embryogenesis . The gene responsible for IP that might contribute to the low penetrance of LHON in the 11 families encodes the NF-kB essential modulator (NEMO) protein . An identical where only sporadic cases were identified. We also aim to find out genomic deletion within NEMO accounts for about 75 % of IP females . which sequence variants might account for the high penetrance of the Small mutations were described in a small portion of IP females . The MTND4/11778G>A and MTND1/3460G>A mutations in haplogroup J . frequent deletion as well as most of these mutations result in total abolition of NF-κB signalling. Punctual mutations may be easily missed, P0733. the Leu33Pro GPiiia genetic variants and quantity of because of the heterozygosity of IP females and the presence of NEMO the GPiib/iiia receptors on platelet’s membrane are the factors pseudogene . Samples from foetal IP males are rarely available . Here influenced the platelet hyperaggregation we describe the study of NF-κB signalling and molecular analysis of O. V. Sirotkina1, A. M. Novikova1, M. I. Kadinskaya2, T. V. Vavilova2, A. L. NEMO gene in fibroblasts derived from two unrelated IP male foetuses Schwarzman1,3; that aborted spontaneously . Interestingly, in both foetuses not carrying 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, the frequent deletion of NEMO gene, we observed a total abolition of 2Saint-Petersburg Pavlov State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian NF-kB activation . In foetus 1, we detected a truncated NEMO protein . Federation, 3Research Institute for Experimental Medicine, Saint-Petersburg, RT-PCR showed deletions of exons 4, 5 and 6 and sequencing of Russian Federation. NEMO gene revealed a splice mutation (IVS4+2 T/G) . In foetus 2, Epidemiological studies have shown that platelet hyperaggregation we detected no NEMO protein . Molecular characterization of NEMO may help predict the risk for ischemic heart disease . The aim of by RT-PCR and DNA sequencing is still underway . We hypothesize our study was to investigate the process that underlies the platelet that in some cases, IP may result from another kind of rearrangement hyperaggregation . We formed a group of 14 volunteers with known involving either repeated sequences within the NEMO gene or the genotypes of Leu33Pro GPIIIa: 8 - 33LeuLeu carriers, 5 - 33ProLeu highly homologous NEMO pseudogene. The identification of such carriers and 1 carrier of 33ProPro . This group was analyzed on rearrangements is impossible in affected females . Males foetal cells spontaneous platelet aggregation, platelet aggregation in response expressing the IP defect are thus very useful for identification of new to ADP and quantity of the GPIIb/IIIa receptors per platelet . For mutations or deletions in NEMO gene . detection of the Leu33Pro variants of the GPIIIa gene the polymerase Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  chain reaction and endonuclease digestion with MspI were used, patients . The same deletion has been previous reported [Joncourt the spontaneous platelet aggregation and ADP-induced platelet et al ., 2003, ESHG], which shows that it could be a frequent cause aggregation was measured by photometric method and quantity of the of LGMD2A and most probably it is due to independent mutational GPIIb/IIIa receptors per platelet was measured by flow cytometry with events . We hypothesize that such deletions might not be a rare event monoclonal antibodies . Mean GPIIb/IIIa quantity on platelet surface in this gene, but using the routine sequence analysis exon by exon was (61330±2404) . The maximum GPIIb/IIIa quantity per platelet was they are missed . 82698, while the minimum GPIIb/IIIa quantity per platelet was 50529 . Both our patients carry exactly the same mutations, but the clinical The GPIIb/IIIa quantity per platelet correlated with spontaneous platelet manifestation of the disease differed significantly. One of them (male) aggregation (R=0 .56, p=0 .07) and ADP-induced platelet aggregation stopped walking at the age of 17, while the other (female) was still (R=0 .52, p=0 .07) . Furthermore, spontaneous platelet aggregation ambulant at the age of 21 . depended on the GPIIIa genotype: (1 .74±0 .22) and (2 .32±0 .27) for LeuLeu genotype and LeuPro/ProPro genotypes, respectively P0736. A combined approach of real-time quantitative PcR (p=0.06). These results don’t achieve statistical significance may be and DNA sequencing reveals a high prevalence of intragenic because of small analyzing group and further studies are required . In deletions in the LIS1 gene and questions genotype-phenotype conclusion, the data obtained in this pilot study have shown that the correlations in patients with isolated lissencephaly platelet hyperaggregation may depend on two factors - quantity of the D. J. Morris-Rosendahl1, C. Zeschnigk1, C. Ceranski-Schwerda1, Y. Berman2, GPIIb/IIIa receptors per platelet and quality of the GPIIb/IIIa receptors S. Hethey3, W. Scheurlen4, W. Borozdin1, J. Kohlhase1; due to Leu33Pro GPIIIa genetic variants . 1Institute for Human Genetics and Anthropology, University of Freiburg, Ger- many, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, P0734. molecular characterization of Helios gene isoforms. Australia, 3Paediatric Clinic, Westkuestenklinikum Heide, Germany, 4Cnopf’sche V. Lopez segura1, E. Sánchez Tapia1, M. F. Fraga2, M. Esteller2, R. González Paediatric Clinic, Nuernberg, Germany. Sarmiento1; Lissencephaly is a term used to describe neuronal migration disorders 1Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2CNIO, Madrid, Spain. that lead to absent or reduced gyration and a broadened but poorly The Ikaros gene family is a group of transcriptional factors (Ikaros, organized cortex . The most common form of lissencephaly is isolated, Helios, Aiolos, Eos y Pegasus) which play an important role in lymphoid also referred to as classical or type 1 lissencephaly, and results from development . Besides acting as a classic transcriptional factor, this mutations in the LIS1 (chromosome 17p13) or DCX (chromosome Xq22) proteins also are involved in chromatin remodelling complexes . genes . The most frequently found mutation for type I lissencephaly is This gene family encodes zinc finger DNA-binding proteins. All the the complete deletion of the LIS1 gene, detectable by fluorescence members of Ikaros family produce multiple isoforms via alternative in situ hybridization (FISH) . In contrast, intragenic deletions in the mRNA splicing . Some of them are dominant-negative isoforms with a LIS1 gene detected by Southern blotting, have been less frequently non functional DNA-binding domain . Those isoforms have been found reported (about 10% of cases) . Using DNA sequencing of the coding in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia and may have a role in region to perform mutation analysis in the LIS1 gene we have detected the development of leukemias or lymphomas . However, some of this 8 single nucleotide mutations, 6 of which have not previously been dominant-negative isoforms are also found in healthy people . described . In addition, using real-time quantitative PCR to detect Our group have characterized new Helios isoforms in haematopoietic intragenic deletions in the LIS1 gene we have observed deletions in and non haematopoietic cellular lines . Several of this new isoforms four of 20 patients analysed . The individual deletions span exon 2, have novel alternatives exons located in differents introns (He .1+2a, exons six to seven, exons five to eight, and exons 10, 11 and the 3’ He .1+3a,He .1+5a), Moreover we have cloned isoforms that present a region of the gene. The deletions have been confirmed via long-range criptic process site in the exón 3 (He.1v y He.Δ6v) and a new dominat- PCR or Southern blotting . Mutations affecting only the last (seventh) negative isoforma named He .S, which is generated by a novel splicing WD domain of the protein have not previously been described . Four mechanism . of our new mutations involve exon 11 and WD7, thus illustrating the We have studied the intracellular localization and the protein-protein importance of this repeat domain . Phenotype-genotype comparison in interaction of some of these isoforms . Moreover, we have analized the our patients indicates that other factors may be important in determining Histones acetilation status . Our results suggest that He .1v plays an the severity of isolated lissencephaly . important role in the histones acetilation, specifically in the Histone H3 and confirms that this proteins are involved in remodelling complexes. P0737. MMP2,9 functional polymorphism in chronic HCV fibrosis The comparative study of differents isoforms will allow us to know development more about the role of this family in normal lymphoid development and B. Moghimi1, T. Tolou1, A. Bahremand2, N. Ebrahimi Daryani3; its possible implication in tumor development . 1Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of rwspiratory disease,Pasteur institute,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran University, P0735. Large deletion of exons 2 to 8 in the cAPN3 gene, Department of Gastroenterology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. causing LGmD2A in Bulgarian families The degree of liver fibrosis and inflammation is important in patients A. Todorova1, T. Todorov1, B. Georgieva1, N. Bogdanova2, V. Mitev3, I. Kremen- with chronic hepatitis C (CHC) in terms of therapy as well as prognosis. sky1, J. Horst2; Quantitative and qualitative changes in matrix protease activity have 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Institute of Human Genet- an important role in extracellular matrix remodeling accompanying ics, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany, 3Department of Chemistry and fibrosis liver injury so, any factor which affect the MMPs expression Biochemistry, Sofia, Bulgaria. due to its effect in speeding the fibrosis process. we collected 120 Here we report on two unrelated limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type chronic fibrosis cases caused by pure HCV infection with out HBV or 2A (LGMD2A) Bulgarian patients compound heterozygous for the HDV super infection. 550delA mutation and a large deletion of exons 2 to 8 in the calpain We did biopsy for all patients. We analyzed four different functional 3 (CAPN3) gene . The mutation screening revealed that both patients polymorphism −1575G/A, −790T/G,−735C/T for MMP-2 and C-1562T were homozygous for the deletion c .550delA . The parents’ analysis for MMP9 by RFLP technique. preliminary results showed that -735C/T showed that only the mothers were the mutation c .550delA carriers had very significant relation with fibrosis process in patients grouped in and the paternity was confirmed with probability 99.999 in both cases. less than 5 years duration of fibrosis whom had grade more than 9/18 This data draw the suspicion that the fathers should transmit deletions from IHA classification or staged more than 2(p<.005).the MMP9 was larger than one base and we assumed the presence of deletions association was not as significant as MMP2. nut results are going to be covering the whole exon 4 . be totally ready in less than month. To check this hypothesis we analyzed both patients on RNA level . The transcribed fragments were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis . The obtained abnormally transcribed fragment, smaller than the normal one, was extracted from the agarose gel and sequenced . A large deletion covering exons from 2 to 8 was detected in both Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 60 P0738. Pathophysiological mechanisms of Lamin A/c associated a 35 year-old patient presenting progeria-like features, and a 7 year- charcot-marie-tooth disease (cmt2B1) old patient presenting with Progeria and osteosarcoma . Altogether, Y. Poitelon1, T. Hamadouche1, D. Annachiara2, S. Kozlov3, N. Serradj4, M. Ta- our data indicate that, rather than the size of the produced Prelamin zir5, M. Chaouch6, M. Jamon4, C. Stewart3, v. Delague1, N. Levy1,2; (truncated or full length), the level of expression of farnesylated 1INSERM U491, Marseille, France, 2Département de Génétique Médicale, prelamin A is the main feature being correlated to the severity of Hopital d’enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 3Cancer and Developmental Lamin A-related progeroid syndromes . Finally, we present the UMD- Biology Lab, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD, United States, 4Géno- ZMPSTE24/FACE1 database, whose aim is to provide integrated mique fonctionnelle, Comportements et Pathologies, CNRS, Marseille, France, genotype-phenotype data on ZMPSTE24-associated disorders, with 5Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Mustaphe, Alger, Algeria, 6Centre Hospitalier transversal informations at the gene, protein, and clinical phenotype Universitaire Ben Aknoun, Alger, Algeria. levels . Lamins, a class of intermediate filaments, are major components of the nuclear lamina, a filamentous network underlying the inner face P0740. the LMNA/C and emerin mutations effect in of the nuclear membrane . A-type lamins are encoded by the same laminopathies patients from Russia gene: LMNA, as a result of alternative splicing . Up to date, at least S. Tverskaya1, A. Chukhrova1, A. Posvyatenko2, S. Kourtchachova2, G. Ruden- nine pathologies, described as laminopathies, have been associated skaya1, A. Polyakov1; with mutations in LMNA. One of these, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Physic- type 2B1, is an autosomal recessive form of axonal hereditary motor Chemical Biology Institute of Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Fed- and sensory peripheral neuropathy caused by the mutation c .892C>T eration. in exon 5 of the gene . In order to progress towards understanding the Mutations in LMNA/C gene result in some different diseases named pathophysiological mechanisms underlying CMT2B1, we studied two “laminopathies” . Most frequent of them are Emery-Dreifuss muscular different models for the disease: human patient’s cells homozygous for dystrophy which caused by mutations in emerin gene too, and dilated the c892C>T mutation, and a murine Knock-In model . cardiomyopathy 1A . We have studied Russian patients with various First, the role of LMNA in maintenance of nuclear integrity was laminopathies diagnosis for emerin and lamin A/C mutations and assessed by immunofluorescent studies. Interestingly, no nuclear reviled 15 different disorders most of them are unknown previously . abnormalities were observed . In LMNA gene 5 mutations are de novo mutations and 4 of them are Secondly, gene expression studies performed on microfluidic plates localize in forth exon which may be “hot region” for mutation in this (Low Density Arrays) evidenced significant decreased expression gene . In family cases we have reviled clinical polymorphism between levels for several genes, including LMNA, as well as genes from the affected relatives. For mutations influences investigation we have FOS, JUN and EGR families . On the other hand, expression levels of got skin biopsy material from 3 patients and 4 control donors and HMGCR and PPARG, two genes regulated by the adipose transcription prepared fibroblasts culture. The lamins allocations were investigated factor SREBP1 were increased . These results suggest that disrupting in part of these cells by immunofluorescence method, another part was interactions between lamins A/C and SREBP1 induces activation of investigated by electron microscopy and from the third part the RNA transcription of SREBP1 targets . for expression analysis was extracted. Using immunofluorescence Finally, in Knock-In models, behavioral, morphological and functional analysis we have not revealed any differences in lamin A, lamin B analyses are still on process . Results will be discussed and compared and Sc-35 allocations in patients and control cell . We have designed to those obtained on patient’s cells . three locuses multiplex system for detection of emerin, lamin A/C and GAPDH as control expression levels . In series of 5 repeat experiments P0739. mutations in LMNA, ZMPSTE (FACE1) and clinical we reviled the LMNA expression decreased in one patient with amino heterogeneity in Prelamin-associated segmental Progeroid acid substitution in compare with other patients and control donors . syndromes The system for precise mRNA level analysis by real-time PCR method C. L. Navarro1, A. De Sandre-Giovannoli2, S. A. Shalev3, R. Ben Yaou4, A. is in progress now Boyer2, K. Lagerstedt5, D. Amor6, F. A. Beemer7, C. Massart4, M. Le Merrer8, A. Chauvat9, V. Cormier-Daire8, C. Béroud10, G. Bonne4, N. Lévy1,2; P0741. candidate genes for LQt syndrome and arrhythmias 1Inserm U491, Genetique Medicale et Developpement, Marseille, France, - mutation screening 2Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire, Departement de Genetique Medicale, A. Bittnerová1, J. Kadlecová1, T. Novotný1, R. Gaillyová1, Z. Schmidtová2, M. Hôpital d’Enfants la Timone, Marseille, France, 3Genetic Institute Ha’Emek Šišáková1, O. Toman1, B. Semrád1, P. Kuglík2,1; Medical Center, Afula, Israel, 4Inserm U582, Institut de Myologie, CH Pitié Sal- 1University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University, Brno, Czech pêtrière, Paris, France, 5Department of clinical genetics, Karolinska university Republic. hospital, Solna, Sweden, 6Royal Children’s Hospital, Victoria, Australia, 7Uni- LQT syndrome is a cardiovascular disorder characterized by an versitair Medisch Centrum Utrecht, Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, abnormality in cardiac repolarization leading to a prolonged QT interval Netherlands Antilles, 8Unite de Genetique Clinique, Hopital Necker, Paris, Fran- on the surface ECG. There is a significant risk of syncope, torsade ce, 9Service de cardiologie, CH Victor Dupouy, Argenteuil, France, 10Laboratoire de pointes and sudden death . Genes mutated in patients with LQT de Genetique Moleculaire, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France. syndrome encode ion channels . Ion channels are proteins embedded LMNA or ZMPSTE24 (FACE1) defects cause several progeroid in cell membranes . Long QT is associated with two cardiac muscle ion syndromes, including Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome, channels: voltage-gated potassium channels and voltage-gated sodium (HGPS), Mandibuloacral Dysplasia or Restrictive Dermopahty (RD) . channels. To the first group belong I and I channels . I channels Kr Ks Ks LMNA encodes two major isoforms: Lamin A, obtained through consist of KvLQT1 (KCNQ1) as an α subunit and minK (KCNE1) as a β post-translational processing of its Prelamin A precursor, and Lamin subunit, while I channels have HERG (KCNH2) subunit and a MiRP1 Kr C . The mechanism underlying most lamin-associated progeroid subunit . To the voltage-gated sodium channels belong I channels, Na disorders is the toxic intranuclear accumulation of truncated or wild one of them is SCN1B. The β subunit can modulate multiple α subunit type farnesylated Prelamin A, either due to intrinsic Prelamin A defects isoforms from brain, skeletal muscle, and heart . This gene is 9 .73 kb hampering its post-translational processing or to the absence/loss of long and consists of 6 exons . function of ZMPSTE24, one of its key post-translational processing The objective of this study is to identify the underlying genetic basis enzymes . of a person with LQT syndrome anamnesis. We have identified 17 We report eight novel ZMPSTE24 mutations: five homozygous mutations in genes KCNQ1 (11p15 .5), KCNH2 (7q35-q36) and KCNE1 nonsense or splicing null mutations in patients affected with typical (21q22) . This basic set of three LQT genes have been extended RD, one homozygous loss of function mutation in a patient affected about next candidate gene - SCN1B (19q13 .1) gene . Analysis of all with a complex progeroid syndrome combining premature aging and 6 exons has been performed, whereas the exon 1 has been split into a severe skeletal muscle dystrophy, and two compound heterozygous two fragments and exon 6 into three fragments . For mutation analysis ZMPSTE24 sequence variations in a child presenting with progeroid we use the SSCP (single strand conformation polymorphism) screen features, lipodystrophy and insulin resistance . method and the automated sequencing . Additionally, we observed 2 novel LMNA mutations causing abnormally This work was supported by grants IGA MZ NR/7424-3 and NR/8063-3 . spliced mRNAs and truncated farnesylated prelamin A, respectively in Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 61 P0742. Genome-wide expression profiling of lysinuric protein P0744. Diagnosis of lysosomal storage diseases in Ukrainian intolerance (LPi) with microarrays patients M. Kleemola1, J. Salmi1, L. Tanner2, J. Tuikkala3, O. S. Nevalainen3, O. Simell2, N. G. Gorovenko1, N. V. Olkhovich2, N. A. Pichkur2, A. N. Nedoboy2, E. V. J. Mykkänen4, K. Huoponen1; Radzihovska2, M. A. Tcigankova2, L. P. Sheyko1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Depart- 1Kyiv Medical Academy of Postdiploma Educations, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Centre of ment of Paediatrics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 3Department of Infor- Medical Genetics, Kyiv, Ukraine. mation Technology and TUCS, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 4Centre for We report our experience of the diagnosis of lysosomal storage Biotechnology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. diseases . 400 families originating from all regions of Ukraine were Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI, OMIM #222700) is a rare autosomal referred to our centre for further specific diagnosis. Initial work-up was resessive aminoaciduria caused by an impairment of amino acid based on clinical and radiological evaluation of the proband . Lysosomal transport in the small intestine and kidney tubules . The disease is enzyme assays in peripheral leukocytes were performed according to caused by mutations in cationic amino acid transporter gene SLC7A7 . standard techniques. During the period 1996 - 2005 specific lysosomal Approximately 30 mutations have been detected world-wide; in Finland, enzyme deficiencies was indicated in 85 families. Gaucher disease however, all the patients (n=38) share the same homozygous mutation, was diagnosed in 25 families, metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) 1181-2A-->T . The clinical manifestations of LPI are complex, including - in 13 families, the mucopolysaccharidoses - in 28 families (9 MPS I, 3 failure to thrive, protein aversion, nausea and hyperammonemia . MPS II, 9 MPS III, 6 MPS IV, 1 MPS VI), mucolipidosis II - in 7 families, Some patients also develop anaemia, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis GM1 gangliosidosis - in 7 families, GM2 gangliosidosis - in 3 families and immunological abnormalities . The symptoms vary greatly, both (2 Sandhoff, 1 Tay-Sachs), Fabry disease - in 2 families . within families and amongst patients affected by the same mutation . Frequent mutations in the arylsulfatase A gene (ARSA) were screened To unravel the possible molecular mechanisms behind the clinical by PCR-RFLP . The overall frequencies of the “I” allele (IVS2+1) were symptoms unexplained by the primary mutation, the gene expression 20% (2/20) and of the P426L change was 20% (2/20). Pseudodeficiency profiles of LPI patients were studied using microarray technology. alleles were found in 2 patients . For other MLD chromosomes the Whole blood RNA (PAXgene) was extracted from 13 Finnish patients analysis of all ARSA exons and intron/exon junctions with sequence and 10 healthy age- and sex-matched controls . Subsequently, the analysis of fragments was performed . We have revealed 4 novel RNA was hybridised on Sentrix HumanRef-8 Expression BeadChips mutations -F247S, D381E, A416V and A469G . Genotype-phenotype (Illumina) containing probes for over 23 000 genes . correlations in Ukrainian MLD patients were similar to those The microarray data were analysed for expression changes between reported in other Caucasian populations, but also indicated specific patients and controls (fold-change, t-test statistics) . As a result, we characteristics . discovered 491 up-regulated and 445 down-regulated genes (fold- The creation of the database of families with LSD patients plays change limit 0.8; P <0.05). An initial analysis of the biological processes important role in the accurate management of these patients and in altered by the up- or down-regulated genes was made . Based on these study structure and occurrence of this pathology in Ukraine . results, the LPI patients’ symptoms and their variability can, indeed, be partly deduced from the changes in their gene expression, other P0745. insight on the mutational process underlying machado- than that of SLC7A7 . Detailed analysis of the altered gene functions Joseph disease (mJD/scA3), through a haplotype study of is currently ongoing . normal, intermediate and expanded alleles S. Martins1,2, M. W. Horstink3, L. Van Maldergem4, M. Mukerji5, G. Wang6, Y. P0743. Disruption of the slc7a7 gene compromises the Takiyama7, P. Coutinho8, A. Amorim1,2, J. Sequeiros9,10; embryonic growth in the knock-out mouse model of lysinuric 1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2Fac Ciências, Univ Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Dept protein intolerance. of Neurology, Univ Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Centre de M. Sperandeo1,2, P. Annunziata1, P. Piccolo1, A. Pepe1, S. Banfi3, G. Andria1, G. Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Loverval, Belgium, Sebastio1; 5Functional Genomics Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Delhi, 1Federico II University of Naples, Naples, Italy, 2Dulbecco Telethon Institute, India, 6China-Japan Friendship Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, Beijing, Telethon Foundation, Rome, Italy, 3Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine- China, 7Dept of Neurology, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan, 8Serv Neuro- TIGEM, Naples, Italy. logia, Hosp S Sebastião, Feira, Portugal, 9UnIGENe, IBMC, Porto, Portugal, Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI, MIM 222700) is an autosomal 10ICBAS, Univ Porto, Porto, Portugal. recessive defect of cationic amino acid (CAA) transport at the The high polymorphic level within the pathological range, but (usually) basolateral membrane of epithelial cells of intestine and kidney, also regarding normal range alleles, is a feature common to the caused by mutations of SLC7A7 gene . A constitutive KO of Slc7a7 was large group of genetic disorders caused by an oligonucleotide repeat generated by random insertional mutagenesis in ES cells (Lexicon expansion . In Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), although the range Genetics Incorporated, The Woodlands, Texas) . More than 400 limits have been broadened with new allele-sizes described in different Slc7a7+/- intercrosses led to only two Slc7a7-/- live animals . At E 16 .5 populations, intermediate alleles with 45 to 61 CAGs are very rare, and E18 .5 stages, the proportions of Slc7a7 genotypes were found as and their role on the generation of de novo full expansions is still expected for an autosomal recessive transmission and the Slc7a7-/- unknown . embryos were already smaller than controls . Most of Slc7a7-/- pups To gain insight into this question, we compared intragenic haplotypes were lost at birth because of cannibalism . None of the null embryos of four intermediate alleles with those found in normal (n=18) showed gross morphological abnormalities apart from a generalized and expanded (n=10) chromosomes. We have identified 10 new developmental delay . polymorphic sites, six of which were already analysed, as were three Genes known to have a key role in regulating foetus-placental growth, SNPs previously described . i .e . Igf1, Igf2, and insulin-like growth factor binding proteins (Igfbps), The three intermediate alleles associated with an abnormal phenotype were studied in SLC7A7-/- embryos by Real-Time PCR . Results shared the H1: TCAAGC-INT-CAC haplotype, whereas an allele with 51 showed down-regulation of Igfs in null animals at E18 .5 compared repeats, described as non-pathogenic and stable upon transmission, with wild-types . Also Igfbp1 and Igfbp4 were down-regulated, whereas had the distinct haplotype H2: CTAGGT-INT-GCA - the most common Igfbp2 and Igfbp6 were up-regulated in the liver of null embryos among normal chromosomes (33%) . Expanded chromosomes compared with wild-types . This expression pattern of Igfbps is similar displayed both haplotypes . to that found in other forms of foetal growth failure. This is the first The fact that only H1 was shared by the intermediate alleles associated observation which links CAA metabolism and intrauterine growth with a disease phenotype, urged us to study this lineage, in further control mediated by the Igf pathway . detail, in both intermediate and normal alleles, to search for cis-acting Acknowledgments: EUGINDAT EC FPVI (LSHM-CT-2003-502852) factors potentially involved in repeat instability . Moreover, it would to G . Sebastio and Telethon Foundation (Grant TCP99029) and San be interesting to study an extended flanking region further up and Paolo IMI to M .P . Sperandeo . downstream, to test the hypothesis of gene conversion as the possible mechanism underlying the expansion process from intermediate alleles, as previously raised .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 6 P0746. Analysis of genetic factors in male patients affected with ment of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University Medical Faculty, De- infertility partment of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Neurology, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University S. Stangler Herodez, B. Zagradisnik, A. Erjavec Skerget, A. Zagorac, V. Science Faculty, Department of Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 5Karolinska Institutet, Vlaisavljevic, N. Kokalj Vokac; Center of Molecular Medicine, Department of Neuroscience, Stockholm, Swe- Maribor Teaching Hospital, SI-2000 Maribor, Slovenia. den. Introduction . Genetic factors are important causes for male infertility . Epilepsy is one of the common neurological disorders affecting 1-2% They include chromosome abnormalities, Y chromosome microdeletions of population . Despite considerable progress in pharmacotherapy of and certain mutations in the cystic fibrosis gene CFTR. Testing for epilepsy, more than 30% of the patients are resistant to antiepileptic these alterations is important to establish the correct diagnosis and drugs . In recent years, overexpression of multidrug transporters in then to assess the risk for the pregnacy . Modern techniques of assited blood-brain barrier, have frequently been investigated . Although some reproduction can help achieve pregnancy, but they also increase the studies support evidence of an association between the polymorphisms risk of having an affected child . In this study we analyzed infertile male in these genes and the drug resistant epilepsy, there is also some data patients, who were potential candidates for ICSI (intracytoplasmic that indicates there is no association between these two . One of the sperm injection) . frequently investigated genes that is found to be responsible for drug Methods . We collected peripheral venous blood from male patients resistance in epilepsy is multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) gene . Instead who were diagnosed with azoospermia or oligozoospermia . Analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism detection, haplotype analysis included karyotyping, detection of Y chromosome microdeletions of of multiple SNPs in the genes involved in drug resistant epilepsy is 18 loci in 4 multiplex PCR reactions, detection of ΔF508 and R117H preferantial . Therefore in this study we aimed to screen the MDR1 gene mutations with allele specific PCR and detection of 5T/7T/9T alleles in for the most common polymorphisms C3435T and G2677AT in drug intron 8 of the CFTR gene with the dot-blot method . resistant epilepsy patients and control group . Besides analysing these Results . A total of 125 patients were included in the study . 20 patients two polymorphisms in MDR1 gene, we also evaluated family histories, (16%) were carriers of a major chromosome abnormality which mostly treatment regimes and the backgrounds of the patients . Thirty-nine involved sex chromosomes, 6 patients (4 .8%) were carriers of Y drug resistant epilepsy and 92 control samples were involved in the chromosome microdeletions, 8 patients (6 .4%) were heterozygotes for study . The polymorphism detection was performed by PCR-RFLP the ΔF508 mutation, 4 patients (3.2%) were carriers of R117H mutation and Pyrosequencing from which the same results were obtained . and in 12 patients (9 .6%) we detected the 5T allele . However, we found no associations between C3435T and G2677AT Conclusions . In our sample of patients the most important genetic polymorphisms and multidrug resistant epilepsy . Haplotype analysis factor is chromosome abnormality followed by mutations in the CFTR including these 2 polymorphisms showed no significant association. gene . High frequency of CFTR mutations indicates that an extended As a conclusion these 2 MDR1 polymorphisms are considered not to mutation analysis of this gene may be needed to fully estimate risk for be responsible for the responsiveness to either different or combined cystic fibrosis in offspring antiepileptic drug therapy in our study group . P0747. sreening of the RYR1 gene for sequence variants P0749. spectrum of MKS1 and MKS genes mutations in meckel associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. syndrome I. Valášková1, Š. Prášilová1, D. Štěpánková1, I. Grochová2, I. Schröderová2, R. T. Attie-Bitach1, L. Baala1, C. Ozilou1, J. Martinovic1, U. M. Smith2, C. Escul- Gaillyová1, P. Kuglík1,3; pavit1, C. Oien3, M. Bucourt4, L. Devisme5, A. Beaufrère6, G. Viot7, Y. Hillion8, 1University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2St.Anne´s University Hospital, S. Shalev9, A. Munnich1, F. Encha-Razavi1, M. Gubler10, C. A. Johnson2, J. Brno, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. Roume8, M. Vekemans1; Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is pharmacogenetic disorder associated 1Département de Génétique et Unité INSERM U-781, Paris, France, 2Section with mutations in sceletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ of Medical and Molecular Genetics, University of Birmingham Medical School, regulatory proteins . It manifests as a hypermetabolic crisis triggered Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center , Bos- by commonly used inhalational anesthetics and a particular paralyzing ton, Paris, France, 4Service d’anatomopathologie, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Paris, drug . Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS) is a dominantly France, 5Génétique et fœtopathologie, CHU de Lille, Lille, France, 6Service inherited predisposition to MH that can be diagnosed by using an d’anatomie pathologique, Hôtel Dieu, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 7Hôpital invasive diagnostics test on excised muscle bundles, the in vitro Cochin, Paris, France, 8Génétique Médicale et Foetopathologie, CHI Poissy, contracture test (IVCT) . This test, based on the differential contractile Poissy, France, 9The Genetics Institute, Ha’Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, response of normal and MH muscle to caffeine and halothane, 10Inserm U574, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. differentiates between MHS and MH normal individuals and defines a Meckel syndrome (MKS) is a letal autosomal recessive disease third MH equivocal (MHE) group of unclear status . characterized by cystic kidneys, occipital encephalocele, polydactyly, Mutations in the calcium channel of sarcoplasmic reticulum, ryanodine and liver ductal changes . Recently, two genes among the three loci receptor type 1 (RYR1 at 19q13) are the major cause of MHS . We mapped have been identified: MKS1 on 17q in Finnish kindreds and sought to develop a reliable genetic screening strategy based on MKS3 on 8q in families from Pakistan and Oman . efficient and relatively inexpansive mutation-detection procedures. We report the genotyping of the MKS1 and MKS3 genes in a large Molecular genetic test has been based on RT-PCR approach with use multhiethnic cohort of 54 independent cases of MKS with 22/54 of total RNA extracted from muscles of individuals (N=50) diagnosed consanguineous families . Haplotyping at the MKS1 and MKS3 loci as MHS by IVCT . The mutational hot spot RYR1 cDNA regions were showed 5/22 and 5/22 homozygous cases respectively . amplified in 9 overlapping fragmants and direct sequenced. Known Sequence analysis of the MKS1 gene identified the same homozygous mutations or novel amino-acid substitutions were identified in 25% of mutation in two Palestinian families, suggesting a founder effect . 4/32 studied patients . Relatives of individuals who have been found to have a non-consanguineous fetuses were compound heterozygotes for mutation causative for MH were diagnosed by subsequent detection of MKS1 mutations . Two cases, from families of French origin, carried the same mutation in blood-extracted DNA .The improvement of RYR1 the “Finnish major” mutation IVS15-7-35del29 . mutation identification in MHS individuals combined with subsequent Sequence analysis of the MKS3 gene revealed homozygous noninvasive genetic testing in family members suggests our strategy mutations in one family from Palestine (splice-site change) and for molecular diagnostics of malignant hypertermia susceptibility in the Pakistan (missense mutation) . 3/32 non-consanguineous cases future . were compound heterozygotes, carrying at least a truncating allele, originating from France (2) and United-States (1) . Interestingly, in the P0748. Lack of association between mDR1 gene polymorphisms latter, a previous fetus had cystic kidneys and bile duct proliferation but and drug-resistant epilepsy no brain malformation . Finally, 6 consanguineous families remained homozygous at the MKS2 A. Alpman1, F. Ozkinay2, H. Tekgul3, S. Gokben3, S. Pehlivan4, M. Schalling5, locus on 11q . C. Ozkinay2; Our first results indicate that the MKS1 and MKS3 genes are each 1Ege University Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of responsible for at least 10 % of MKS cases with various mutations in Genetics and Teratology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University Medical Faculty, Depart- different populations . One fetus had a situs inversus, further arguing for Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 6 a ciliary function of MKS proteins . Finally 10 consanguineous families propionyl-CoA carboxylase subunits A and B (pcca-1, pccb-1), excluded the three loci, suggesting further genetic heterogeneity . methylmalonic acidemia cobalamin A complementation group (mmaa- 1), co(I)balamin adenosyltransferase (mmab-1), MMAHC (cblc-1), P0750. mutation’s spectrum in the part of EX 10 mEFV gene in methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase (mce-1) and methylmalonyl-CoA Armenian patients with familial mediterranean fever. mutase (mmcm-1) were identified. To verify predictions that the entire A. V. Polyakov, O. A. Schagina, N. V. Komarova; intracellular adenosylcobalamin metabolic pathway existed and was Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. functional, the kinetic properties of the C . elegans mmcm-1were Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disease examined . RNA interference against mmcm-1, mmab-1, mmaa-1 particularly common in several populations of Mediterranean origin, in the presence of propionic acid revealed a chemical phenotype of in which the prevalence reaches as high as 1/200 individual . This increased methylmalonic acid; deletion mutants of mmcm-1, mmab- disease is characterized by recurring attacks of fever and serositis . 1 and mce-1 displayed reduced C14-propionate incorporation into Mutations in MEFV gene have been identified in patients with FMF. macromolecules . The mmcm-1 deletion mutant produced increased Most frequent of them are localizing in exon 10 and consist of more amounts of methylmalonic acid in the culture medium, proving that than 90% of all mutations . a functional block in the pathway caused metabolite accumulation . We have investigated 120 Armenian patients living in Russia from 118 Lentiviral delivery of the C. elegans mmcm-1 into fibroblasts derived unrelated families . Mutation analysis of MEFV gene exon 10 sequence from a patient with muto class methylmalonic acidemia and cells from between codons 663 and 771 was performed using SSCP method . a Mut knock-out mouse could partially restore propionate flux. The C. In our series 69 patients displayed homozygous or compound- elegans mce-1 deletion mutant demonstrates for the first time that a heterozygous MEFV mutations . The M694V/M694V genotype was lesion at the racemase step of methylmalonyl-CoA metabolism can found in 29/69 patients, in 23/69 patients we found M694V/V726A, functionally impair flux through the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase pathway; M694V/M680I in 11/69 patients . In this series, other genotypes were this suggests that malfunction of MCEE may cause methylmalonic also found: both the M680I/M680I and the M694V/R761H genotypes acidemia in humans . The C . elegans system we describe represents were observed in two patients, the V726A/M680I was identified in one the first lower metazoan model organism of mammalian propionate patient. In 16 cases we revealed only one mutation: V726A/- in 5/16; spectrum disorders and should be useful to study methylmalonic and M694V/- in 6/16; M680I/- in two and one K695R/- heterozygotes. We propionic acidemia . found no mutation in 35 families . Allelic frequency and composition of mutations in our group do not P0753. molecular characterisation of a balanced chromosome reliable differ from Armenians living in Armenia . translocation identifies MGST2 as a candidate gene for psoriasis vulgaris P0751. X-linked mental retardation, choreoathetosis and A. Tzschach1, K. Hoffmann1, M. Hoeltzenbein1, I. Bache2, N. Tommerup2, C. abnormal behaviour (mRXs10) is caused by an unique mutation Bommer3, H. Körner3, V. Kalscheuer1, H. Ropers1; in an ubiquitously expressed gene 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Wilhelm J. Ramser1, C. Lenski2, B. Winnepenninckx3, C. E. Schwartz4, A. Meindl1, R. F. Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Institute of Medical Bio- Kooy3; chemistry and Genetics, The Panum Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Institute 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Technical University Munich, of Medical Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany. Munich, Germany, 2Department of Human Genetics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Uni- Psoriasis vulgaris is a chronic inflammatory disease with a strong versity, Munich, Germany, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University of Ant- contribution of genetic factors . A recent meta-analysis of published werp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United linkage data has identified a major susceptibility locus (PSORS9) States. on chromosome 4q31 . We report on a male patient with a balanced Systematic mutation screening on the short arm of the X chromosome chromosome translocation t(2;4)(p25;q31.1) and familial psoriasis between markers DXS8080 and DXS1190 revealed a silent C- vulgaris . The breakpoint in chromosome band 4q31 disrupts a non- A transversion in exon 5 of the HADH2 gene in a patient suffering coding RNA gene (CR742434) that overlaps, in antisense direction, from mental retardation, choreoathetosis, and abnormal behaviour, a the MGST2 gene . MGST2 encodes a microsomal glutathion S- syndromic form of XLMR previously described as MRXS10 . The disease transferase that plays a central role in the synthesis of leukotriene has been mapped to Xp11 by linkage analysis in a four-generation C4 (LTC4) . Altered expression of this gene due to the chromosome family with 5 affected males, previously . The detected C/A substitution rearrangement may influence the synthesis of LTC4 and change the segregated with the disease and was absent in 1500 tested control balance of pro- and antiinflammatory mediators, thereby predisposing X-chromosomes . It causes an aberrant splicing of exon 5 resulting in to disorders like psoriasis . Thus, MGST2 is a promising positional and a reduced level of wild type transcript and an elevated level of an exon functional candidate gene for psoriasis vulgaris . 5 lacking variant in the patient . Real time experiments showed that the amount of wild type transcript in the patient was reduced to one third P0754. microRNA expression in the mouse inner ear and their as compared to healthy controls, whereas the amount of the exon 5 possible role in hearing and deafness lacking variant was 11 fold up regulated in the patient . Additionally the L. M. Friedman1, G. Toren1, H. Shahin1, E. Hornstein2, K. B. Avraham1; amount of a third transcript variant harbouring a truncated form of exon 1Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 5 was 14 times higher in the patient as compared to controls . Finally, United States. in vitro-splicing experiments demonstrated that the silent mutation is During the last years, microRNAs (miRNAs) have been discovered as associated with the aberrant splicing event . Our result is in concordance having important roles in development and disease of plants, insects, with the hypothesis that a prominent proportion of the approximately nematodes and vertebrates . The involvement of miRNAs in the development 260 MRX entities might be caused by unique aberrations . Furthermore, and function of specific tissues and systems have been focused on only aberrations in ubiquitously expressed MRX genes often seem to cause recently, following the development of new and sensitive methods to a phenotype restricted to the brain, which might be more vulnerable to measure miRNA expression and identify their targets . Vertebrate ear such changes than other tissues . development may be dependent on miRNAs, as was suggested by recent studies in zebrafish. Our goal is to identify miRNAs that contribute to the P0752. New Phenotype for methylmalonyl-coA Epimerase development and function of the mouse inner ear and may be involved in Demonstrated using a c. elegans model of Propionate hearing and deafness in mammals, as well as their target mRNAs . We used metabolism bioinformatics and other prediction tools to identify potential miRNAs that R. J. Chandler, V. Aswani, M. Tsai, C. P. Venditti; may control inner ear development or function. Using methods to profile National Institute of Health/NHGRI, Bethesda, MD, United States. the microRNA of the mouse inner ear, such as the ‘Invader’ assay and We have utilized Caenorhabditis elegans to study human methylmalonic expression arrays, we will decipher the expression of candidate miRNAs acidemia . Using experimental studies and bioinformatics, a full in cochlea and compare it to their expression in other tissues . Finally, we complement of mammalian homologues for the conversion of will confirm the role of these suspected miRNAs in cochlear cell function propionyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA in the genome of C . elegans, including and attempt to identify correlations to deafness .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 6 P0755. Novel variant of the mitochondrial DNA A7445G mutation by a deficiency of arylsulfatase A (ARSA) activity .The estimated in a Hungarian pedigree. gene frequency for MLD is approximately 0 .5%,corresponding to an A. Maasz1, K. Komlosi1, K. Hadzsiev1, R. Kellermayer1, V. Havasi1, Z. Szabo2, incidance of 1 in 40,000 births . B. Melegh1; ARSA deficiency causes intralysosomal storage of cerebroside sulfate 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, Pecs, Hungary, 2Bor- in the cells of the white matter of the central nervous system and of the sod County Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary. peripheral nerves, leading to a progressive demyelination and a variety Mitochondrial tRNA genes have been found to be associated with of neurological symptoms .Clinically the disease is heterogeneous nonsyndromic hearing loss. A peculiar form is the A→G transition and different forms are classified according to the age of symptoms at 7445 of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) which affects the border (infantile, juvenile, and adult) . of COI/Ser(UCN)-tRNA genes and has only been characterized in The ARSA gene has been mapped to chromosome 22q13 .31 and pedigrees . spans approximately 3 .2kbp contains eight exons and encodes a We detected this mutation in a 12-year-old Hungarian boy . The familial protein of 507 amino acid residues with three N-glycosylation sites . examinations revealed the maternal inheritance, and five family Three most common MLD mutations are c .459+1G>A, c .536T>G members were affected . Using PCR/RFLP and direct sequencing of (p.Ile179Ser) c.1277C>T (p.Pro426Leu) as well as the pseudodeficiency blood DNA we characterized the segregation of the mutation . allele (c .1620A>G) . The mutation was apparently in homoplasmic form in the proband We investigated mutations in six exons by PCR-sequencing in our and his mother . The proband had deafness while his mother had no patients . evidence of hearing loss . The mutation was found in heteroplasmic form in the maternal grandmother and in her niece, who are P0758. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia is caused by the monozygotic twins and one of them has deafness . The mutation’s level Q490X mutation of the ACVRL1 gene in a large Arab family: was approximately 90-95% of the total mtDNA in the grandmother and support of homozygous lethality only 5-10% in the twins . Unlike other families with this mutation, our M. Stuhrmann1, W. Kuehnau1, J. Schmidtke1, D. Gadzicki1, M. Ahmed2, M. patients had no palmoplantar keratoderma . Krawczak3, E. A. El-Harith1; This is the first Hungarian family with A7445G mutation and this is the 1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2King Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi first pedigree in which homoplasmic and heteroplasmic forms were Arabia, 3Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany. detected simultaneously . The normal allele was not segregated to the In a large Saudi Arabian family with hereditary hemorrhagic mother and the proband at all; while on the other branch of the pedigree telangiectasia (HHT), we identified ACVRL1 (ALK1) nonsense mutation the heteroplasmy was transmitted in low proportion . Despite the huge Q490X in 40 HHT patients and three healthy children, but neither in 11 difference of the heteroplasmy, there were affected individuals on both individuals with epistaxis, 41 other healthy family members, nor in 50 branches of the family, which suggests that the degree of the mutated healthy unrelated Saudi Arabian controls . Sequence analysis of the DNA alone does not necessarily determine the development of the entire coding region of the ACVRL1 and ENG genes in five of the 11 clinical symptoms . epistaxic individuals did not reveal any other disease-causing mutation . Epistaxis seems to be a relatively common phenocopy of HHT in the P0756. megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical family under study . One couple, both affected by HHT and carriers cysts, from mutations to function of Q490X, had 12 pregnancies . Three of them ended in spontaneous G. C. Scheper1, I. Boor1, K. de Groot1, R. Estevez2, M. S. van der Knaap1; abortion, four in early neonatal death, and only five yielded living 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of offspring, all of which had HHT and were Q490X heterozygous . This Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Barcelona, Spain. observation corroborates previous claims that homozygosity for HHT Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC) is causing-mutations is lethal . an autosomal recessive cerebral white matter disorder in children . This disease is histopathologically characterized by myelin splitting and P0759. mohr-tranebjaerg syndrome: A tim23 knockout mouse intramyelinic vacuole formation . MLC is caused by mutations in the as neurodegenerative animal model gene MLC1 and 50 mutations in this gene have been found . Splice-site, U. Ahting1,2, I. Schneider3,4, L. Becker3,4, E. Kling3,4, H. Prokisch5,2, T. Floss6, T. nonsense, and deletion/insertion mutations occur throughout the entire Meitinger1,2, T. Klopstock4,2; coding region . In about 20% of the patients with a typical clinical and 1GSF Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of Human Genet- MRI picture, no mutations in the MLC1 gene are found . The absence ics, Munich-Neuherberg, Germany, 2Mitochondrial Medicine Munich, Munich, of mutations can be the consequence of performing standard analysis Germany, 3GSF Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of of genomic DNA . This study shows that cDNA and qPCR analysis are Experimental Genetics, Munich-Neuherberg, Germany, 4Klinikum Großhadern, valuable tools to identify some of the missing mutations . Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Department of Neurology, Munich, Germany, The MLC1 protein has eight transmembrane domains, but contains no 5Technical University Munich, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, other known functional domains and shows no significant homology 6GSF Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of Developmental with proteins of known function . MLC1 is highly conserved between Genetics, Munich-Neuherberg, Germany. vertebrates . MLC1 is a plasma-membrane protein, which is expressed Tim23 protein is a key component of the mitochondrial import machinery . in leukocytes and in astroglial end feet at the glial limiting membrane It is part of the Tim23 complex which is responsible for translocation of of the blood-brain and at the brain-CSF barriers . Interestingly, the matrix located protein precursors across the inner membrane . Tim23 expression of MLC1 in astrocytic end feet overlaps with the expression is essential in yeast . Tim23p itself is imported into mitochondria with of the dystrophin-associated glycoprotein complex (DAGC) . Mutations the aid of the DDP1p/Tim13p complex, located in the intermembrane in merosin, a component of this complex, lead to a muscular dystrophy space . In yeast the homologous Tim8/Tim13 complex is not essential . accompanied by white matter abnormalities . MRI of the brain of such Lack of this complex leads to a cold-sensitive phenotype and patients shows remarkable resemblance to the MRI of MLC patients . impairment of Tim23p import . Mutations in DDP1 in humans are the Our data suggest that MLC1 is part of the DAGC . cause of Mohr-Tranebjaerg syndrome, the so far only known human disease caused by impaired protein import into mitochondria . P0757. metachromatic leukodystrophy We investigated the direct effect of the lack of Tim23 in mouse and M. Abedi Khalilabad, B. Hooshiar kashani, A. Yazdi, P. Rostami, T. Majidiza- created a Tim23 knockout mouse using the gene-trap strategy . The deh, M. Houshmand; gene-trap vector inserted between exons 6 and 7 of the gene . A LacZ National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- fusion protein is expressed ubiquitinously in Tim23 +/- mice as shown lamic Republic of Iran. by lacZ histochemistry . Homozygous Tim23 -/- causes early embryonic Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) belongs to a larger group lethality . Heterozygous Tim23 +/- mice showed reduced levels of of lysosomal storage diseases. MLD is caused by deficiency of the Tim23p as determined by immunoblotting . Phenotypic characterization enzyme arylsulfatase A and the resulting inability to degrade sulfated of these mice revealed sex specific impairment of motor coordination, glycolipids, especially the galactosyl-3-sulfate ceramides . balance and grip strength . The reduced Tim23p levels correlated with MLD is a rare autosomal recessive metabolic disease characterized a reduced lifespan of Tim23+/- mice . Some heterozygous Tim23 +/- Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 6 mice showed alopecia and kyphosis, which are signs of aging, in early P0762. mucopolysaccharidosis iVA stages of life . Z. Alvandi, G. Rahim, M. DehghanManshadi, A. Yazdi, M. Rostami, M. Housh- Conclusions: Homozygous knockout of Tim23 is lethal in mouse . mand; Reduced levels of Tim23p result in animals with reduced lifespan and National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- impairment of coordination and grip strength . lamic Republic of Iran. Mucopolysaccharidoses, which are also known as mucopolysaccharide P0760. Expression and biochemical characterization of novel storage (MPS) diseases, are a group of rare genetic disorders caused mutations and polymorphisms in spanish and Argentinian by the deficiency of one of ten specific lysosomal enzymes. mucopolysaccharidosis Vi (maroteaux-Lamy syndrome) patients Morquio syndrome (MPS IV) is a mucopolysaccharide storage disease E. Garrido1, A. Chabás2, J. J. Hopwood3, B. Cormand1, D. Grinberg1, L. Vilage- that occurs in two forms: type A , caused by deficiency of lysosomal N- liu1; acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase, and type B, caused by a deficiency 1Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, of lysosomal beta-galactosidase . Type A is more common, but the two Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Corporació Sanitària Clínic, types generally have the same symptoms. Deficiency of either enzyme Barcelona, Spain, 3Lysosomal Diseases Research Unit, Department of Genetic leads to an accumulation of keratan sulfate, and bony abnormalities of Medicine, Women’s and Children’s Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia. the head, chest, hands, knees and spine may occur as a result of this Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (MPS VI) or Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome is metabolic defect . Intelligence is normal . an autosomal recessive disorder resulting from the deficiency of the Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA (MPS IVA; Morquio A disease) is an lysosomal hydrolase N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfatase (arylsulfatase autosomal recessive . The cDNA contains an open reading frame of B, ARSB) . Mutation analysis in 14 MPS VI Spanish and Argentinian 1566 bp which encodes a 522-residue polypeptide . The gene spans patients resulted in the identification of 9 novel ARSB mutant alleles . approximately 50 kb, and contains 14 exons .The variety (missense or In the present study, six missense mutations (c .245T>G [p .L82R], nonsense), frequency, and location of point mutations causing human c .284G>A [p .Y138C], c .922G>A [p .G308R], c . 937C>G [p .P313A] genetic disease are highly non-random . c .1340G>T [p .C447F] and c .1421T>C [p .L472P]) were transiently We identified 32 different mutations . Transitional mutations at CpG expressed in COS-7 cells and 4-sulfatase activity was determined dinucleotides accounted for 23% of all single base substitutions in cells extracts . All mutations resulted in less than 4% of wild-type leading to missense and nonsense mutations in the coding region (10 enzyme activity and most of them showed no enzymatic activity at all . of 44 alleles) . Methylation of individual CpG cytosines was extensive Mutations were expressed in their haplotypic context concerning two within exons 2-14 while CpG cytosines in exon 1 were completely non-synonymous polymorphisms present in the ARSB gene, p .V358M unmethylated . All transitional mutations at CpG sites were located and p .S384N . Formerly described as a third mutation in some patients, between exons 2 and 14 . Non-methylation at CpG sites correlated with p .S384N is present in several SNP databases and has a minor allele the absence of transitional mutations in exon 1 . frequence (MAF) of 0 .09, as estimated in a Spanish control population For molecular diagnosis Sequence Analysis, is recommended . including 46 chromosomes . In our expression studies, ARSB cDNAs bearing haplotypes p.358M;p.384S and p.358V;p.384N presented an P0763. Complex I Deficiency in Persian Multiple Sclerosis ARSB activity of 70% and 57% respectively, when compared to the most Patients enzymatically active haplotype combination (p.358V;p.384S). When M. Houshmand1, H. Hassani Kumleh2, G. Riazi2, K. Gharagozli3, M. Sanati1, M. expressing the p.358M;p.384N haplotype, 4-sulfatase activity was Shafa Shariat Panahi1; reduced to 16% . These data suggest that these two variants should be 1NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Bio- considered modifier alleles rather than pathogenic mutations. Western physics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of blot analysis and subcellular localization studies of the mutations are Neurology, Loghman Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. currently underway . Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating disease of the central nervous system characterized by the morphological hallmarks of P0761. Homocysteine levels and mtHFR c677t and A1298c inflammation, demyelination and axonal loss .Until now, little attention genotypes in patients with myocardial infarction has been paid to the contribution of mitochondrial respiratory chain V. Sango1, I. Novakovic2, N. Antonijevic3, D. Mirkovic4, L. Lukovic2, B. Jakov- enzyme activities to MS . In this study, kinetic analysis of mitochondrial ljevic5; respiratory chain complex I enzyme (measured as NADH-ferricyanide 1Medical Center Jagodina, Jagodina, Serbia and Montenegro, 2Institute of Biol- reductase) was performed on intact mitochondria isolated from fresh ogy and Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia and Montene- skeletal muscle in MS patients (n=10) and control subjects (n=11) . gro, 3Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases KCS, Belgrade, Serbia and Montene- Mitochondrial DNA common deletion and deletions were also tested gro, 4Institute of Biochemistry KCS, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 5Institute in MS patients. Our findings showed that complex I activities were of Hygiene, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. significantly reduced (P=0.007) in patients compared with control. MTHFR plays a key role in metabolism of plasma homocisteine . The However, we could not find deletion in mtDNA of patients with MS. The C677T mutation in methylentetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) presupposition of relationship between MS and mitochondrial disorders gene is accompanied by reduction of enzyme activity and increased is due to predominant maternal transmission of MS in affected parent- homocysteine level . child pairs, pathoaetiological role of respiratory chain dysfunction in AIM : We assessed the association between homocysteine levels and multisystem disorders and important role of it in neurodegenerative MTHFR 677 and 1298 genotypes in young patients with myocardial disorders, a number of patients such as LHON or other mtDNA infarction (MI) under age 45 . abnormality with developed neurological symptoms indistinguishable METHODS : Sixty-one MI patients and 43 control subjects were included from MS and similarity of clinical symptoms in mitochondrial disorders in our study . The MTHFR 677 and 1298 genotype were analyzed using to those of MS . This study suggested that a biochemical defect in PCR amplification and digestion with restrictive endonucleases Hinf complex I activity may be involved in pathogenesis of MS . I and Mbo II . Total homocysteine sera concentration was measured using HPLC with fluorescence detection. P0764. mitochondrial D-Loop variation in Persian multiple RESULTS : The prevalence of the MTHFR C677T genotypes were not sclerosis Patients: K and A haplogroups as a risk factors!! significantly different in patients and controls (C/C 47,5% and 46.5%; M. Shafa Shariat Panahi1, H. Hassani Kumleh2, M. Houshmand1, G. Riazi2, M. C/T 39.3% and 39.5%; T/T 14.7 %and 14.9%), and the prevalence of Sanati1, K. Gharagozli3; MTHFR 1298 polymorphism were not significantly different in group 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Medical with MI and controls too . Subject with the MTHFR 677 TT genotype Genetic Department, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Institute of Biochemistry showed higher levels of tHcy compared with C/C (p< 0 .05) and C/T and Biophysics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Depart- genotypes (p< 0 .01) in MI patients and controls (tHcy were 14 .7 µmol/l ment of neurology, Loghman Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and 14 .9 µmol/l respectively) . Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a multifocal demyelinating central nervous CONCLUSION : Our results showed the association of MTHFR677 system disorder in which interplay between genes and the environment T/T genotype and increased levels of t Hcy in group of MI patients and are supposed to be involved . Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has the controls . only non-coding regions at the displacement loop (D-loop) region that Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 66 contains two hypervariable segments (HVS-I and HVS-II) with high P0767. the pattern of mutations in Feingold syndrome polymorphism . mtDNA has already been fully sequenced and many establish a loss-of-function mechanism for the canonical MYCN subsequent publications have showed polymorphic sites, haplogroups oncogene. and haplotypes . Haplogroups could have important implications to F. Hol1, J. van Reeuwijk1, T. Rinne1, R. Meijer1, J. Celli1, B. Glaudemans1, E. understand association between mutability of the mitochondrial genome van Beusekom1, P. Rieu1, R. Newbury-Ecob2, A. Tészás3, R. Kellermayer3, H. and disease . To assess relationship between mtDNA haplogroup and Scheffer1, H. Brunner1, H. van Bokhoven1; MS, we have sequenced the mtDNA HVS-I in 54 MS patients and 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijme- 100 control subjects . We have found that haplogroups A and K are gen, The Netherlands, 2Genetics Centre, Royal United Hospital, Combe Park, significantly more abundant in MS patients (P= 0.042 for haplogroup Bath, United Kingdom, 3Department of Medical Genetics and Child Develop- A and P=0 .0005 for haplogroup K) .Thus, these two haplogroups might ment, University of Pécs, Hungary. act synergistically to increase the penetrance of MS Feingold syndrome (FS MIM 164280) is characterized by variable combinations of esophageal and duodenal atresias, microcephaly, P0765. X chromosome inactivation in females with multiple learning disability, syndactyly and cardiac defect . We have recently sclerosis established that heterozygous mutations in the MYCN gene on G. S. Knudsen1, J. Pedersen2, H. Harbo3, C. Smestad4, A. Spurkland5, E. Ce- chromosome 2p23-p24 are causative for the disorder in 15 unrelated lius4, K. Ørstavik2,1; FS families . All mutations were located in exon 3 and disrupt both 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty Division Rikshospitalet, University the full-length protein as well as a novel shortened MYCN isoform, of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet-Radi- denoted ΔMYCN. umhospitalet HF, Oslo, Norway, 3Institute of Immunology, Rikshospitalet-Radi- The MYCN oncogene consists of three exons . The canonical MYCN umhospitalet HF, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Neurology, Ullevål University protein is produced by the use of an ATG start codon in exon 2 that is Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, preceded by an Internal Ribosome Entry Site . Alternative transcripts Oslo, Norway. lacking exon 2 encode ΔMYCN, an N-terminally truncated MYCN Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disorder and a chronic isoform produced by initiation of translation in exon 1 . Since all inflammatory disease of the central nervous system. Loss of previous mutations affected both the MYCN and ΔMYCN isoforms, it immunological tolerance to self-antigens seems to be a common feature was unknown whether the pathophysiological mechanism was caused of autoimmune disorders. X linked self-antigens could be influenced by disruption of either one or both of the protein isoforms . Here we by X chromosome inactivation pattern, and contribute to the skewed describe the identification of 10 additional heterozygous mutations in female:male ratio (2:1) in the frequency of MS . A high frequency of FS families . While most of the mutations are located in the common skewed X inactivation was recently reported in females with autoimmune exon 3, frameshift mutations were identified in exon 2 in three unrelated thyroid disease, and skewed X inactivation has also been described in families. In addition, a polymorphism was identified in exon 1, which women with the autoimmune connective tissue disease scleroderma . In disrupts the predicted open reading frame of the ΔMYCN isoform. order to investigate a similar potential role of X inactivation in MS, we Taken together these results demonstrate that multiple aspects of early compared the X inactivation pattern in 125 female MS patients (aged embryogenesis, postnatal brain growth and tumorigenesis in humans 22-53, median 39 years) with a control group consisting of 117 blood are tightly regulated by dosage of canonical MYCN protein and that donors (age 19-55, median 38 years) . The MS patients were divided heterozygous disruption of ΔMYCN is not associated with any obvious into two subgroups according to disease course; primary progressive phenotypic abnormalities . (PP, n=17) or relapsing remitting (RR, n=108, including 24 females with a secondary progressive course) . We found no difference in the P0768. Evidence of instability of intermediate number of median degree of skewing between PP patients (median 60%), RR ctG repeats in DMPK in a Norwegian kindred with myotonic patients (median 64%) and controls (median 65%)(p= 0 .46 median dystrophy test) . The frequency of skewed X inactivation (>80%) was higher in K. Bjørgo, M. Kroken, K. Eiklid, B. Paus; the PP patients (23 .5%) compared to the RR patients (14 .8%) and Dept. of Medical Genetics, Oslo, Norway. controls (12.0%), but the difference was not statistically significant. We We here report on a kindred descending from eight sibs with no clinically conclude that X chromosome inactivation pattern does not seem to be recognized muscular dystrophy . One sister suffered from cataract since more skewed in MS patients than in controls and does not explain the the age of 40 and one brother died unexpectedly of cardiac arrest at skewed female to male frequency ratio of MS . the age of 67 . Mild muscular symptoms came to attention in the next generation and were diagnosed as fibromyalgia, except one case with P0766. congenital myasthenic syndrome (cms): A review of recognized myotonic dystrophy, where a confirmational Southern blot molecular Genetic Analysis to date analysis indicated 130-500 CTG repeats in one DMPK allele . The A. Jani1, D. Beeson2, S. Man1, P. J. Clouston1, A. Seller1; affected patient had a grandchild with a severe juvenile form . One 1Genetics Laboratories, The Churchill, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Neuroscienc- daughter of the cataract patient developed myotonic dystrophy in the es Group, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom. presence of a relatively low number (53-61) of CTG repeats . Of the Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes (CMS) are a group of clinically and offspring of the patient with cardiac arrest, which could represent a genetically heterogeneous conditions caused by defective transmission phenocopy, four individuals underwent molecular testing . All of them at the neuromuscular junction, resulting in fatigable muscle weakness . exhibited an allele with only 40 CTG repeats in DMPK . It has been Identification of the causative mutations is important for clinical and established that myotonic dystrophy is caused by DMPK alleles with family management . more than 50 CTG repeats, while the normal number is 5-37 repeats . The Oxford Myasthenia centre, supported by the National Specialist Intermediate numbers of CTG repeats between 38 and 49 has been Commissioning Advisory Group (Department of Health) provides a considered stable, although rare . The study of this kindred suggests National Clinical and Genetic service for the diagnosis of CMS . Full that an allele with 40 CTG repeats only has been able to expand, and mutation screening is offered for the genes encoding the α, β, δ and that anticipation resulted in a severe phenotype in two generations ε subunits of the acetylcholine receptor (AChR), rapsyn, choline only and a severe juvenile form after another two generations . We acetyltransferase (ChAT) and the collagen-like tail subunit (ColQ) . Our conclude that the so-called intermediate number of CTG repeats must strategy involves clinical assessment followed by targeted mutation be considered potentially unstable, and that this has consequences for screening by dHPLC WAVE™ and sequencing . Functional analysis to genetic counseling . determine pathogenicity of novel mutations is also available . To date we have received 334 referrals, 247 of which are affected probands . Pathogenic changes have been found in 19% (47 cases, of which 8 are novel mutations). In addition 56 confirmation tests and 49 carrier tests have been performed . We will present a review of data, including a breakdown of the numbers, types and outcomes of referrals, produced to date .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 6 P0769. Identification of entire LMX1B gene deletions in nail France, 5LENA, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 6Service de Pé- patella syndrome: Final evidence for haploinsufficiency as the dopsychiatrie, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France. main pathogenic mechanism underlying dominant inheritance The importance of extracellular proteases and their inhibitors is well in man documented in several human diseases (hemophilia B, alpha-1- E. M. H. F. Bongers, I. J. de Wijs, H. van Bokhoven, C. Marcelis, L. H. Hoefs- antitrypsin deficiency, serpinopathies). loot, N. V. A. M. Knoers; Neurotrypsin belongs to the subfamily of trypsin-like serine proteases . Dept Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijme- It was localized in the presynaptic membrane and the presynaptic gen, The Netherlands. active zone of central nervous system synapses . Neurotrypsin is Nail patella syndrome (NPS) is an autosomal dominant disorder expressed in the cerebral cortex, the hyppocampus and the amygdala, characterised by nail and skeletal malformations, nephropathy, and suggesting a role in learning, memory and emotion . glaucoma . Phenotype studies of Lmx1b-/- mice revealed nail and Neurotrypsin (PRSS12) mutation is associated with autosomal patellar anomalies similar to human NPS, which contributed to the recessive mental retardation . To date, seven patients from three identification of mutations in the LIM-homeodomain encoding LMX1B consanguineous families who are all originally from the same area of gene as the genetic defect . It is as yet unclear why heterozygous LMX1B Eastern Algeria have been identified with the same mutation (4-base mutations cause NPS in humans, whereas Lmx1b heterozygous mice pair deletion in exon 7 of the PRSS12), suggesting a founder effect in are completely normal. The hypothesis that haploinsufficiency is the this population . main mechanism underlying dominant inheritance in human NPS is Clinical examination revealed impaired voluntary saccadic eye- based on the fact that the same phenotypic variability is observed in movements in the horizontal and vertical direction whatever the nature individuals with LMX1B missense, nonsense, frameshift or splice-site of the stimulation (visual, auditory, somesthesic . Ophthalmological mutations and that the range and severity of symptoms varies both examination including FO and ERG was unremarkable . Ocular within and between families . This assumption is supported by the movement recording has ruled out ocular motor apraxia . lack of any dominant-negative effect observed by in vitro experiments Intrafamilial clinical expression of neurotrypsin mutation is variable . studying missense and truncation LMX1B mutations . By MLPA However, we can distinguish 2 clinical pictures: one is characterized analysis with specific probes for the different exons 1-8 of LMX1B, by severe mental retardation, absence of language and autistic we found a deletion of the entire gene in two unrelated individuals features, the other one by moderate global mental retardation without with NPS and a deletion of exons 3-8 in another patient from a series autistic features . Further investigations will be required to objective of 3 classic NPS families (3/8; 38%) in which no mutation could be abnormalities of voluntary eye-movements in these patients . detected by sequencing LMX1B . The phenotype of these individuals is comparable with our previously reported families in which LMX1B P0772. mutated NLGN4 in a family with mental retardation, missense mutations were identified. Further characterisation of the size autism and mood disorder of the deletions is presently being performed. This first identification S. Silverstein, B. Glick, I. Lerer, M. Zeigler, D. Abeliovich, V. Meiner; of entire LMX1B deletions strongly confirms the hypothesis that Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel. haploinsufficiency is the principal pathogenic mechanism of NPS. Neuroligin 4 (NLGN4) belongs to the neuroligin family made up of neuronal cell-surface proteins located in synaptic structures and mostly P0770. Phenotype-genotype correlation in patients with enriched at excitatory synapses . NLGN4 mutations were previously Netherton syndrome associated with mental retardation and susceptibility to x-linked autism . W. Lissens1, S. Seneca1, K. Keymolen1, I. Liebaers1, M. Schmuth2, P. M. Elias3, We examined 6 siblings of which 3 males (ages 9 - 14 years) were J. Hachem4,3; affected with mental retardation and autistic features and one female 1Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Vrije Universiteit Brussel, (16 years) was diagnosed to have behavioral problems and suspected Brussels, Belgium, 2Dermatology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, mood disorder . The familial co-segregation of mental retardation and 3Dermatology Research, UCSF, San Francisco, CA, United States, 4Dermatol- autistic features in males supported an X linked inheritance . Molecular ogy, University Hospital Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. analysis was performed using markers (DXS1060 and DXS 996) Netherton syndrome (NS) is an autosomal recessive disorder spanning the NLGN4 site located at Xp22 .33 . Following suggestive characterized by congenital ichthyosis and severe atopic NLGN4 linkage, we screened the entire coding sequence of this gene manifestations. A specific hair shaft defect (‘bamboo hair’) is diagnostic and identified a missense mutation N515S. This NLGN4 mutation was for the disease . The genetic defect in NS is caused by mutations in present in the 3 male sibs with mental retardation and autism and also the SPINK5 gene that encodes a serine protease inhibitor LEKTI in their sister who presented with behavioral and mood disturbances, (lympho-epithelial Kazal-type related inhibitor) . The phenotype of the yet not in two additional healthy sibs . Screening 100 chromosomes of patients can vary considerably in severity, and can fluctuate over time healthy individuals from a similar ethnic background did not detect this in individual patients . The aim of the work presented here is part of an mutation . It may be proposed that not only types of autism and mental effort to correlate the clinical phenotype of our patients with NS with retardation but also mood disorders may share a common genetic their genotype . origin . Familial occurrence of autism and mood disturbances should To this end, the 33 exons, and flanking parts of the introns, were PCR direct to NLGN4 as a predisposing genetic factor. These findings may amplified and sequenced. In six of the eight patients studied, two lead to better understanding of molecular pathways and possibly to mutations could be identified in each patient, a result that is expected development of more specific treatment modalities. for an autosomal recessive disease . Four of these are homozygotes, probably because of consanguinity of the parents: two carry a P0773. NOD2/cARD15 nonsynonymic single nucleotide nonsense mutation, one patient a frameshift mutation and one a splice polymorphisms in Russian patients with crohn‘s disease site mutation . The other 2 patients are compound heterozygotes for E. V. Stepanova1, O. A. Schagina2, I. D. Loranskaya1, A. V. Polyakov2; two splice site mutations, or for a splice site and a frameshift mutation . 1Russian medical academy for post-graduate education, Moscow, Russian Fed- In the two remaining patients only one (a splice site mutation) or no eration, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. mutation could be found . Phenotypic data are being collected from There are two clinical subtypes of inflammatory bowel disease these patients, and these data will be compared to the type and (IBD): Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), which differ position of the mutations present . from each other by morphological criteria . CD has a strong genetic component, with a lifetime risk of 10-20% for IBD development . Several P0771. Phenotype associated with neurotrypsin mutation: a nonsynonymic single nucleotide polymorphisms of NOD2/CARD15 preliminary report gene (16q21) have been shown to be associated with susceptibility A. Philippe1, N. Boddaert2, M. Iba-Zizen3, M. Rio4, M. Masure5, M. Barbeau6, D. to CD . Cohen6, F. Molinari1, A. Munnich1, L. Colleaux1; The DNA samples from 51 unrelated patients with CD and 54 1INSERM 781, Paris, France, 2Service de Radiologie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants population controls from Russia were investigated for NOD2/CARD15 Malades, Paris, France, 3Service de Neuroradiologie, Hôpital des Quinze-Vingt, gene SNPs: P268S, R702W, G908R and ins3020 C . Paris, France, 4Service de Génétique, Hôpital necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, The allele frequency for 268S was 0,57 among CD patients and 0,44 among population group (p>0,05) while for 702W it was 0,29 in patients Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 6 and 0,02 in population (p<0,0003); for ins3020 C it was 0,49 and 0,08 the molecular diagnostic have confirmed CMT1A diagnosis. respectively (p<0,00001) and allele 908R was reviled with frequency The DNA testing for the CCD is in progress . 0,08 in affected group and was absent in population . We suggest that P268S substitution is not significant for CD manifestation but all other P0776. Novel phenotypic variant of the OctN2 V295X mutation SNPs may be important for disease development . L. Magyari1, K. Horvatovich1, J. Bene1, K. Komlósi1, É. Nemes2, B. Melegh1; Twenty five from fifty one (49%) of CD patients had at least one potential 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, disease-causing polymorphism, whereas only 5 from 54 population Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Pediatrics, Medical and Health Science Center, persons had it (p<0,000001) . Double or more predisposition alleles University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. in homozygous or compound heterozygous status were found in 22% In a previous paper we reported two non-consanguineous Hungarian (11/51) affected patients but did not reviled in population . Roma (Gypsy) children who presented with cardiomyopathy and decreased plasma carnitine levels (Melegh et al; Am J Med Genet P0774. contiguous deletion of the NDP, MAOA, MAOB 2004;131:121.). Homozygous deletion of 17081C of the SLC22A5 and EFHC genes in a patient with Norrie disease, severe gene was detected that resulted in a frameshift at the R282D and psychomotor retardation and myoclonic epilepsy lead ultimately to a premature stop codon in the OCTN2 high affinity L. Rodriguez-Revenga1, I. Madrigal1, L. Alkhalidi2, L. Armengol3, E. González3, carnitine transporter (V295X) . In both families sudden infant death C. Badenas1, X. Estivill3, M. Milà1; syndromes were also documented . In a two year old male Roma 1Servei de Bioquímica i Genetica Molecular. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, patient presented with hepatopathy resembling to urea cycle defect 2Department of Health and Medical Services, Rashid Hospital, Dubai, United we detected the same mutation; there was also sudden death in this Arab Emirates, 3Genes and Disease Programme, Centre for Genomic Regula- family. Taking into consideration that this mutation was already verified tion, Barcelona, Spain. in two large families, the recognition of the mutation in a further family Norrie disease (ND) is an X-linked disorder, inherited as a recessive suggest a wide ancestral spread of it in certain Roma subpopulations . trait that, therefore, mostly affects males . The gene responsible for In addition, identification of a novel phenotypic variant associated with ND, called NDP, maps to the short arm of chromosome X (Xp11 .4- the homozygous deletion of 17081C of the SLC22A5 gene shows p11 .3) . We report here an atypical case of ND, consisting of a that various clinical manifestations can be presented similar to other patient harbouring a large submicroscopic deletion affecting not SCL22A5 mutations . only the NDP gene but also the MAOA, MAOB and EFHC2 genes . Microarray comparative genomic hybridisation analysis showed that P0777. molecular genetic analysis of ornithine transcarbamylase eleven consecutive bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones deficient twins. , mapping around the NDP gene, were deleted . These clones span G. R. Nagy1, C. Largiader2, B. Nagy1, Z. Bán1, Z. Papp1; a region of about one megabase (Mb) on Xp11 .3 . The deletion was 1I. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, Buda- ascertained by fluorescent in situ hybridisation analysis with different pest, Hungary, 2Institut für Klinische Chemie, Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland. BAC clones located within the region . Clinical features of the proband Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) locus is located in the short include bilateral ocular atrophy, microcephalia, severe psychomotor arm of X-chromosome. The deficiency of the enzyme is the most retardation without verbal language skills acquired, and epilepsy . The common inborn error of the urea cycle caused by a vast number of identification and molecular characterization of this case reinforces point mutations, deletions and insertions in the respective gene . The the idea of a new contiguous gene syndrome that would explain the most common form of the disease occurs as hyperammonaemic complex phenotype shared by atypical ND patients . (FIS 04/1126, encephalopathy . The patient is a 32 years old asymptomatic V2003-REDC-07, REDG-098) woman, who had four spontaneous abortions before . She became a monozygotic twin pregnant spontaneously . Because of inevitable P0775. molecular diagnosis of the neuromuscular diseases in preterm delivery she gave birth to male twins, who died because of Latvia hyperammonaemic state . We took a liver biopsy post mortem from the N. Pronina, O. Olhovaya, Z. Daneberga, Z. Krumina, I. Balode, L. Kornejeva, second boy . Following DNA isolation, it was examined by polymerase R. Lugovska; chain reaction (PCR) amplification of all 10 exons of the OTC gene Latvian State Children`s University Hospital; Medical Genetics Clinic, Riga, including exon-intron boundaries and subsequent single strand Latvia. conformation polymorphism analysis . The amplimer of exon 8 revealed Neuromuscular disorders are diseases that affect the neuromuscular an aberrant migration pattern and was further analyzed by DNA components: the nerve root, the peripheral nerve, the neuromuscular sequencing . The results indicated a new homologous point mutation junction and the muscle . of codon 253 (GCA to ACA), which causes replacement of Ala by Thr . In Latvia DNA testing is available for the 3 most common neuromuscular We also took her blood sample, isolated the DNA with Roche High disorders: X-linked Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), spinal Pure PCR Template Preparation kit and analyzed the DNA sample by muscular atrophy (SMA) and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT1A) . PCR amplifying and sequencing of the exon 8 of the OTC gene . The The molecular diagnosis of Central core disease (CCD) is in DNA sequence data showed that the mother is a carrier of the same progress . mutation that was previously detected in the case of her son . We are Following methods are used for the DNA testing: multiplex PCR, PCR planning preimplantation genetic diagnosis in the next pregnancy . and restriction enzyme digestion, fluorescent PCR. DMD is X-linked muscular dystrophy, primarily affecting voluntary P0778. consortium for Osteogenesis imperfecta mutations: muscles, caused by the absence of dystrophin, protein associated Lethal regions in the helical portion of type i collagen chains with the sarcolemma in skeletal and smooth muscle . Three patients align with collagen binding sites for integrin and proteoglycans from 13 referred to the molecular diagnostic were confirmed for the J. C. Marini1, A. Forlino1, W. Cabral1, A. Barnes1, J. San Antonio2, S. Milgrom1, DMD diagnosis . J. Hyland3, J. Korkko3, D. Prockop3, A. DePaepe4, P. Coucke4, F. Glorieux5, P. SMA is an autosomal recessive genetic disease caused by deficiency Roughley5, A. Lund6, K. Kuurila7, D. Cohn8, D. Krakow8, M. Mottes9, U. Schwar- of a motor neuron protein (SMN) . ze10, J. Troendle1, R. Dalgleish11, P. Byers10; 59 patients suspected of having SMA were analysed . Eighteen from 1NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2T. Jefferson U., Phila., PA, United them (35,5%) lacked both copies of SMN1, and 6 (10,2%) - both States, 3Tulane U., New Orleans, LA, United States, 4U. Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, copies of SMN2 . Two prenatal samples from the heterozygous patients 5Shriners Hospital, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 6Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Den- showed the presence of at least one copy of SMN1 . Other patients mark, 7Vaasa Hospital, Vaasa, Finland, 8Cedars-Sinai, Los Angeles, CA, United have no confirmed diagnosis of SMA, but need the quantitative States, 9U. of Verona, Verona, Italy, 10U. Wash., Seattle, WA, United States, 11U. analysis of SMN gene-copy number also as patients with both lacked Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. SMN2 copies . To explore genotype-phenotype relationships between mutations in CMT type 1A is an autosomal dominant neurological disorder that type I collagen genes (COL1A1 and COL1A2, encoding α1(I) and causes damage to the peripheral nerves, carrying signals from the α2(I) chains, respectively) and Osteogenesis Imperfecta, we identified brain and spinal cord to muscles . Eight patients from 13 referred for 832 independent mutations, of which 682 (80%) result in substitution Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 6 for glycine residues in the helical domain and 150 alter splice the controls and PD patients were detected for 4 SNPs from 3 genes sites . Glycine substitutions on either chain that have greater than 5 (serotonin 2A receptor, Wolfram syndrome 1, proopiomelanocortin recurrences are almost always associated with CpG residues . Distinct genes) . Two SNPs in POMC gene were also associated with different genotype-phenotype relationships emerge for each chain . One-third clinical forms of PD . Our data suggest that at least three genes involved of α1(I) glycine substitutions are lethal, especially residues with a in neurotransmitter systems may have more specific role in genetic charged or branched side chain. Substitutions in the first 200 residues predisposition to PD . are non-lethal and have variable effect thereafter, unrelated to folding or helix stability domains . Two exclusively lethal regions (691-823 and P0781. Analysis of exon deletions and duplications in PARK2 910-964) align with Major Ligand Binding Regions, suggesting crucial gene by taqman Real-time PcR method in patients with early- interactions of collagen monomers or fibrils with integrins, MMPs, onset Parkinson disease from Russia fibronectin and COMP. Mutations in COL1A2 are predominantly non- E. Semenova1, M. Shadrina1, G. Bagyeva2, S. Moskovskaya1, P. Slominsky1, S. lethal (80%) . Lethal substitutions are located in 8 regularly spaced Illarioshkin2, S. Limborska1; clusters along the chain, supporting a regional model . The lethal regions 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Rus- align with proteoglycan binding sites along the fibril, suggesting a role sian Federation, 2Department of Neurogenetics, Institute of Neurology, Moscow, in fibril-matrix interactions. Unlike α1(I), recurrences at the same site Russian Federation. in α2(I) are generally concordant for outcome. Splice site mutations Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative in COL1A1 are rarely lethal; they often lead to frameshifts and the disorder . Increasing evidence suggests that genetic factors play an mild OI type I phenotype. In α2(I), lethal exon skipping events are important role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease (PD) . To date, located in the carboxyl half of the chain . These genotype-phenotype genetic analyses have detected linkage to eleven chromosomal regions relationships indicate that the two collagen chains play very different and have identified seven causative genes. Early-onset Parkinson roles in matrix integrity and that phenotype depends on intracellular disease (EOPD) may be associated with different mutations in PARK2 and extracellular effects . gene, from point mutations to complex rearrangements including deletion and/or multiplication of complete exons . Exon rearrangements P0779. PANK gene mutations in patients with progressive occur with the rate from 33% to 66% of the total amount of mutations neurodegeneration in PARK2 gene. It is therefore a question of scientific interest and A. Krepelova1, A. Zumrova1, K. Pavlikova1, T. Marikova1, M. Kyncl1, M. Ad- necessity to develop a new cost-efficient, sensitive and fast method amovicova2, M. Havlova3; of detecting exon rearrangements . In the present study, we applied 1University Hospital Motol and 2nd Medical Faculty, Prague, Czech Republic, TaqMan Real-time PCR method to analyze and assess the frequency 2Faculty Thomayer Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 31st Medical Faculty, of deletions and duplications in PARK2 gene . We selected primers and Prague, Czech Republic. probes for exons 2-12 and examined 63 EOPD patients from Russia Pantothenate kinase associated neurodegeneration (PKAN; MIM (age of onset less than 50 years) for exon deletions and duplications . 234200) is a rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder Exon rearrangements were detected in 14% of the EOPD patients in characterized by progressive extrapyramidal dysfunction, retinopathy, exons 2-7, being most frequent in exons 3 and 4 . The results of our difficulties with speech, and cognitive decline. The accumulation of iron work let us presume that this method can be applied to mass screening in basal ganglia and their degeneration are detectable by magnetic of deletions and duplications in PARK2 gene in patients with Parkinson resonance imaging (MRI) as a sign called ,,eye of tiger“ . Numerous disease . mutations in the gene encoding pantothenate kinase-2 (PANK2) were identified in patients with PKAN. Four homologous pantothenate P0782. PARK2 mutations in patients with early-onset kinase genes were identified in the human genome, PANK1-4, but up Parkinson’s disease in Russia. to now, only PANK2 and PANK4 have been shown to code for proteins S. N. Pchelina1,2, A. F. Yakimovsky1, O. N. Ivanova1, N. M. Hanina2, A. K. Eme- with pantothenate kinase activity . In some patients, linkage of the lianov1, A. L. Schwarzman2; disease to the PANK2 locus at 20p13 was excluded . To identify the 1St.Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, S.Petersburg, Russian Federa- molecular cause of the disease and to confirm the diagnosis of PKAN tion, 2Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, S. Petersburg, Russian Federation. at the molecular level, we performed DNA sequencing of the coding Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease region of the PANK2 gene in patients suffering from progressive with unknown ethiology and a complex interaction of genetic and neurodegeneration accompanied by the typical ,,eye of tiger“ sign on enviromental factors . Mutations in the parkin gene (PARK2) have been MRI. We studied fourteen patients from eleven families and identified identified as a relatively common cause of early-onset PD (EOPD) (age mutations on both alleles in eight patients from seven families . In total, of onset before 50), especially in cases with a positive family history with we detected eight different mutations . Two mutations were already an autosomal recessive mode of transmission . The aim of the present described: GeneBank AF494409: c .1561G>A (p .Gly521Arg), and work was to identify mutations in the PARK2 gene in Russian EOPD c .1583C>T (p .Thr528Met) . Six mutations were novel, observed only patients (ethnic Slavic) and to study genotype-phenotype correlations . in the Czech population: c .515_527del13 (pVal172fsX29), c .845_ Using multiplex PCR, SSCP analysis, sequencing and quantitative 847del3 (p .Leu282del), c .805G>A (p .Glu159Lys), c .1235+5G>A, real-time PCR with TaqMan probes we searched for PARK2 mutations c .1369G>T (p .Asp457Tyr), and c .1630G>T (p .Gly544Trp) . We did not in 40 patients with EOPD (age of onset 45±6 .2 years) . Polymorphism find any PANK2 gene mutations in the remaining six patients . This can S167N have been identified in two patients and different mutations A be explained by genetic heterogeneity of the disease . man with heterozygous A334C substitution in functional region of parkin Supported by MZO 00064203 . was characterized by early onset of disease and by weak response to L-dopa treatment . A woman with disease onset at 44 years has exons P0780. Association study of sporadic Parkinson’s disease 8,9 deletion, disease progression was fast with good response to L- genetic risk factors in patients from Russia by APEX technology dopa . The deletions of exons 7, 10 and delition of exon 9 were found M. Shadrina1, T. Nikopensius2, P. Slominsky1, S. Illarioshkin3, G. Bagyeva3, E. in two women with slow PD progression and onset of disease 45 and Markova3, I. Ivanova-Smolenskaia3, A. Kurg2, A. Metspalu2, S. Limborska1; 50 years, respectively . The allelic localization of described mutations 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of remains to be determined . The frequency of PARK2 mutation carriers Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of Neurology, Moscow, is 10% with a wide variation in the clinical PD presentation . Russian Federation. Most patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) have sporadic form of the disease with a multifactorial etiology due to interactions between environmental conditions and the genetic constitution of the individuals . We have analyzed by APEX technology 50 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 19 genes related to cholecystokinin, serotonin, dopamine and opioid neurotransmission . Significant differences in the allele and genotype frequencies between Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 P0783. investigation of polymorphisms in coding region Frequencies of normal alleles (see Table) slightly differ from average of Human mitochondrial DNA in 20 Persian patients with date in European populations, but not significant (χ2 =0,05; p>0,8) and Parkinson’s disease reveals more similarly with Germany and France (0,676/0,324) . The K. Gharagozli1, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi2, F. Fasahat3,2, M. Houshmand2, F. level of observed heterozygosity in population of Moldova is 0,33, but Mirzajani2; the average date in European countries is 0,37 . The distribution of 1Department of neurology, Loghman Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, mutant PKU alleles in our study not differs significantly from those 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Institute for Genetic engineering and observed in European (χ2=0,20; p>0,08) and Asian (χ2=0,95; p>0,08) Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Khatam University, Tehran, populations. The Bgl II alleles in our populations had a significant Islamic Republic of Iran. difference in the distribution among normal and mutant chromosomes Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder clinically (χ2=9,22; p<0,01). Frequency of informative cases by RFLP-analysis of characterized by bradykinesia, rigidity and tremor . The etiology of Bgl II alleles from PKU families is 28% that provide a tool for molecular idiopathic PD is currently undefined and most PD cases are sporadic. diagnosis of these disease and carrier status in Republic of Moldova . Numerous findings have contributed to identifying possible mitochondrial table. Distributions of Bgl II alleles at the PAH gene involvement in the pathogenesis of PD . In order to identify polymorphic Allele Normal mutant χ2 sites and potential genetic background accounting for PD and to test the hypothesis that mtDNA variations contributes to PD expression in E1 0,716±0,038 0,284±0,038 9,22; Persian population, the complete region of ND1, tRNALeu, ND2 and E 0, 873±0,030 0,127±0,030 p<0,01 16s rRNA of mtDNA from 20 unrelated PD patients were evaluated . 2 The sequences were aligned upon the revised Cambridge Reference P0786. cellular responses to PHOX2B polyalanine aggregates Sequence (rCRS) and any incompatibilities were recorded single base associated with congenital central hypoventilation syndrome substitutions (SBS), insertions and deletions (Indels) . 9 polymorphisms T. Bachetti1, S. Parodi1, S. Borghini1, A. Robbiano1, M. Di Duca1,2, P. Bocca3, I. were identified in this study which had not been already reported Prigione3, I. Matera1, R. Ravazzolo4,5, I. Ceccherini1; in the mitochondrial databases . Our study suggests that mtDNA 1Ist. G. Gaslini, Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Genova, Italy, 2Ist. G. mutations may corroborate the idea that the mitochondrial oxidative Gaslini, Lab. di Fisiopatologia dell’Uremia, Genova, Italy, 3Laboratorio di On- phosphorylation pathway is involved in the susceptibility to idiopathic cologia - Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 4Ist. G. Gaslini, Laboratorio PD and could contribute, together with nuclear gene mutations and di Genetica Molecolare, Genoa, Italy, 5Dip. di Pediatria e CEBR, Università di environmental factors, to the pathogenesis of PD . Genova, Genova, Italy. Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) is a P0784. Functional analysis of pelota during the cell cycle neurocristopathy characterized by absence of adequate control B. Buyandelger, L. Ebermann, M. Sallam, I. Adham, W. Engel; of breathing, especially during sleep, with decreased sensitivity to Institute of Humangenetics, Goettingen, Germany. hypoxia and hypercapnia . Mutations in the PHOX2B gene, encoding Mutation in either the Drosophila pelota (Pelo) or the S. cerevisiae for a paired box homeodomain transcription factor required for the homologe, dom34 cause defects of spermatogenesis and oogenesis correct development of the autonomic nervous system, have been in Drosophila, and delay of growth and failure of sporulation in yeast . associated with the vast majority of CCHS patients . In particular, in a Both phenotypes suggest a requirement of Pelo for normal progression set of 60 CCHS patients we have identified 91,7% PHOX2B mutations, of the mitotic and meiotic cell cycle . To explore the function of Pelo in including 49 alanine expansions, 5 frameshift mutations and one mammals, we have disrupted the mouse Pelo gene and shown that the truncated protein . The correlation between length of the alanine gene is essential for mouse embryonic development . Development of expanded tracts and severity of CCHS respiratory phenotype has homozygous embryos arrests about 6 .5-7 .5 days after conception . The been confirmed by length-dependent decrease in the transcriptional failure of ICM and survival of trophoblast in Pelo-/- blastocysts indicate activation of PHOX2B target genes and length-dependent cytoplasmic that the lethality of Pelo is due to defect cell proliferation . Increase PHOX2B retention with formation of aggregates . of polyploidy at E7 .5 can be directly responsible for the arrested In order to understand further the molecular mechanisms underlying development and suggests that Pelo is required for the maintenance the effects of PHOX2B polyalanine expansions, we have set up of the genomic stability . Approaches to establish Pelo-/-cells failed experiments aimed at assessing the fate of cells characterized by to detect a Pelo deficient cells. These results suggest that Pelo is PHOX2B polyalanine aggregates . In particular, we have observed that essential for cell viability and cellular proliferation. Using Pelo specific the activation of heat shock response by the drug geldanamycin is antibody, we found that Pelo is associated with cytoskeleton . Western efficient both in preventing formation and in disassembling PHOX2B blot analysis revealed the presence of Pelo is in the cytoskeleton and polyalanine aggregates in COS-7 cells expressing PHOX2B-GFP fused membrane-fractions but not in nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions . proteins . Moreover, we have observed that inhibitors of the ubiquitin- These results demonstrate a possible role of Pelo in cytoskeleton proteasome pathway and autophagy, two mechanisms responsible organization and cell motility . Using yeast-two hybrid system, we for the maintenance of protein balance, increase percentage of cells identified several putative interaction partners of Pelota which are characterized by PHOX2B polyalanine aggregates, suggesting their associated with the cytoskeleton . To overcome the early embryonic involvement in degradation of PHOX2B misfolded proteins . Finally, as lethality of the Pelo deficient mice, generation of conditional knock-out proteins carrying polyalanine expanded tracts are prone to cell death, mice is underway . we are investigating toxicity due to mutant PHOX2B aggregates . P0785. Distribution of Bgl ii alleles at the phenylalanine P0787. mutations in the non-duplicated region of the PKD1 gene hydroxylase gene in Republic of moldova in families with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease A. P. Gavriliuc1, A. Jacota2; in czech Republic 1National Centre of Reproductive health & Medical genetics, Chisinau, Republic J. Stekrova1, J. Reiterova1,2, J. Zidovska1, M. Merta2, M. Kohoutova1; of Moldova, 2Institute of Genetics, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, General Teaching Hospital and 1st Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Nephrology caused by phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency. The structural Dept., General Teaching Hospital of 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, gene, located at chromosomal band 12q22-24, comprises 13 exons Prague, Czech Republic. spread over 90kb of genomic DNA . The complete 2,4kb cDNA (Kwok, Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most 1985) can be used to detect eight different RFLPs located within the common hereditary renal disease . The disease is caused by mutations PAH locus . of PKD1 (affecting roughly 85 % of ADPKD patients) and PKD2 (14 Genomic DNA was extracted and examined by standard procedures % of ADPKD patients) genes, though in several ADPKD families the from 59 families with classical PKU, i .e . 236 parental chromosomes . PKD1 and/or PKD2 linkage was not found . PCR amplification of 290 bp fragment near from 1 exon and RFLP- PKD1 locus (MIM 601313) was linked to the short arm of chromosome analysis were performed as described previously by Dworniczak 16, at 16p13 .3 and so far 266 different germline mutations have been (1991) . reported . PKD2 locus (MIM 173910) was localized to 4q13-23 and Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 73 different germline mutations were identified. Patients with PKD Alanine stretches (AS) are common in all proteomes studied with 2 mutation have milder clinical course in comparison with PKD1 the longer stretches being found in mammals . AS are coded by patients . degenerated codons (GCN) and characterized by rapidly evolving The direct detection of mutations in the non-duplicated region of the nucleotidic sequences with high rates of expansions and contractions: PKD1 gene was performed in 90 nonrelated individuals ; in 32 families the longer and more pure the sequence, the higher the length the disease was clearly linked to PKD1 gene and in 58 patients with polymorphism of the AS in the population . These genic sequences are end stage renal failure earlier than in 50 years. An affected member frequent in transcription factors and have recently been proposed as from each family was analyzed using denaturing gradient gel facilitators of evolution . electrophoresis (DGGE) . Samples which exhibited shifted bands on Hitherto, polyalanine expansions and contractions have been DGGE were sequenced in both directions . . We detected 19 mutations ascribed to 9 human diseases, either autosomal dominant or X-linked . in 21 families/individuals; 16 mutations unique for Czech population. Considering both that : i) AS are coded by mixed (GCN)n codons and, We identified 8 nonsense mutations, 6 missense mutations, 2 ii) that transmission over generations is stable, a polymerase slippage frameshifting mutations and 3 mutations in splice site . mechanism is unlikely . A mechanism of unequal allelic homologous Establishment of localisation and type of mutations and their genotype recombination has thus been proposed . Worth noting, expansions - phenotype correlation in ADPKD families will improve DNA diagnosis have been identified in asymptomatic parents for 3/9 disease causing and could help to assess the clinical prognosis of ADPKD patients genes namely HOXD13, ZIC2 and PHOX2B for which mutations Supported by the grant projects IGA MZ CR NE/7633-3and VZ MSMT account for synpolydactyly, holoprosencephaly and congenital central 0021620806 hypoventilation syndromes respectively . In the latest case, 5% of the asymptomatic parents from our series harbor an alanine expansion in P0788. mLPA analysis for the detection of exonic deletions in the their leucocytes . We tested carrier parents either by cloning the PCR PAH gene causing phenylketonuria fragment when a heterozygous SNP was present or by QMPSF . We L. R. Desviat, B. Perez, M. Ugarte; show that, as speculated, carrier parents are somatic mosaics for the Centro de Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain. mutation . However, instead of the 3 alleles (wild-type, expansion and Multiplex ligation probe amplification (MLPA) is a novel, sensitive and contraction) expected according to the mutational model, only 2 are time and cost efficient strategy for molecular diagnosis of diseases observed in mosaic parents (wild-type and expansion) . Therefore, involving deletions or duplications of large genomic regions . In an alternative mutational model to generate alanine expansions and phenylketonuria (PKU), most of the mutant alleles correspond to contractions will be proposed . missense mutations, and large deletions have been scarcely identified. In this study we report for the first time the use of MLPA analysis in P0791. Polycystin-2 regulates cellular proliferation in a p21/ PKU patients to detect exonic deletions . A total of 24 PKU patients with cdk2-independent manner an incomplete genetic diagnosis were subjected to MLPA analysis . K. N. Felekkis1, P. Koupepidou1, E. Kastanos1, N. Gretz2, L. Tsiokas3, C. Del- The technique identified two different large genomic deletions in the tas1; phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene, of 6,6 Kb and 1,9 Kb and 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Medical Research Center, Klinikum including exons 3 and 5, respectively, which were not detected by Manheim, University of Heidelberg., Manheim, Germany, 3Department of Cell standard mutation analysis methods . The chromosomal breakpoints Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, were established by long-range PCR and chromosomal walking, United States. corresponding to mutations c .169-4951del6604ins8 and c .442- Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is one of 1556del1881, and confirming the involvement of repetitive sequences the most common inherited disorders, characterized by progressive in each deletion (Alu sequences and simple repeats, respectively), cyst formation and loss of kidney function . ADPKD is principally as reported for other genomic deletions causing disease . The results linked to two genes, PKD1 and PKD2 . The pathogenesis of renal show that MLPA can complement routine mutation screening in PKU cyst formation is currently thought to involve dysregulated epithelial patients, although, in the sample studied, exonic deletions in the PAH cell proliferation and differentiation, alteration in membrane proteins gene do not appear to be a frequent cause of PKU . polarity and abnormal fluid accumulation. The molecular mechanism of cystogenesis originating from mutations in these two genes has P0789. Association of the gene polymorphism of platelet not been fully elucidated . A recent report implicated polycystin-2 in glycoprotein ibα in acute myocardial infarction the regulation of epithelial cell proliferation. Specifically, the authors T. Cora1, H. Acar1, M. Tokac2, Z. Inan1, A. Soylu2; suggested that PC2 over-expression suppresses cell proliferation 1Selçuk University, Department of Medical Genetics, konya, Turkey, 2Selçuk through inhibition of the p21/Cdk2 pathway . To better understand the University, Department of Cardiology, konya, Turkey. role of PC-2 in epithelial cell proliferation, we utilized various cellular Thrombosis at the site of atherosclerotic plaque rupture is a prominent models generated by stable expression of mutated (R742X and 1-702) feature in acute coronary syndromes and in vessel wall injury after and wild-type PKD2 . In contrast to the previous data, over-expression coronary intervention . The glycoprotein (GP) Ib-IX-V receptor of wild-type or mutated polycystin-2 in two different cell-lines does complex contains 4 polypeptides, GP Ibα, GPIbβ, GPIX, and GPV. not affect cellular growth . Interestingly, primary renal epithelial cells GP Ibα, which is the largest one, plays a crucial role in this process from transgenic rats generated by expression of the 1-702 PKD2 have by mediating platelet adhesion by binding von willebrand factor at the elevated levels of the proliferation markers, PCNA and c-myc . However, site of the vessel wall lesion. We studied 540 subjects; 378 patients in both primary cells and stable cell lines, wild -type or mutated PC- who underwent coronary angiography had myocardial infarction (MI) 2 do not alter p21 levels and Cdk2 activity . Collectively, these data and 162 were healthy normal subjects based on noninvasive tests . We suggest that in our models, PC-2 regulates epithelial cell proliferation genotyped to determine the association of the -5T/C polymorphism in a p21/Cdk2-independent manner . In addition, these results highlight of the platelet glycoprotein GPIbα with the potential risk factor for the fact that inactivation of PC-2 is probably not the only factor involved MI. In this study, we present the association of clinical findings and in the abnormal proliferation observed in cystic epithelial cells . genotypes of the patients compared with the control data . The present findings showed no significant association between the genotype of P0792. Polymorphisms of the catalase gene (cAt1) in the the platelet glycoprotein GPIbα gene and MI, but evaluation of the development of occupational chronic bronchitis GPIbα genotype might be valuable in clinical condition of patients with L. Akhmadishina1, G. Korytina1, S. Mingazova2, A. Bakirov2, T. Victorova1; atherosclerotic vascular disease and MI . 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Occupational Medicine and Human Ecology, Ufa, Rus- P0790. Revisiting the mutational model leading to polyalanine sian Federation. repeat expansions and contractions Oxidative stress has been suggested to play an important role in the D. Trochet, L. de Pontual, B. Keren, A. Munnich, S. Lyonnet, J. Amiel; pathogenesis of occupational chronic bronchitis . Catalase together Département de Genetique et Unite INSERM U-781, Hôpital Necker, Université with other antioxidant enzymes constitutes a primary defense against Paris 5, Paris, France. oxidative stress . In this study, we investigate the possible association Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  of the catalase (CAT 1) 1167 T/C and -262C/T polymorphisms in the Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is characterized by partial deficient development of occupation chronic bronchitis . activity of hepatic uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase enzyme (UROD) The study group consisted of 135 patients with occupation chronic with hepatic and cutaneous manifestations . The enzymatic defect of bronchitis from Republic Bashkortostan, Russian Federation . In the UROD alone is not sufficient to provoke clinical symptoms of PCT. control, the DNA samples from 299 unrelated healthy individuals Various factors such as xenobiotics, alcohol, hormones and hepatitis were tested . PCR-RLFP method was used to detect catalase alleles . infections are known to induce PCT . Cytochrome P450 enzymes are Statistical analysis of the results was carried out with Statistica v . 6 .0 known to be involved in the metabolism of porphyrogens and therefore program . might have an important role on the pathogenesis of PCT . No significant difference has emerged from the comparison of either The aim of the study is to determine the frequency of the CYP1A2 C/A genotype or allele frequencies for the catalase gene 1167 T /C polymorphism in intron 1 and polymorphisms in promoter (C1/C2) and polymorphism . The frequency of C allele -262C/T polymorphism was intron 6 (D/C and 1/2) regions of the CYP2E1 gene . significantly higher in patients (81.48% compared to control 75.0%, The 117 PCT patients studied were divided into Familial-PCT, which χ2=3.99, p=0.05). A single base substitution C/T at position -262 are associated with mutations in the UROD gene and decrease have been found characterized higher expression of the catalase . erythrocyte UROD activity, and sporadic-PCT who exhibited normal Thus, catalase C allele significantly increased the risk for developing UROD activity in erythrocytes . The rare familial occurrence of sporadic- occupational chronic bronchitis in exposed workers (OR=1 .47, PCT was classified as Type III-PCT. For the study PCR-RFLP analysis CI=1 .01-2 .14) . In conclusion, the catalase -262C/T polymorphism, were carried out for the patients and 150 healthy volunteers . perhaps, have dramatic role in the pathogenesis of lung diseases, Preliminary results support the idea that the “A” CYP1A2 allele could particularly occupational lung disorders . be a susceptibility factor for the development of PCT . P0793. the importance of the Genes, Responsible for P0796. PPARα induces cardiomyogenesis during differentiation Xenobiotics’ Biotransformation in the Development of of mouse Es cells by utilization of a Reactive Oxygen species Reproductive Pathology in Women (ROs) dependent mechanism G. Iskhakova, T. Victorova; F. Sharifpanah1, M. Wartenberg2, H. Sauer1; Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. 1Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Justus-Liebig University, Gies- There was held an analysis of polymorphism of the genes responsible sen, Germany, 2Department of Cell Biology, GKSS Research Center, Teltow, for xenobiotics’ transformation (CYP1A1, GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1) Germany. in women with reproductive pathology (primary infertility, secondary Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARα, -γ and -δ) infertility and usual miscarriage) and in the screening group . Among are nuclear receptors involved in transcriptional regulations of lipid the patients there was detected a significant rise of the deletion metabolism. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of PPARα frequency of GSTT1 gene, compared with the results of the screening in cardiomyogenesis during the differentiation of mouse embryonic group (35,9% and 19,5% respectively, χ²=9,77; p<0,003; OR=2,3). In stem (ES) cells derived embryoid bodies (EBs) . When EBs were the group of patients with a secondary infertility the deletion frequency treated with PPARα agonists (WY14643, GW7647 and Ciprofibrate) of GSTT1 gene was 38,2%, while in the patients with an infertility after a significant increase in cardiomyogenesis was observed. In contrast, medical abortion it was 43,8% . In women with a secondary infertility the PPARα antagonist ,MK886, decreased the number of beating foci. the frequency of a mutant allele of the GSTP1 gene was 11,8%, and The effect of the PPARα agonists was abolished when EBs were pre- this was much higher than the control level, which was equal to 3,4% incubated with the free radical scavengers Vitamin E (trolox) and N- (χ²=4,36; p<0,04; OR=3,92). (2-mercapto-propionyl)-glycine, indicating the involvement of reactive oxygen species (ROS) . Furthermore, we observed an increase in P0794. Pompe disease ROS when EBs were treated with PPARα agonists, and consequently L. Komeilian, S. Saber, B. Hooshiar kashani, T. Majidizadeh, M. Rostami, M. a decrease in intracellular ROS when EBs were treated with MK886 . Houshmand; The effect of PPARα agonists on intracellular ROS was attenuated by National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- NADPH-oxidase inhibitor DPI, indicating the involvement of NADPH lamic Republic of Iran. oxidase. In summary our data indicate, that PPARα stimulation induces Glycogen storage disease type 2, also known as Pompe disease or cardiomyogenesis in ES cells using a pathway that involves ROS and acid maltase deficiency (AMD), is genetically transmitted through NADPH oxidase . autosomal recessive inheritance. It is caused by a deficiency of acid a-D- glucosidase, a glycogen-degrading lysosomal enzyme . P0797. Analysis of a group of probands with Prader-Willi and The enzyme catalyses complete hydrolysis of glycogen by cleaving Angelman syndromes by the ms-mLPA method a-1 , 4 and a 1, 6 glycosidic linkages at acid PH liberating glucose G. Calounova, A. Krepelova, M. Havlovicova, L. Apltova, P. Goetz; to cytoplasm for reutilization . The loss or diminution of GAA activity Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics University Hospital Motol and 2nd results in lysosomal glycogen accumulation in almost all body tissues School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. with cardiac and skeletal muscle affected .Based on clinical symptoms Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes (PWS and AS) are two distinct and the age of onset, such defects divided into 3 clinical types: neurogenetic disorders caused by loss of function of imprinted genes infantile, juvenile and adult forms . Muscle weakness is a prominent in 15q11-q13 . The loss of expression of these genes results from feature in all forms . Although in the infantile form, the rapid build up various mechanisms: deletion of the critical region, uniparental disomy, of the glycogen in muscle tissues causing sever muscle weakness, imprinting defects or gene mutation . hypotonia, cardiomegaly, respiratory involvement, difficulty feeding and First, we studied 27 patients with PWS and 17 patients with AS, death during the 1st or 2nd age of old, in late-onset disease progression previously confirmed by microsatellite, FISH and methylation analysis and death usually results from respiratory failure .Pompe disease is by a new method, Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent caused by mutation in the (GAA) gene . The GAA gene is located on Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA). In the PWS group we confirmed all chromosome 17q25 .2-q25 .3 . 19 deletions, 5 uniparental maternal heterodisomies, 2 uniparental Prenatal Diagnosis :determination of GAA in cultured amniotic cells maternal isodisomies, and one case with an imprinting defect . In or CVS, the group of 17 AS patients we confirmed all 16 deletions and one clinical tests:Enzyme activity test,Enzyme level (ck,Ast,Alt) , (EMG), uniparental paternal isodisomy . X-Ray, (ECG) ,Iscmic forearms test Next we studied using MS-MLPA 5 additional new patients, 4 PWS and 1 AS, and we revealed 2 cases with uniparental maternal disomies, P0795. Association of cYP1A2 and cYP2E1 polymorphisms and 2 cases with uniparental maternal isodisomies, and 1 case with susceptibility to overt Porphyria cutanea tarda (Pct) uniparental paternal isodisomy . M. Martínez-Fresno1, N. Henriques-Gil1, M. C. Garrido2, T. Perucho-Alcalde1, We also applied the MS-MLPA method to two cases with marker M. García-Bravo2, M. Méndez2, A. Fontanellas2, R. Enríquez de Salamanca2; chromosome 15 and an Angelman-like phenotype . We detected three 1Lab. Genética. Universidad San Pablo CEU, Monteprincipe Madrid, Spain, alleles, two methylated and one unmethylated, in both cases . 2Centro de Investigación. Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain. The new MS-MLPA method is robust and highly useful for the detection Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  of copy number changes and methylation status in the critical PWS/AS (Noonan syndrome, NS; LEOPARD syndrome, LS) or contributing to region . The method is helpful and sensitive to distinguish between leukemogenesis, depending on the specific amino acid substitution. deletions and uniparental disomy or imprinting defects in suspected On the basis of previously gathered genetic and biochemical data, we PWS/AS probands, and also to detect supernumerary marker proposed a model that splits NS- and leukemia-associated PTPN11 chromosomes in the 15q11 .1-q12 region . mutations into two major classes of activating lesions with differential This work was supported by grants GAUK 61/2004 and MZO- perturbing effects on development and hematopoiesis . To test this 00064203 . model, we characterized biochemically a panel of SHP-2 mutants recurring in NS (T42A, A72S, T73I, E76D, E139D, I282V, N308D and P0798. RPGR mutation in the patient with overlapping RP and M504V) and leukemia (A72V and E76K), and performed molecular PcD symptoms disrupts transport of the inner dynein arm dynamic simulations to determine the structural effects of selected component into the cilium mutants (A72S, A72V, E76D and E76K) . Our results demonstrate that M. Geremek1,2, E. Zietkiewicz1, S. Amselem3, C. Wijmenga2, H. Omran4, M. NS-causative mutations have less potency for promoting SHP-2 gain- Witt1,5; of-function than do leukemia-associated ones . Simulations provide, for 1Institute of Human Genetics, Div. of Molecular and Clinical Genetics, Poznan, the first time, direct evidence supporting the hypothesis that mutations Poland, 2Complex Genetics Section, DBG-Department of Medical Genetics, leading to strong basal activation, as observed among the leukemia- University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Institut National associated mutants, perturb the interaction between the N-SH2 and de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U. 654, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Créteil, PTP domains, and describe the molecular interactions leading to the France, 4Pediatric Neurology and Muscle Disease, University Children’s Hos- displacement of the N-SH2 loop from the PTP active site . Biochemical pital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 5International Institute of Molecular and Cell data demonstrate that the recurrent LS-causing Y279C and T468M Biology, Warsaw, Poland. amino acid substitutions engender loss of SHP-2 catalytic activity, Retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator (RPGR) protein has been identifying a previously unrecognized behaviour for this class of localized to photoreceptors connecting cilia of rods and cones and in missense mutations and suggesting that these mutants interfere with the transitional zone of cilia . Mutations in the RPGR gene on Xp21 .1, normal SHP-2 function by a dominant negative mechanism . Finally, responsible for 70% of the X-linked retinitis pigmentosa (RP), have a classification of mutations based on the predicted role of affected been reported to be associated with retinitis pigmentosa, hearing loss, residues is presented . and bronchosinusitis . Recently, a mutation in RPGR has been reported in a family with overlapping phenotypes of the X-linked RP and primary P0801. mutational analysis of LmNA and ZmPstE24 in restrictive ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). Here, we analyzed the coding sequence and laminopathy intron/exon boundaries of the RPGR in a large Polish RP/PCD family . M. S. Wehnert1, T. D. Nguyen1, C. Bethmann1, I. Hausser2, B. Albrecht3; A missense mutation (G52R) found in the last nucleotide of RPGR 1Institute of Human Genetics, D-17487 Greifswald, Germany, 2Dermatological exon 2 is an example of an exonic mutation disrupting the splicing Clinic, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Institute of Human Ge- process and leading to exon skipping. Immunostaining with fluorescent netics, University of Essen, Essen, Germany. detection was performed on epithelial cells from nasal brushing . Restrictive dermopathy (RD) is characterized by intrauterine growth Predictably, RPGR was not present in the transitional zone of cilia in retardation, tight and rigid skin with erosions, prominent superficial the patient . Another antibody, targeting a component of inner dynein vasculature, and epidermal hyperkeratosis, as well as bone arms, revealed defect of those structures in patient’s cilia . These mineralization defects, arthrogryposis, characteristic facial features, results indicate that RPGR plays an important role in the transport of preterm delivery and early neonatal death . As in Hutchinson-Gilford inner dynein arms components into the cilium . Defect of this process syndrome (HGPS) - a laminopathy caused by mutations in LMNA - may cause overlapping symptoms of X-linked RP and PCD . unprocessed prelamin A can be detected in cells and tissues of RD patients . Thus RD was shown to be caused by mutations in LMNA P0799. molecular analysis of the cPY1B1 gene in primary or ZPMSTE24 (FACE1) coding for a zinc metalloprotease, which is congenital glaucoma in a sample of mexican patients involved in the post-translational processing of prelamin A to mature O. Messina, L. Gonzalez, R. Rivera, S. Kofman, S. Cuevas; lamin A (Navaro et al . 2004) . In the present study, we conducted a Hospital General de Mexico, Fac. de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D,.F., Mexico. mutational analysis of LMNA and ZMPSTE24 in six unrelated RD Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), an autosomal recessive disorder families . No mutations were found in LMNA . But three pathogenic DNA due to abnormal development of the anterior eye portion, is an important changes could be identified in ZMPSTE24. One of the three mutations cause of childhood blindness . The principal molecular defect in most was the common previously described mutation c .1085-1086insT of PCG subjects occurs in the CYP1B1 gene, which is also expressed leading to a frame shift, which results in a non-functional truncated in the anterior chamber angle of the eye . CYP1B1 enzyme is able to peptide p .I362fsX380 (Navarro et al . 2005) . Two novel mutations metabolize steroid hormones and participates in tissue development . In c .209_210delAT and c .50delA were found in two unrelated patients, the present study, we analyze the CYP1B1 gene of 25 non-related and putatively resulting also in a frame shift with the consequence of non- sporadic and/or familial cases with PCG . Onset of clinical symptoms functional and even more truncated ZMPSTE24 peptides p .S70fsX73 ranged from birth to 12 months (mean 4 .5 months), the male:female and p .S17fsX37 . The novel mutation c .50delA was combined with the ratio was 10:4 while ocular findings were similar in all patients except common mutation c .1085-1086insT as a compound heterozygote in for two cases of difficult control. Consanguinity was observed in 3 a German family . The novel homozygous mutation c .209_210delAT families . DNA sequencing analysis of the CYP1B1 gene showed occurred in a consanguineous Turkish family . In the four other unrelated no missense or nonsense mutations in 21 cases, only polymorphic German families, the homozygous mutation c .1085-1086insT led to changes similar to those observed in normal controls were found . We RD . observed four novel mutations in the rest of cases . These data allow conclude that most cases with PCG are not consequence of mutations P0802. Analysis of the role of the NR2E3 (Nuclear Receptor) in the CYP1B1 gene in our population, at least in the analyzed sample . gene in Retinal Dystrophies This analysis is very important in diagnosis and genetic counseling of S. Bernal1, L. De Jorge1, T. Solans1, A. Bruix1, C. Ayuso2, M. Baiget1; PCG in this population . 1Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain. P0800. structural and functional consequences of germline and Mutations in the NR2E3 gene are associated with various retinal somatic PtPN11 mutations on sHP-2 function diseases: Enhanced S-cone Syndrome, Goldmann Favre Syndrome S. Martinelli1, L. Stella2, G. Bocchinfuso2, E. Flex1, B. D. Gelb3, A. Palleschi2, and clumped pigmentary retinal degeneration . The involvement of the M. Tartaglia1; Nr2e3 gene in non-syndromic ARRP without clumped pigmentation 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Università “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, has been documented in only one family . 3Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States. The purpose of this report was to evaluate the involvement of the Mutations in the protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN11/SHP-2 are NR2E3 gene in Spanish patients with different types of retinal implicated in different human diseases, causing developmental disorders dystrophies: 96 ARRP patients, 4 cases with a clinical diagnosis of Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  retinoschisis without mutations in the XLRS-1 gene and 3 patients with in silico simulations of the wild type, G90V and G90D variants of RHO . Goldmann Favre Syndrome . The overlay of the three RHO structures showed different distortions The coding regions of the NR2E3 gene were scanned for mutations of amino acid 90 in variant G90D and G90V . Furthermore, the aspartic using SSCP and direct sequencing methods . acid side chain in the G90D shifts the opposing oxygen of Leucin 112 . Fourteen sequence variants were identified. Of these changes, six Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first description of two different were interpreted as mutations (absence in controls and segregation phenotypes associated with mutations at the same amino acid position with the disease within the family) . 4/6 changes are novel: One in RHO . Our data suggest that even small structural changes in RHO frameshift mutation (c .1034_1038del5bp) and three different amino influence the human phenotype. acid changing variants, one of which is located in DNA binding domain (p .S44L) and the other 2 changes remaining within the ligand binding P0805. KCNH: a good candidate for the cardiac phenotype domain (p .G287S and p .K324R) in the NR2E3 protein . We have also observed in Rett syndrome. identified the missense substitution (p.R311Q) and the single splice- F. Ariani1, A. Bozzato2, F. Mari1, I. Meloni1, E. Scala1, M. Acampa3, G. Hayek4, site change (c .119-2 A>C) described previously . M. Zappella4, G. Borsani2, A. Renieri1; We detected 3 rare variants that include two novel changes, one 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Department of Biomedical Sciences and Bio- of which is the synonymous codon change (c .195 C>T or p .N65N) technology, Brescia, Italy, 3Department of Clinical Medicine and Immunological and the other change involves a deletion of three base pairs in the Sciences, Siena, Italy, 4Child Neuropsychiatry, Siena, Italy. 3’UTR region . The c .245+8 C>T change reported previously as Rett syndrome (RTT) is one of the most common genetic causes of non-pathogenic was also found . Several polymorphic variants were mental retardation in girls . Patients may survive into adulthood, but observed in NR2E3 gene . their life expectancy is reduced and the incidence of sudden death is greater than in the general population . Possible causes include P0803. mutation analysis of RHO gene in patients with cardiovascular anomalies . MECP2 mutations are found in up to 90% nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa from Bashkortostan of classic RTT cases . Given that MeCP2 is a transcriptional repressor, E. R. Grinberg, L. U. Dzhemileva, E. K. Khusnutdinova; we decided to study MECP2 mutation consequences on gene Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. expression . For this aim, we selected three classic RTT patients with Retinitis pigmentosa (RP), the hereditary degenerative disease of the early truncating mutations and balanced X-inactivation . We isolated photoreceptor neurons of the retina, represents the most prevalent RNA from lymphoblasts of patients and three healthy controls and we cause of registered blindness among those of working age in developed performed gene expression profiling experiments on the two pools of countries . The prevalence of RP in the US and Europe is approximately samples . We used cDNA microarrays containing 19 .200 DNA spots from 1/3500 to 1/4000 . It can be inherited as an autosomal dominant, from human cDNA clones. We identified 75 up-regulated and 81 down- autosomal recessive, or X-linked recessive disorder . In the autosomal regulated genes . Among the down-regulated genes, we focused our dominant form (adRP), which comprises about 25% of total cases, attention on KCNH2, encoding the voltage-gated potassium channel approximately 30% of families have mutations in the gene encoding the alfa-subunit underlying Ikr, a current essential for human ventricular rod photoreceptor-specific protein rhodopsin. More than 90 different repolarization . KCNH2 mutations are found in patients with Long- rhodopsin point mutations have been identified, affecting 1 in 3500, QT syndrome, a heart disease associated with sudden death due to or an estimated 2 million people worldwide . The RHO gene maps to ventricular arrhythmias . Previously, our group and others observed that human chromosome 3q21, consists of 5 exons . We have carried out electrocardiographic evidence of cardiac repolarization abnormalities, mutations screening of this gene by SSCP-metod with further direct such as prolongation of QT interval, is common in RTT individuals . sequencing . We analyzed 5 exons of RHO gene in 119 unrelated All three patients involved in the array experiments show significantly patients with RP and their relatives and 77 unaffected individuals longer QTc values . Considering these data, KCNH2 seems to be a from Bashkortostan . Patients were examined clinically and with visual good candidate for RTT cardiac phenotype . Experiments are ongoing function tests. We have identified sequence change IVS3+4c→t, and in order to identify possible correlations between the type of MECP2 its frequency more in patients (0 .36) than in controls (0 .1) . There were mutation and KCNH2 expression levels . statistically significant differences in allele and genotype frequencies at this locus in affected patients with RP and in controls . So, according P0806. the MECP gene mutation screening in Rett syndrome to our data, this polymorphism is likely to be pathogenic . Also we patients from croatia analyzed poly (CA)n polymorphism Mfd2CA of RHO gene and revealed T. Matijevic1, J. Knezevic1, I. Barisic2, V. Culic3, J. Pavelic1; 14 allelic variants. Alleles 116 and 132 are significantly more frequent 1Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Bos- in patients than in controls . kovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital Zagreb, University of Zagreb, Medical School, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Department of P0804. Different Rhodopsin mutations at the same amino acid Medical Genetics, Pediatric Clinic, Clinical Hospital Split, Split, Croatia. position lead to distinct phenotypes in patients. Rett syndrome is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder J. Neidhardt1, D. Barthelmes2, F. Farahmand1, J. C. Fleischhauer2, W. Berger1; almost exclusively affecting females and is usually sporadic . Mutations 1Div. Medical Molecular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, University of Zurich, in MECP2 gene have been found in more than 80% of females with Switzerland, 2Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Zurich, Swit- typical features of Rett syndrome . In this study, we analyzed 15 zerland. sporadic cases of Rett syndrome . In 7 of 15 patients (47%), we detected Purpose: To characterize the functional and clinical consequences of a pathogenic mutations in the coding parts of MECP2 fourth exon . We novel rhodopsin (RHO) mutation in comparison to a known pathogenic found two missense (T158M, R133C), two nonsense (R168X, R270X), variant at the same amino acid position . two frameshift mutations (P217fs and a double deletion of 28-bp at Methods: 38 retinitis pigmentosa (RP) patients were screened for 1132-1159 and 10-bp at 1167-1176) and one in-frame deletion (L383_ mutations in RHO by direct sequencing . Patients were characterized E392del10) . According to our knowledge, the last two mutations have clinically using visual acuity testing, slit lamp examination, fundoscopy, not been reported yet . We also detected one previously described Goldmann perimetry, dark adaptometry, and ERG recordings (ISCEV polymorphism (S194S) . In conclusion, these results show that fourth standard) . Structural analyses of the RHO protein were performed with exon should be the first one analyzed because it harbors most of the the Swiss-Pdb Viewer program . known mutations . Moreover, mutation-negative cases should be further Results: We identified a novel RHO mutation (G90V) in a three analyzed for gross rearrangements. This is the first study of this kind in generation Swiss family . No additional mutation was found in this Croatia and it enabled us to give the patients an early confirmation of family in four other genes associated with RP . The clinical picture is Rett syndrome diagnosis . compatible with RP . Interestingly, a different amino acid substitution at the same position in RHO, G90D, leads to night blindness instead of RP by constitutive low-level activation of the phototransduction cascade (Sieving et al ., 1995) . To elucidate whether the different amino acid substitutions have specific effects on the 3D structure of RHO, we did Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P0807. Novel MECP2 mutations identified in patients from located on the chromosome 20 in this syndrome . The genes KCNQ2 southern italy with Rett syndrome (potassium voltage-gated channel KQT-like protein 2) and CHRNA4 F. L. Conforti, R. Mazzei, A. Magariello, A. Patitucci, T. Sprovieri, C. Ungaro, A. (neuronal nicotinic acethycholine receptor alpha4 subunit) both L. Gabriele, M. Muglia; involved in other form of epilepsy are two serious candidate genes . A Institute of Neurological Science CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy. mutation or a deletion in these two genes on the r(20) could explain The Rett syndrome, a childhood neurodevelopmental disorder almost the phenotype of epilepsy . To undertake this study, we need to release exclusively affecting females, is caused by mutations in the methyl- from the mosaicism . A microdissection laser system was used to CpG-binding protein 2 gene (MECP2) located at Xq28 . Previous isolate the ring chromosome . For a patient, about twenty r(20) were studies carried out in patients coming from southern Italy divided into collected in the same tube. Next, whole genome amplification followed classical Rett, variant RTT and patients with Rett-like features, revealed by specific polymerase chain reactions (PCR) on the candidate genes mutations in MECP2 in most of the patients with classical and variant were performed . After having demonstrated that the sample contained RTT, 73% of all the mutations were common mutations and other 27% only the r(20), using microsatellite markers, the two genes were were rare mutations (Conforti et al, Am J Med Genet A .,2003) . By the sequenced . So, this technique of microdissection can be a solution to additional studies to confirm the diagnosis of RTT, we report here two study other pathologies associated with a mosaicism . novel MECP2 mutations (N126Y and S134P) responsible for classical RTT . The missense mutation N126Y involves a well conserved P0810. molecular investigation scA in 26 patients suspected to aminoacid residue in MECP2 across species . It is considered to be scA in iran associated with the clinical phenotype, since it is located at the methyl- S. Saber, M. Rostami, M. DehghanManshadi, B. Hooshiar kashani, M. Banoie, binding domain and other pathogenic mutations were detected around M. Houshmand; the site . The second new mutation S134P is a missense mutation National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- resulting from a nucleotide substitution of T to C; furthermore, it is a lamic Republic of Iran. de novo mutation involving a conserved residue in the MBD of MECP2 More than 20 types of SCA have been described . These types are gene . In addition to determine the role of X Chromosome Inactivation given numbers (1-22, excluding the number 9) . (XCI) in phenotypic variability of Rett patients, we also evaluated XCI All types of SCA are characterized by a progressive incoordination using the AR methylation assay . Our data indicate that a random and of walking . They are often associated with poor coordination of hand a skewed XCI (90%) occurred in the patients carrying the S134P and movments, eye movments, and speech . With some exceptions, the the N126Y mutations respectively . onset of symptoms usually occurs after the age of 18 .SCA is slowly progressive M .R .I and C .T of affected persons often show shrinkage P0808. mEcP2 mutation detection in Rett patients from czech or atrophy of cerebellum . and slovak Republics Most common of SCA is SCA3 (21%), SCA2 and SCA6 (15%) D. Zahorakova, A. Baxova, J. Zeman, P. Martasek; SCA 1 (6%) and SCA7 (5%) respectively . Department of Pediatrics, 1st School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, The genetic change that causes SCA types 1,2,3,6,7,12 and 17 is Czech Republic. called a CAG repeat expantion . Background: Rett syndrome (RTT), primarily affecting females, is an We checked these types of SCA in our lab with PCR analysis across X-linked neurodovelopmental disorder with a frequency of 1:10,000- the CAG region of the SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA6, and SCA7 genes 1:15,000 . RTT is caused by mutations in the MECP2 gene encoding to determine allele sizes . methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 . So far, a wide variety of mutation types We checked 28patients refer to our lab for detection of these types have been reported including missense, non-sense mutations, small of SCA by molecular technique . 13 patients were normal repeat size deletions/insertions and large rearrangements of the MECP2 gene . for these types of SCA and 4 patients were expanded repeat size (2 We present the mutation screening of the MECP2 gene in 92 girls with patients SCA3, 2 patients SCA62 and patients SCA2) . 9 patients have RTT from Czech and Slovak Republics . intermediate repeat size . After detection of normal repeat, we checked Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood other hereditary ataxia . Then, we proved AT for 2 patients by molecular leukocytes . The whole coding sequence and exon/intron borders of technique . the MECP2 gene were amplified and analyzed by direct sequencing Type ChromosomeNormal repeat sizeExpanded repeat size and RFLP . ,,Mutation-free“ cases were examined by multiple ligation- dependent probe amplification (MLPA). SCA 1 6p23 6-36 39-83 Results and discussion: Mutation analysis revealed 27 different point SCA 2 12p24 15-31 34-220 mutations and small deletions/insertions and 2 large deletions in 63 patients (68 .4%) . 33 patients had missense mutation, 17 patients SCA 3 14q24 .3-q32 12-40 55-86 had nonsense mutation, 9 carried frame-shift mutation (including SCA 6 19 4-18 21-33 6 deletions, 1 insertion and 1 insertion/deletion) and 1 had in frame deletion . MLPA analysis revealed the deletion of exon 3 and 5`end SCA 7 3p12-p21 .1 4-19 37-300 of exon 4 in one patient and the deletion of exon 4 near STOP codon in another patient. Our results confirm the high frequency of MECP2 P0811. marked genetic anticipation in spinocerebellar Ataxia 2 mutations in females with RTT and provide data concerning the and Huntington Disease. New insights on phenotypic variability mutation heterogeneity in the Slavonic population . in autosomal dominant neurodegenerative diseases Supported by grants IGA MZ 8355-3 and GAUK 8/04 . A. K. Abd El-Aleem; National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt. P0809. Use of a microdissection laser system to study the CAG expansion is the causative mutation in a heterogeneous group of possible involvement of some genes in the ring chromosome 20 hereditary neurodegenerative disorders . It is widely reported that the epilepsy syndrome size of the repeats is inversely correlates with the disease age of onset . E. Masson1,2, M. Audrezet1,3, P. Latour4, C. Férec1,3; We present Egyptian families with SCA 2 and Huntington Disease, in 1INSERM U613. Génétique moléculaire et génétique épidémiologique, BREST, whom marked genetic anticipation can not be only explained on the France, 2Universié de Bretagne occidentale, Brest, France, 3Centre hospitalier basis of CAG repeats number . In the SCA2 family, the proband, who Universitaire, génétique, Brest, France, 4Centre hospitalier Universitaire, neuro- is a boy is presented as early as 2 years of age with delayed mile- logie, Nantes, France. stones, upper extremities tremors and dystonic movement of limbs . Ring chromosome 20 (r(20)) is a rare chromosomal anomaly always Molecular analysis of his SCA2 gene revealed a CAG expansion of 75 associated with typical and intractable epilepsy . This epilepsy syndrome repeats . His affected mother, who manifested at the age of 22, died is characterized by a ring chromosome mosaicism : the percentage of before being examined . Neonatal onset of SCA2 has been reported cells carrying r(20) varied in a cell line . Currently, no large deletions before with 62 repeats, which is still lower than repeats detected in our on the ring chromosome 20 have been found by cytogenetics . The proband. In one of our HD families, the amplified HD allele passed from aim of this work is to reveal the possible involvement of some genes the mother with a limited further expansion to one son only, out of her Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 6 four offsprings . The interesting feature in this maternal transmission is RT-PCR reactions were performed in a LightCycler® Instrument the marked anticipation in the age of onset with more than 10 years (Roche) using SYBR Green I fluorescence dye. Housekeeping advance in appearance of symptoms in her son, in spite of the limited glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), ciclophilin-A difference in HD allele size . We report here on the potential presence and β2-microglobulin (β2M) genes were used as endogenous control of certain brain related biomarkers that can modify expression and genes to normalize the results . The statistical analysis was performed effect of mutated polyglutamine proteins and hence promote variability using the relative expression software tool (REST©) . in disease age of onset, and mimics the situation currently proven in High real-time PCR efficiencies were obtained for the seven genes another age-related neurodegenerative disease; Parkinson’s disease. analysed, between 1 .75 and 1 .92 . The results obtained after normalization with GAPDH expression data agree with those obtained P0812. A Point mutation At the calreticulin Gene core Promoter with ciclophilin-A but not with β2M, suggesting that the β2M gene is conserved sequence in a case of schizophrenia not suitable for normalization of the target genes data . Our preliminary M. Ohadi1, A. Aghajani1, H. Najmabadi1, A. Rahimi2, F. Fadai3, A. Ebrahimi4; results showed no statistical difference in gene expression of the four 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation genes analysed between groups suggesting that the expression of Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Sina Hospital Psychiatric Center, these nuclear-encoded mitochondrial enzymes are not transcriptionally Hamedan Medical Sciences University,, Hamadan, Islamic Republic of Iran, regulated in severe sperm impairment . 3Razi Psychiatric Center, Shahr-e-Ray,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Sina Supported by: FIS (PI02/0120, CP03/00088), Red de Centros ISCiii Hospital Psychiatric Center, Hamedan Medical Sciences University, Hamadan, (C03/07) Islamic Republic of Iran. Exposure to atypical antipsychotic drugs such as valproate increases P0815. study of the spatial Pattern of Expression of the Spp the expression of chaperones that assist in the folding of proteins in Gene in mouse Liver Using a Non-isotopic In Situ Hybridisation the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) including calreticulin, GRP78/BiP, method GRP94, and PD1 . This neuroprotective role may be involved in the H. Khorram Khorshid1, R. Dalgleish2; pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia 1Genetic Research Centre, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of and bipolar disorder. The 5’-flanking region of the human calreticulin Genetics, Leicester, United Kingdom. gene was screened in 100 cases of schizophrenia by PCR/SSCA Secreted phosphoprotein 24 (spp24) is a member of cystatin between -485 and +1 basepair (bp) relative to the transcription start superfamily and was first identified in cattle as a minor component site . A G>C point mutation was detected at -48 in a case of paranoid of cortical bone. Subsequently it was identified as a component of schizophrenia, which was not detected in 280 unrelated control subjects the fetuin-mineral complex . In the original study, using northern blot (560 chromosomes). This is the first report of mutation in relation with analysis, the expression of the gene (Spp2) was demonstrated in bovine the calreticulin gene . The -48G>C mutation creates a CpG site at the bone periosteum and liver . We assessed the pattern of expression of core promoter region. The role of this mutation remains to be clarified spp24 in human and mouse tissues . In human, using hybridisation of in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia . a full-length spp24 cDNA probe to a human multiple tissue expression (MTE) mRNA array, the strongest hybridisation was identified in adult P0813. Identification of X linked gene for Severe Combined liver and kidney . In mouse, using an RT-PCR method, expression Immunodeficiency in irainain patients was detected in liver, kidney, brain and diaphragm . Because the gene S. kasraie1, S. Etemad Ahari1, M. Moin2, Z. Poorpak2, M. Houshmand1; is expressed at the highest level in all three species in liver, it was 1National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islam- decided to assess its spatial expression in mouse liver using a non- ic Republic of Iran, 2Immunology, Asthma & Allergy Research Institute (IAARI), isotopic in situ hybridisation method . The expression of spp2 in mouse Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. liver was demonstrated most strongly in: Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is a syndrome of • Hepatocytes across the liver, but with prominent expression especially profoundly impaired cellular and humoral immunity . In humans, SCID adjacent to vessels around the portal vein . is most commonly caused by mutations in the X-linked gene IL2RG, • Endothelial cells . which encodes the common chain, c, of the leukocyte receptors for In addition lower levels of hybridisation suggestive of expression of interleukin-2 and and multiple other cytokine receptors, including those spp24 were detected in: for IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, and IL-15 . Without bone marrow transplantation • Artery smooth muscle cells . (BMT), affected patients suffer severe and persistent infections, often • Connective tissues around the vessels, especially around the portal with opportunistic pathogens, and generally die in infancy . Although vein . both X-linked recessive and autosomal forms of SCID are recognized, The gene is not detectably expressed in polymorphonuclear cells the X-linked form is the most frequent . Patients with X-linked SCID (neutrophils) that were present in the tissue sections . generally have very low numbers of T cells and natural killer (NK) cells, These findings could help us understand the function of spp24 whereas B cells are often found in relatively high numbers even though protein . specific antibody responses are deficient We want to investigate the frequency and variety of X-linked that P0816. characteristation of mouse Dactylaplasia mutations, a cause SCID in Iranian patient that no one work on it and we want to model for human ectrodactyly sHFm3 analyze Exon 3,4,5 and find the mutation.according to that we can M. Friedli1, F. Spitz2, R. Lyle3, C. Wyss1, D. Duboule2, S. E. Antonarakis1; design prenatal diagnosis kit . 1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Ge- neva Faculty of Sciences, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Norwegian Institute of Public P0814. succinate Dehydrogenase and citrate synthase gene Health, Oslo, Norway. expression in idiopathic infertility of testicular origin SHFM3 is a congenital limb malformation affecting the hands and feet . S. Bonache1, X. Muñoz1, O. Rajmil2, J. J. Martinez1, L. Bassas2, S. Larriba1; It is caused by an ~500kb duplication at 10q24 . Subsequent work from 1CGMM-IRO-IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain. our laboratory narrowed the minimal duplication to a 325kb segment Sperm cell concentration in the ejaculate has been correlated with the containing two genes . Dactylaplasia (Dac) is a similar inherited limb nuclear-encoded [Succinate Dehydrogenase (SDH)/ complex II and malformation in mice and is thus a model for human SHFM3 . Sidow citrate synthase (CS)] mitochondrial enzyme activities (Ruiz-Pesini et et al reported two alleles, Dac1J and Dac2J, mapping in the region al ., 2000) . From these data, we postulate that the enzymatic expression syntenic with the duplication in SHFM3 . Dac1J is an insertion of a should be decreased in severe sperm impairment and investigate if transposon upstream of Fbxw4 and was sequenced, while the exact this decrease could be a consequence of gene expression variation . molecular lesion in Dac2J has not yet been characterized . Here, we By means of a quantitative real-time PCR we have determined the report mapping and sequencing of Dac2j by inverse PCR and show expression pattern of SDHB, SDHC, SDHD and CS gene in testicular that it is caused by insertion of an early transposon, similar to the Dac1j biopsies of 14 infertile men with a phenotype of non-obstructive allele . Interestingly, this mutation occurs within a highly conserved azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia (<5 million sperm per ml) element that may represent a regulatory sequence . The two Dac and 13 infertile men with obstructive azoospermia as controls . The insertions are ~50kb apart . We tested for duplication of the region in Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  Dac mice, since this is the mutation mechanism in human SHFM3 . 2Service d’ORL et de Chirurgie Cervico-Faciale, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Quantitative PCR on genomic DNA with assays covering the genomic AP-HP, Paris, France, 3INSERM U587, Unité de génétique des déficits sen- locus failed to identify any copy number differences between either soriels, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, 4Service de pédiatrie, endocrinologie Dac mutant and wild-type littermates . Both the human and mouse infantile, Hôpital Jean Verdier, AP-HP, Bondy, France, 5Service de Génétique phenotypes seem to be caused by a disruption in the normal gene Médicale, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 6Unité de Génétique expression patterning in limb bud development, but the mechanisms Médicale, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France. are not known . Complementary approaches in both human SHFM3 The gene SLC26A4 encodes a chloride/iodide and chloride/formate and mouse Dac will be important in identifying the causative genes transporter implicated in various forms of human hereditary hearing and uncover the regulatory mechanisms involved in gene expression impairment . in this region . Mutations of SLC26A4 were first identified in Pendred Syndrome by Everett in 1997, and have since been further associated with the non- P0817. Beta Globin gene cluster haplotypes among sickle cell syndromic autosomal form of deafness DFNB4 and with Enlarged patients and carriers in the Puerto Rican Population Vestibular Aqueduct Syndrome . C. L. Cadilla, J. Y. Renta, G. Rivera, M. E. Echevarria, P. J. Santiago-Borrero; We here report three unrelated non-consanguineous Pendred families School of Medicine, San Juan, PR, United States. from Turkey in which all patients presented with profound to severe Sickle hemoglobin (HbS) is the most common hemoglobin variant deafness and goiter . Molecular analysis of the 20 coding exons of worldwide and is associated with four major haplotypes on the β globin SLC26A4 with denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography gene cluster: #19 (Benin), #20 (Bantu, Central African Republic (CAR), (DHPLC) followed by sequencing elicited the same homozygous #3 Senegal and #17 (Cameroon) . The CAR haplotype is associated p .Ser133Thr (c .398T>A) mutation in all patients . This mutation affects with a more severe phenotype, while the Senegalese haplotype is an amino acid conserved in all vertebrate species and located in the not. Other factors, (gender, modifier genes, fetal hemoglobin (HbF) SLC26A transporters signature domain . It was not observed in 100 levels, etc are thought to influence sickle cell disease (SCD) severity. chromosomes of normal-hearing individuals . We studied 33 patients with homozygous HbS mutations to compare Since Borck (2003) reported the p .Ser133Thr mutation at the disease severity with β globin gene cluster haplotype. The majority homozygous level in another Turkish family, and since all families of the patients were haplotype heterozygotes (19/20 42 .4%, 19/3,31 analysed here originated from either east or south of Turkey, we set 18 .2%), 21 .2% were homozygous for the CAR haplotype and only out to examine microsatellite and SNP markers linked to the SLC26A4 6 .1% were homozygous for the Benin haplotype, which partially locus in 7q31 .1 whether a founder effect or recurrent mutation might contradicts the historical records of the African slave trade . Patients be at cause . homozygous for the CAR haplotype, 50% of the 19/20 haplotype A single haplotype was shared by all patients analysed, suggesting that heterozygotes and 33% of the 19/3,31 haplotype heterozygotes had p .Ser133Thr is a founder mutation in Turkish patients with Pendred severe manifestations of SCD . Clinical severity did not correlate with syndrome . HbF levels and β globin haplotypes. Puerto Rican subjects carrying the sickle cell trait (AS, 79 parents and 81 infants) and 61 normal, P0820. strategy for the generation of a knockout mouse for LAt- the predominant haplotypes were the Benin and CAR haplotypes . The 2 AA chromosomes possessed mutations commonly associated with S M. Font-Llitjós1, M. Larramona1, M. Palacín2, V. Nunes1; chromosomes which indicates admixing in the Puerto Rican population . 1IRO-IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Universitat de Barcelona, Our results resemble the haplotype distribution reported for the island Barcelona, Spain. of Cuba, where the predominant haplotypes were the Benin and the The SLC7A8 gene encodes for LAT-2, a transporter of neutral amino CAR haplotypes and the Senegalese haplotype contributed less than acids that belongs to the heteromeric amino acid transporters (HAT) 10% of the HbS chromosomes . Research supported by RCMI grant family, which is formed by a heavy subunit (rBAT or 4F2hc) linked by G12RR03051 . a disulfide bridge to a range of light subunits. Transporter 4F2hc/LAT- 2 plays a major role in the net basolateral efflux of cysteine, pointing P0818. Frequency and etiology of uniparental disomy in silver to LAT-2 as a candidate to modulate cystine reabsorption . Here we Russell syndrome describe the generation of chimeras for a knockout of Slc7a8, that can E. Karaca1, C. Ozkinay2, S. Pehlivan3, B. Tüysüz4, F. Ozkinay1; contribute to ascertain the possible implication of LAT-2 in cystinuria 1Ege University Medical School Hospital Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Tur- and to study the physiological function in skeletal muscle and heart, key, 2Ege University Medical School Hospital Department of Medical Genetics, where it has a remarkable expression . Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University Faculty of Science, Izmir, Turkey, 4Istanbul Uni- We obtained the sequence of the murine gene in the Celera database, versity Medical School Hospital Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey. and designed primers in the 5’ region of the gene to amplify the Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) describes a uniform malformation homology arms, from 129P2 genomic DNA . We generated a vector syndrome characterized by pre- and postnatal growth restriction and with homology arms of 6,1 kb and 2,3 kb, and replaced part of the a typical craniofacial feature . The basic defect of SRS is currently promoter and exon 1 of Slc7a8 by the neomycin resistance gene . unknown, and the number of meaningful genetic tests available is Homologous recombination between the vector and the Slc7a8 gene therefore limited . . We have reported the etiology of uniparental disomy in 129P2 ES cells was performed by GenOway (Lyon) . We screened (UPD) in Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) patients . Thirteen families 400 clones by long PCR and confirmed by Southern-blot that 3 clones were typed with 4 short tandem repeat markers from chromosomes were heterozygous for the mutation in Slc7a8 . Two clones were 7 . Maternal UPD7 was detected in one SRS patient, accounting for microinjected into C57BL/6 blastocysts, and several chimeric mice approximately 7% of the tested SRS patients . Our patient with UPD7 were obtained . and those previously published had a classical SRS phenotype and At present we are crossing chimeras with C57BL/6 females to obtain were not clinically distinguishable from other children diagnosed heterozygous mice . with SRS . These results agree with previously published studies . Acknowledgments: Grants from the Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología The allelic distribution in the family with UPD showed complete (SAF2003-08940-01/02), the ISC III (G03/054, C03/07) and EUGINDAT heterodisomy that indicating UPD originates from maternal meiosis . (LSHM-CT-2003-502852) . Our results demonstrate the necessity of screening SRS patients for UPD7, although the effect of UPD7 cannot be correlated with the SRS P0821. maternal Alleles of Genes involved in cholesterol phenotype as yet . Transport are Modifiers of the Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome M. Witsch-Baumgartner, G. Utermann; P0819. Founder mutation s133t (p.ser133thr) of the sLc26A4 Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Inns- gene in turkish families with Pendred syndrome bruck, Austria. L. Jonard1, F. Denoyelle2,3, D. Feldmann1,3, N. Lucidarme4, H. Dollfus5, C. Petit3, The Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome (SLOS,MIM 270400) is a E. N. Garabédian2, R. Couderc1,3, S. Marlin6,3; malformation syndrome that ranges in clinical severity from minimal 1Laboratoire de Biochimie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, dysmorphisms and mild mental retardation to severe congenital anomalies and intrauterine death . SLOS is caused by mutations in Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  the delta7sterol-reductase gene (DHCR7), which impair endogenous Consortium . We screened our subjects for the homozygous deletion cholesterol biosynthesis and make the growing embryo dependent of SMN genes exons 7 and 8 and NAIP exon 5, using PCR-RFLP and on exogenous (maternal) sources of cholesterol . Previous studies PCR techniques . demonstrated a correlation of severity with DHCR7 genotype and The results are shown in Table: maternal ApoE genotype . We have now investigated whether other genes involved in lipid metabolism (apoCIII, LCAT, CETP, LDLR, SMA I SMA II SMA III Homozygous deletions ABCA1), and additionally MTHFR, involved in folic acid metabolism, n = 26 n = 10 n = 9 may act as modifiers of the severity of SLOS. SNP genotyping was performed in 68 SLOS patients, their mothers and fathers . 4 1 We tested for correlation between patients´ clinical severity score and SMN1 Exon 7 0 (0%) (15,4%) (10%) gene dose of the rare alleles in the patients and their parents . Neither patients nor paternal genotypes were associated with disease severity . 4 1 In addition to the previously observed association with DHCR7 genotype SMN1 Exon 8 0 (0%) and apoE genotypes, only maternal ABCA1 genotypes (p=0 .007) but (15,4%) (10%) no SNPs in other genes showed a significant correlation. The rare maternal K1587 allele in the ABCA1 gene was associated with milder NAIP Exon 5 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%) phenotypes . The correlation of maternal ABCA1 genotypes and SLOS severity persisted after stratification for cholesterol (p=0.041) and for 8 1 1 the DHCR7 genotype of the patient (p=0 .008) . SMN1 Exons 7 + 8 (30,8%) (10%) (11%) ABCA1, a transporter of cholesterol across membranes is highly expressed in the placenta . We conclude that at least three factors, DHCR7-, ApoE- and ABCA1 genotypes modify the phenotype of the SMN1 Exons7 + 8 + NAIP 5 0 (0%) 0 (0%) SLOS . Exon 5 (19,2%) supported by FWF grant T161 to M .W .-B . 1 (3,9 1 P0822. smN1 and smN2 deletion of exons 7 and 8 concurrent in SMN1 Exon 7 + NAIP Exon 5 0 (0%) %) (10%) one family T. Majidizadeh, M. Dehghanmanshadi, B. Hooshiar kashani, M. Rostami, M. SMN1 Exon 8 + NAIP Exon 5 1 (3,9%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%) Banoie, M. Houshmand; National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- lamic Republic of Iran. 3 6 8 None Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder that (11,4%) (60%) (89%) characterized by loss of α - motor neurons due to degeneration in the lower motor neurons . The SMN gene exists in two highly homologous It is important to notice one homozygous deletion of SMN1 exons 7 copies, telomeric (SMN1) and centromeric (SMN2) . SMA is caused by and 8 among SMA III clinically diagnosed patient . mutations in SMN1 but not SMN2 . Additionally, we have identified in the relatives group, only three In this study one family who were heterozygote for both SMN1 and particular homozygous deletion: SMN2 exons 7+8, SMN2 exons 7+8+ SMN2 gene deletion screened for common deletion on exon 7 and 8 in NAIP exon5, and NAIP exon5 . Interestingly, their SMA type II (n=2) and both genes . They missed only their child because of SMA type I caused III (n=1) clinically suspected children have no homozygous deletions by deletion in exons 7 and 8 in SMN1 gene . Heterozygosity of parents in these exons . Supplementary studies are required for establish the was found when they referred to prenatal diagnosis in next pregnancy meaning of this findings. .PND showed deletion of exons 7 and 8 concurrent in SMN2 gene . It proved that parents were heterozygote for deletion of exons 7 and 8 in P0824. A possible distortion in the segregation ratio of the smN1 both genes SMN1 and SMN2 . Mutations in SMN1 are responsible for alleles in smA families SMA and mutations in SMN2 just influence on severity of SMA. Also, so far authors have not been observed any report about deletion of E. F. Tizzano, L. Alias, M. J. Barceló, I. Gich, J. Parra, M. Baiget; exons 7 and 8 together in SMN2 gene . Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common autosomal recessive Genetic counseling could have opinion about SMA because of found disorder caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene . Both parents of a intact SMN1 gene in PND, but we can not ignore the possible role of patient are carriers with a recurrence risk of 1/4 . Our objective was homozygous SMN2 deletion in exons 7 and 8 either in SMA or other to analyse the segregation ratio of the SMN1 gene in the offspring of disorder such ALS and CMD that SMN2 gene can act as a prognostic factor and may be a phenotypic modifier in sporadic ALS. SMA parents in whom de novo mutations or mosaicism were ruled out . We present the results from 216 prenatal analyses and from 101 carrier studies in unaffected siblings . P0823. molecular analysis of common mutations associated with A total of 46 foetuses (21%) were homozygously deleted (expected spinal muscular Atrophy (smA) in Romanian families n=54), 91 (42%) were carriers (expected n=108) and 79 (36%) were M. F. Stavarachi1, P. Apostol1, D. Cimponeriu1, M. Toma1, N. Butoianu2, C. homozygous for the wild type allele (expected n=54) . The transmission Burloiu2, S. Magureanu2, L. Gavrila1; rate of the deleted gene copy was lower than expected (p=0 .001) . 1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Department of Pediatrics Neurol- Furthermore, from 101 unaffected siblings of patients, 57 (56%) were ogy I, “Alexandru Obregia” Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. carriers (expected n=67) and 44 (43%) were non-carriers (expected Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder n=33) . Taking together the unaffected foetuses and siblings, the characterized by degeneration of lower motor neurons leading to number of carriers was 148 (55%, expected n=179) and that of non- muscular weakness and atrophy . Any data regarding prevalence and carriers was 123 (45%, expected n=89) (p=0.0001). No significant carrier frequency in Romanian population are not available . differences in the sex-ratio of the foetuses and carriers were observed . The aim of our study was to analyze the most common mutations that Nor were there any divergences in the paternal or maternal origin of occur in SMN and NAIP genes, causing SMA disease, in Romanian the transmitted allele to the carriers . families . These results suggest a distortion in the segregation ratio in favour This is the first molecular test available for diagnosis of SMA in our of the wild type SMN1 allele . Meiotic drive or preferential survival country . Genetic counseling was provided to all the couples having a of gametes may account for these findings. However, to determine child affected by SMA . their significance in SMA biology and their consequences in genetic We investigated 45 SMA clinically diagnosed patients from “Al . counselling, larger population studies in SMA families are necessary . Obregia” Hospital Bucharest, and their 34 relatives . All patients Supported by RI03-05/FIS02-1275 . fulfilled the diagnostic criteria of SMA as defined by International SMA Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P0825. Polymorphisms of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, P0827. segregation analysis of the X-chromosome in patients angiotensin converting enzyme and coagulation factor Xiii with steroid sulfatase deficiency genes in patients with spontaneous abortion S. Cuevas, J. Toral, L. Gonzalez, S. Kofman; T. Memariani1, M. Aarabi1, S. Arefi2, S. Hantoosh Zadeh3, J. Ghasemi1, M. H. Hospital General de Mexico, Fac. de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D,.F., Mexico. Modarressi1,4; X-linked ichthyosis (XLI) is an inherited metabolic disease due to 1Reproductive Biotechnology Research Center, Avesina Research Institute, steroid sulfatase (STS) deficiency. Most XLI patients (>90%) have Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Avesina Infertility Clinic, Avesina Research entire deletion of the STS gene and flanking markers. The presence Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Obstetrics & Gy- of low copy number repeats (G1 .3 and CRI-S232) on either side necology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of of the STS gene seems to be responsible of the high frequency of Iran, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, these deletions . Unequal homologous recombination between both X- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. chromosomes seems to generate this type of deletion . In the present introduction: Spontaneous abortion is a common problem among study, we analyzed 6 Mexican families with XLI and complete deletion infertile couples. Thrombophilic disorders and hypofibrinolysis could of the STS gene to investigate the parental origin of the affected X- result in abortion due to uteroplacental microvascular thrombosis chromosome . STS activity was measured in leukocytes using 7-[3H]- and hypoperfusion. Genes that influence the coagulation are dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate as a substrate. Amplification of the potential etiologic candidates for thrombophilia . We investigated the regions telomeric-DXS89, DXS996, DXS1139, DXS1130, 5’ STS, 3’ polymorphisms of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1(PAI-1), angiotensin STS, DXS1131, DXS1133, DXS237, DXS1132, DXF22S1, DXS278, converting enzyme (ACE) and coagulation factor XIII (FXIII) genes in DXS1134-centromeric was performed through PCR . Segregation Iranian women with spontaneous abortion . analysis was performed with GeneScan. No STS activity was detected materials & methods: 120 patients with more than two abortions and in the XLI patients (0 .00 pmoles/mg protein/h) . Paternal origin of the 112 healthy female controls without history of abortion were involved . affected X-chromosome was confirmed in two families. It was not In order to characterize PAI-1 (4G/5G), ACE (D/I) and FXIII (val 34 leu) possible to determine the parental origin of the X-chromosome in polymorphisms, we performed polymerase chain reaction followed by fourth families . All patients showed the 5’ STS deletion at the sequence digestion with restriction enzymes (PCR-RFLP) . DXS1139 (probe CRI-S232A2) and the 3’ STS rupture site at the Results: 16 (14 .4%) patients were homozygote (4G/4G) for PAI- sequence DXF22S1 (probe G1 .3) . These data indicate that unequal 1 polymorphism, in contrast with two (2%) controls (p = 0 .001) . In homologous recombination between both X-chromosomes is not the patients with more than six abortions, 4G homozygosity was more only mechanism in the genesis of the breakpoints of the STS gene frequent (p < 0 .05) . 38 (29 .5 %) patients and 25 (26 .6%) controls were of XLI . homozygote (DD) for ACE polymorphism . DD homozygosity was more frequent in patients with more than seven abortions (p < 0 .05) . We P0828. screening for inherited thrombophilia in a group of Greek observed only two patients and one control with homozygosity (34leu) patients with stroke. for FXIII polymorphism . A. Vasiageorgi1, P. Tsoplou1, K. Vemmos2, K. Karalis1; conclusion: 4G/4G polymorphism for PAI-1 gene could be a 1Department of Molecular Diagnostics,Bioiatriki Medical Services, Athens, thrombophilic mutation leading to abortion . We recommend analysis Greece, 2Department of Clinical Therapeutics, Alexandra Hospital, University of of this mutation in patients with spontaneous abortion, especially if the Athens, Athens, Greece. history of several abortions exists . Stroke is a complex heterogeneous disease with unclear etiology . Inflammation, abnormal coagulation, metabolic diseases, P0826. Partial paternal uniparental disomy (UPD) of environmental and nutritional factors including hypelipidemia have chromosome 1 in one patient with stargardt disease been greatly implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease . As a result, R. Riveiro-Alvarez1, D. Valverde2, I. Lorda-Sanchez1, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1, a wide spectrum of genes with different roles have been suggested to D. Cantalapiedra1, E. Vallespin1, J. Aguirre-Lamban1, C. Ramos1, C. Ayuso1, .. be associated with the disease . In the present study, we evaluated 16 Es.Ret.Net1; patients with ischemic stroke and one patient with hemorrhagic stroke 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain. for the presence or not of common mutations and/or polymorphisms Stargardt disease (STGD) is the most common juvenile macular in Factor V Leiden (G1691A), Factor II (G20210A), MTHFR (C677T), dystrophy, characterised by central visual impairment . All recessively GPIa (C807T) and PAI 4G/5G . Our results indicate that 11 .7% of inherited cases are thought to be due to mutations in the ABCA4 the patients were heterozygous for the FV mutation, 5 .8% were gene . heterozygous for the FII mutation, and 52 .9% were heterozygous for A total of 77 STGD families were studied . DNA from every patient and the MTHFR polymorphism . Homozygosity for the tested genes was not relatives was analysed for variants on the ABCR400 microarray; results detected in any patient, neither the stroke-associated 4G/4G genotype were confirmed by direct sequencing. Haplotype analyses, standard of the PAI gene . In our patients group, 11 .7% were homozygous and and high-resolution karyotypes and the novel approach of Multiplex 29 .4% were heterozygous for the GPIa polymorphism . Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) were also performed. Our results indicate that the Factor V Leiden mutation was more A patient with STGD caused by the homozygous R1129L mutation prevalent in patients with ischemic stroke (around 2x) compared to in the ABCA4 gene was found to be the daughter of a non carrier the carrier rate in the general population (5% of carriers rate) . Factor mother and a father who was heterozygous for this change . Haplotype V Leiden has been associated with venous thrombosis and there are analysis suggested that no maternal ABCA4 allele was transmitted to studies suggesting its involvement in stroke, although there is still the patient . Microsatellite markers spanning all chromosome 1 could controversy in the field. Our findings indicate the necessity for larger, identify a homozygous region of at least 4 .4 Mb, involving the ABCA4 well controlled studies for the identification of the role of Factor V gene . The cytogenetic study revealed normal female karyotype . Further mutations in the pathogenesis of stroke . evaluation with MLPA resulted useful for showing that the patient had a normal dose for both copies of the ABCA4 gene, thus suggesting P0829. the role of tBX1 in the 22q11Ds phenotype partial paternal isodisomy but not a maternal microdeletion . B. Glaser1, P. Ataliotis2, S. Monks3, N. Williams1, P. Scambler2, K. Murphy3, M. We report, for the first time, that recessive STGD can rarely be O’Donovan1, M. Owen1; inherited from only one unaffected carrier parent in a nonmendelian 1Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United manner . This study also demonstrates that genomic alterations Kingdom, 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, United contribute to only a small fraction of disease-associated alleles for Kingdom, 3Department of Psychiatry, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, ABCA4 . Nevertheless, for those cases where homozygous mutations Dublin, Ireland. are found, is recommendable to perform haplotype analyses, in order Del22q11 .2 syndrome (22q11DS) occurs in 1 of 4000 life births and is to discard a possible situation of UPD . the most frequent chromosomal microdeletion found in men . 22q11DS is characterised by many and diverse clinical symptoms, all showing variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance . Most patients with the 22q11DS phenotype carry a 1 .5-3 Mb-wide chromosomal Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 microdeletion on 22q11 (del22q11) . group - 76,0 ± 4,4% (p<0,005) . The frequencies of homozygote on Chromosome engineering experiments in mice strongly suggest the T allele (TT) (8,4 ± 3,0%) and heterozygote (CT) (38,1 ± 5,3%) in that the majority of the physical phenotype in 22q11DS results from the main group has also reliably exceeded than the analogous index haploinsufficiency of TBX1 . Recently, evidence that haploinsufficiency of the control group (3,2 ± 1,0 and 20,8 ± 4,1%;p< 0,05). Genotypic of TBX1 also plays a key role in the human phenotype was provided frequencies for A1298C polymorphism have not had differences by the identification of point mutations in patients from 3 families with between the main and the control group . typical clinical features of 22q11DS, but without deletions . In the main group reliably low frequency of positive haplotype C677/ Here we report a fourth family in which the phenotypic features of A1298C and high frequency of negative haplotypes C677T/A1298C, 22q11DS, in particular VCFS, segregate with a novel 23 bp-frameshift C677T/ 1298C, 677T/ A1298 and 677T/A1298C were observed . deletion within the 3’-end of TBX1C (1320-1342del23bp) . The results state that there is a possibility of potential contribution of Based on CAT assays and immunocytochemical investigations of negative MTHFR gene types carriage to the etiology and risk of NTD transfected cells we provide evidence that this mutation impairs development . the ability of TBX1 to activate transcription in reporter experiments although it localises in the nucleus.This corroborates earlier findings P0832. Epimutation at both the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome that the C-terminal region of Tbx1 is essential for transcriptional and transient neonatal diabetes (tND) loci in two individuals transactivation . Our results suggest that the novel 23 bp-frameshift ascertained from a cohort of tND patients deletion found in this family represents a null allele and is likely to K. Temple1,2, J. M. D. Hahnemann3, J. Clayton-Smith4, S. E. Boonen5, S. cause TBX1 haploinsufficiency in non-deleted VCFS patients. Poerksen6, D. J. Bunyan7, H. E. White8, V. J. Durston8, N. S. Thomas9, J. P. H. Shield10, D. O. Robinson7,11, D. J. G. Mackay11,7; P0830. Pattern of β-globin mutations among β-thalassaemic 1Division of Human Genetics, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2Wessex Clinical children and families in Albanian population Genetics Serivce, Southam;pton, United Kingdom, 3Medical Genetics Labora- A. Laku1, S. Berisha1, V. Mokin1, M. Cikuli1, A. Mitre1, E. Anastasi2, S. Pissard3; tory Centre, The Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 4Academic Department 1University Hospital Center Mother Theresa, Medical Genetic Service, Tirana, of Medical Genetics, St Mary’s Hospital,, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Clini- Albania, 2University Hospital Center Mother Teresa, Haematologic Service of cal Genetics, The Kennedy Institute - National Eye Clinic, Glostrup, Denmark, Pediatric Department, Tirana, Albania, 3Hopital Henri Mondor, Service de Bio- 6Department of Paediatrics, Glostrup University Hospital,, Glostrup, Denmark, chimie et de Genetique, Creteil, Paris, France. 7Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 8National Objective. The aims of this study were to determine the different β-thal Genetics Reference Laboratory Wessex, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 9Wessex alleles that are present in Albanian population, to establish an efficient regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 10Bristol Royal Hospi- cost- effective method for molecular detection of the heterozygous tal for Children, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 11Division of Hu- carriers in the screening programmes and prenatal diagnosis of β- man Genetics, University of Southampton, Salisbury, United Kingdom. thalassemia . Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDM) is characterised by intra- Methods . We have analyzed 92 samples, of these 42 patients with uterine growth retardation, while Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome thalassemia major or intermedia, 13 with sickle cell anemia or sickle (BWS) is a clinically heterogeneous overgrowth syndrome . Both TNDM cell β-thalassemia, 33 parents and 4 unrelated heterozygotes . The and BWS may be caused by aberrant loss of methylation (LOM) at mutations were investigated by TTGE system, restriction enzymes, imprinted loci on chromosomes 6q24 and 11p15 .5 respectively . We DNA sequencing after amplification of genomic DNA by PCR. identified a cohort of individuals ascertained because of Transient Results. Five β-thalassemia alleles (IVS-I-110 G-A, codon 39 C-T, neonatal diabetes, 17 due to paternal UPD 6, 9 with a duplication of IVS-I-6 T-C, IVS-I-1 G-A, codon 44 -C) were present in nearly 88% chromosome 6, 13 with loss of maternal methylation at 6q24 (LOM) of the β-thalassemia alleles. The frequencies of these mutations were and 4 of unknown aetiology . We investigated the cohort for methylation nearly similar to those found in other studies in Albanian population . aberrations at 11p15 .5 and demonstrated that 2 patients, both with 321 chromosomes with a β-thal mutation have been analyzed and 13 LOM at 6q24, had in addition loss of maternal methylation at KvDMR mutations were found in all studies carried out in Albanian population . (domain 2) at 11p15 .5 . All other TNDM cases investigated showed Common point mutations as IVS-I-110, codon 39, IVS-I-6, IVS-I-1 normal methylation patterns at KvDMR, as did 120 controls . This and codon 44 were present in nearly 92% of β-thalassemia alleles. shows that imprinting anomalies occasionally affect more than one A genetic heterogeneity was detected from one study to another . A imprinted locus . rare new mutation, IVS-I-2 was found for the first time in Albanian population in our study . P0833. Functional characterization of the first B-box missense Conclusion. Five point mutations were present in nearly 92% of β- mutation in tRim37 underlying mulibrey nanism thalassemia alleles, which will facilitate a prenatal diagnostic program . R. H. Hämäläinen1, J. Kallijärvi1, D. Mowat2, A. E. Lehesjoki1; It makes possible the detection of the heterozygotes for the β- 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Neuroscience Center, University of Hel- thalassemia in Albanian population screening program and offers an sinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Chidren’s accurate prenatal diagnosis with a probability 92% . Hospital, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. Mulibrey nanism is a rare congenital growth disorder with autosomal P0831. correlation between the neural tube defects and recessive inheritance . The characteristic features include, short stature, mutations in the methyltetrahydrofolate reductase gene in the typical craniofacial features, progressive cardiopathy and failure of kazakh population sexual maturation . The patients develop insulin resistance syndrome Z. Makhmutova, G. Svyatova; and type 2 diabetes and they have an increased risk of developing The Republic Center of mother and child’s health protection, Almaty, Kazakh- kidney, liver and ovarian tumors . stan. Mutations in TRIM37, a gene encoding for a novel RING finger ubiquitin Neural tube defects (NTD) are one the most frequent congenital E3 ligase, underlie mulibrey nanism . The family of TRIM proteins is anomalies (CA) in Kazakhstan . The frequency of such defects is 0 .7 per characterized by the presence of tripartite motif, which includes a 1000 newborns in Kazakh Republic . The dynamics of NTD frequency RING finger, one or two zinc-binding B-box motives and a coiled-coil has not been displaying a declining tren from 1998 to 2005 . region . It is known that the methyltetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene To date 12 TRIM37 mutations have been characterized in mulibrey mutations play a substantial role in the NTD’s etiology . In order to nanism patients of different ethnic origin . Most of these are truncating, examine the causes of NTD’s in the Kazakh population we have with only two missense mutations (L76P, G322V) identified so far. conducted a molecular-genetic study for carriage of C677T and We studied three newly diagnosed patients and identified four novel A1298C mutations in the MTHFR gene . The parents of 84 newborn mutations . Two patients are homozygous for two new truncating with NTD and 96 persons of ethnic Kazakh descent for the control mutations, while the third patient is compound heterozygous for a B- group were studied . box missense and a novel truncating mutation . The missense mutation In the main group, the favorable homozygote genotype (CC) occurred is the first identified in the B-box domain of TRIM37. As it affects a reliably less frequently - 53 .5±5 .4%, in comparison with the control cysteine residue and thus may affect the zinc-binding of the B-box, Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 functional characterization of the mutant protein may gain insight University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, Izmir, Turkey, into the mechanisms underlying mulibrey nanism . Functional studies 4Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, underway include subcellular localization, ubiquitin E3 ligase activity Gaziantep, Turkey, 5Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical and interaction properties of the mutant protein . Genetics, Izmir, Turkey. Vitiligo is a common skin disorder characterized by patchy P0834. investigation of TSC genes mutation spectrum in depigmentation, due to the decrease of melanin pigment resulting from tuberous sclerosis families in taiwan the apparent melanocyte loss . The pathogenesis is still unknown, but D. Chu, M. Huang; several hypotheses have been advocated . Recently polymorphisms Graduate Institution of Medical Biotechnology, Chang Gung University, Tao- in a number of genes which are involved in the immune system have Yuan, Taiwan Republic of China. been found to play a role in the susceptibility to vitiligo disease . Tuberous sclerosis (TS) is an autosomal dominant disorder The aim of this study was to investigate interleukin 4 (IL4) gene (-590), characterized by the development of hamartomatous growth in many angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) gene insertion (I)/deletion (D), organs . In this study, twenty-seven Taiwanese families including 25 C-C chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) gene (Δ32) and IL1-R antagonist familial and 2 sporadic cases suffering from this disease were tested (IL1-RN) (VNTR in intron 2) gene polymorphisms (GP) in Turkish for mutations in the TSC1 and TSC2 genes . We use RT-PCR method to vitiligo patients . detect the presence of hamartin and tuberin mRNA from patients with The study included 48 vitiligo patients and 50 healthy controls . TS and their parents . Mutation screening of the TSC1 and TSC2 genes Polymorphisms for the genes ACE, CCR5 and IL1-RN were detected of the TSC patients was performed with denaturing high-performance by PCR . IL4 polymorphism was typed by PCR-RFLP . Genotypes and liquid chromatography (dHPLC), then DNA sequence variations were allelic frequencies for these genes in patient and control groups were confirmed with direct sequencing. Data indicated that genetic lesions compared . were found in 16 patients among the 27 patients . Three possible No significant differences in either the genotype distribution or the pathogenic mutations were found in the TSC1 gene, including one allelic frequencies of IL4, CCR5 and ACE gene polymorphisms were missense, one nonsense and one frame shift mutation . In the TSC2 observed between vitiligo patients and healthy controls . CTLA4 GG and gene analysis ten possible pathogenic mutations in the sporadic cases IL1RA 2/2 genotypes (16 .6%, 12 .5%) and CTLA4 G allele frequency were found, including two in-frame deletion, seven deletions, one (26%) were found to be significantly higher in the vitiligo patients nonsense mutation, and two missense mutations . In addition, real-time compared to the control group (p=0 .044, 0 .003, 0 .000) . CTLA4 AA and quantitative PCR protocol was conducted to determine the quantities IL1RA 1/5 (64 .6 %, 0%) genotypes and IL1RA 5 allele frequency (0%) of hamartin and tuberin mRNA in those patients with mutations . were found to be significantly lower in the vitiligo patients compared to Comparing patients with mutation and their parents, various levels the control group (p=0 .014, 0 .013, 0 .015) . of hamartin and tuberin mRNA were found. Besides, no significant correlation between particular clinical features and these mutations P0837. Analysis of AtP7B gene exon 14 in Latvian Wilson were found . In conclusion, it seemed that no mutation hot spot was disease patients present in Taiwanese TS patients . More data need to be collected to I. Micule1, J. Keish1, V. Sondore2, A. Krumina1; further support this finding. 1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2Infectology center of Latvia, Riga, Lat- via. P0835. TBX, the Ulnar-mammary syndrome gene, plays role in Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder mammary cell proliferation independently of p1ARF and p of hepatic copper metabolism resulting in liver disease and/or N. Platonova1, M. Scotti2, P. Babich1, G. Bertoli2, I. Zucchi2, G. Merlo1; neuropsychiatric disease . WD is caused by mutations in the gene 1Dulbecco Telethon Institute / CNR-ITB, Milan, Italy, 2Istituto Tecnologie Biome- ATP7B . More than 200 mutations of this gene have been reported, the diche CNR, Milan, Italy. most common of them being H1069Q in the exon 14 . This mutation is TBX3, the gene mutated in the Ulnar Mammary Syndrome (UMS), is a found in 30-80% of WD patients in different populations . transcription factor of the T-box gene family, known to inhibit transcription Our aim was to analyze exon 14 of ATP7B gene in Latvian WD patients . from the p19ARF promoter and contribute to cell immortalization . We studied DNA of 11 patients, whose symptoms and laboratory tests One of the main features of the UMS is the severe hypoplasia of the gathered 3 or more points by WD scoring system before mutation breast, associated to haploinsufficiency of TBX3. Based on the UMS analysis. The liver copper quantification and rhodanine staining of phenotype it is logical to expect that TBX3 may have a positive role in hepatocytes is not available for our patients . the proliferation of the mammary epithelial cells (MECs) . In addition, DNA was extracted from whole blood by standard phenol/chloroform in mice homozygous for the targeted disruption of Tbx3 the mammary purification protocol. The DNA analysis methods used were PCR, gland (MG) is nearly absent from early stages of embryogenesis, while SSCP and direct sequencing . in the heterozygous ones the MG show reduced ductal branching . Of 22 WD chromosomes analyzed 5 were found to carry the mutation These data strongly suggest a specific role of TBX3 to promote growth H1069Q (two patients were H1069Q homozygotes, one heterozygote) . of MECs, however, direct evidence in this direction is lacking . Here we Thus the frequency of this mutation in WD chromosomes in Latvia is show that TBX3 has growth promoting function in several models of 22 .7% . The relatively low frequency of the mutation H1069Q may be MECs, associated to its ability to repress the p19ARF promoter, while due to the small patient group . In addition in one patient a previosly no direct effect of TBX3 on cell differentiation or apoptosis could be not reported mutation was found . The mutation 3106G>A involving observed . TBX3 represses transcription of p19ARF in MECs, however first nucleotide of codon results in amino acid change V1036I. This growth-promoting function of TBX3 appears to be independent of patient did not carry mutations on the other allele of the exon . No other the p19ARF, p53 and mdm2 cell-cycle regulatory proteins, as p53- mutations were found in exon 14 of our patients . The causative role of null MEC show similar growth responses associated to up- or down- mutation V1036I in development of WD still remains to be proved . regulation of Tbx3 . In fact the downregulation of p19ARF does not change proliferation, but rather reduces apoptosis of MECs . These are P0838. Detection His 1069Gln mutation in patients with Wilson the first direct evidence that the level of TBX3 expression positively disease using bidirectional PCR amplification of specific alleles controls proliferation of MEC using pathways alternative from p19ARF (Bi-PAsA) test and p53 . H. Polakova1, G. Minarik2, E. Ferakova2, A. Ficek2, M. Baldovic2, L. Kadasi1; 1Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia, P0836. Association Between IL4 (-590), ACE (I)/(D), CCR5 (Δ32) 2Comenius University Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular And iL-1RN (VNtR in intron 2) Gene Polymorphisms And Vitiligo Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia. in turkish Patients Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of hepatic S. Pehlivan1, F. Ozkinay2, S. Alper3, A. Ozcan1, E. Yuksel3, M. Pehlivan4, C. copper metabolism caused by mutations in a gene encoding a copper- Ozkinay5; transporting P-type ATPase . The majority of known mutations affecting 1Ege University Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege this gene are rare, except for the His 1069Gln mutation often found in University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege patients of Northern or Eastern European origin . In our previous work we examined the frequency of the His 1069Gln mutation in Slovak Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics  patients with Wilson disease using two different DNA-based methods: 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United ACRS (amplification created restriction site ) for Alw21I in combination Kingdom, 3Service de Génétique et INSERM U316, Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, with nested PCR, and ARMS (amplification refractory mutation system) France, 4Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, test . Although, both mentioned methods are reproducible and precise, 5Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 6INSERM 129- ACRS requires seminested PCR and digestion of PCR product and ICGM, Faculté de Médecine Cochin, Paris, France, 7Department of Genetic in ARMS test two PCR reaction must be performed to detect the His Medicine, Women’s and Children’s Hospital and Department of Paediatrics, 1069Gln mutation . In the present work we describe a method based University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 8Centre for Molecular and Biomo- on bidirectional PCR amplification of specific alleles (Bi-PASA) which lecular Informatics, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. identifies His 1069Gln both in homozygotes and heterozygotes in one Non-syndromic X-linked mental retardation (MRX) is a complex and PCR reaction . Comparing results of BI-PASA test with ACRS and highly heterogeneous genetic disorder . Some 25 MRX genes have ARMS tests on 27 WD patients homozygous and heterozygous for been identified so far, which collectively explain about 20% of the His 1069Gln mutation and on 120 random DNA samples genotyped patients in our cohort of families with MRX. For the identification of showed 100% concordance . In conclusion, BI-PASA is more simple novel MR genes, array CGH has proven to be successful . We used and rapid method for detecting the of His 1069Gln mutation when full coverage X-chromosomal BAC arrays to reveal a 1 Mb deletion compared to both ACRS and ARMS method . in Xp11 .3 in a boy with a mental retardation syndrome . The deleted SLC9A7, CHST7, ZNF673 and ZNF674 genes were screened for P0839. Identification of X linked gene for Wiskott- Aldrich mutations in 28 MRX families with a linkage interval that includes syndrome (WAs) in irainain patients the Xp11.3 region. One nonsense mutation, p.E118X, was identified S. Etemad Ahari1, S. Kasraie1, M. Moin2, Z. Poorpak2, M. Houshmand1; in ZNF674 and therefore, another 306 unlinked XLMR patients were 1National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islam- tested for mutations . Two more nucleotide changes, p .P412L and ic Republic of Iran, 2Immunology, Asthma & Allergy Research Institute ( IAARI), p.T343M, were identified. These three changes were not present in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 350 control X-chromosomes . The p .E118X leads to a truncated protein Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome (WAS) is a rare inherited disorder that that has no zinc finger domains. The Pro to Leu change is present may be characterized by recurrent infections due to defects in the in a conserved linker between two zinc finger domains and probably immune system (i .e ., partial defects in T lymphocyte and B lymphocyte causes a disturbance of its DNA binding property . The second missense systems [combined immunodeficiency]); abnormal bleeding caused mutation p .T343M, involves an amino acid that is not conserved in by a deficiency in circulating blood platelets (thrombocytopenia); a other zinc finger genes. ZNF674 belongs to a cluster of seven highly high incidence of “autoimmune-like” symptoms; and the presence of related zinc-finger genes in Xp11, two of which (ZNF41 and ZNF81) scaling, itchy skin rashes (eczema) that may be mild in some affected have been implicated previously in MRX. Identification of ZNF674 as individuals and severe in others . The range and severity of symptoms the third MRX gene in this cluster may indicate a common role for these and physical features associated with the disorder may vary greatly zinc-finger genes that is crucial to human cognitive functioning . from case to case . Because Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome is inherited as an X-linked(Xp 11 .22-23) recessive genetic trait, the disorder is usually P0842. Influence of polymorphisms in xenobiotic-metabolizing fully expressed in males only . and DNA-repair genes on diepoxybutane-induced scE We want to investigate the frequency and variety of Xp 11 .22-23 frequency mutations that cause WAS in Iranian patient for the first time and to I. Laczmanska1, J. Gil1, P. Karpinski1, A. Stembalska1, J. Kozlowska1, H. Busza1, analyze Exon 1,2,4,7,10 and find the mutations so according to that K. Schlade-Bartusiak1,2, D. Ramsey3, N. Blin4, M. M. Sasiadek1; we could design prenatal diagnosis kit . 1Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 2De- partment of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, P0840. A novel mutation of iL1RAPL1 in the Polish mRX family. 3Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science, Wroclaw University of Tech- M. Nawara1, J. Klapecki1, K. Borg1, S. Moreno2, J. Bal1, J. Chelly2, T. Mazurc- nology, Wroclaw, Poland, 4Division of Molecular Genetics, Eberhard Karls Uni- zak1; versity, Tübingen, Germany. 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute Cochin, Paris, France. Several studies on polymorphisms in genes exerting “minor impact” Mental retardation (MR) affects approximately 2% of the population . It on susceptibility to xenobiotics indicated that analysis of combined has been observed that affected males outnumber females of about polymorphisms might be the key to an understanding of the role of 30% . This fact might be due to be an an effect of mutations of the these genes in modulation of susceptibility to mutagens . genes located on X chromosome . Until recently mutations in about The aim of our study was to test for associations between DEB- twenty genes are known to result in nonspecific form of X-linked induced SCE-frequency and genetic polymorphisms in genes coding mental retardation (MRX) . Because MRX is a clinically homogenous xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes (CYP1A1, CYP2, GSTT1,XPDE, but genetically heterogenous disorder, linkage studies in extended NAT2) as well as DNA repair proteins (XRCC1, XRCC2, XRCC3, XPD, pedigrees followed by mutational analysis of known MRX genes in XPA, XPC, XPG, XPF, ERCC1, BRCA1, NBS1, RAD51) in in vitro the linkage interval are very often the only way to identify a genetic experiment on healthy donor’s lymphocytes . We found that GSTT1 background of the disorder . null genotype and c1/c2 variant of CYP2E1 are associated with higher, We have performed linkage analysis in several MRX families and we while G590A variant of NAT2 with lower SCE induction by DEB . No have mapped one family to an interval encompassing Xp22 .2-11 .3 correlation between DEB-induced SCEs and any of tested variants (LOD score >2) . There are three known MRX genes located in this in DNA-repair genes was revealed . The analysis on pairs of genes region: ARX, IL1RAPL1 and TM4SF2 . Following mutational analysis showed that for a fixed GSTT1 genotype, the SCE level is increasing of those genes let us to identify a deletion of four exons (3, 4, 5, and in the number of tyr alleles in EPHX position 113 (exon 3) . It was also 6) of the IL1RAPL1 gene. In order to confirm the results of molecular observed that among GSTT1(+) individuals the DEB-induced SCE analyses we performed cytogenetic studies . This enabled us to level is significantly lower when the EPHX, codon 139 genotype is his/ define the molecular background of the disease and to assess the arg than his/his . An interaction between CYP2E1 and EPHX, codon carrier status of females . Here we present the results of molecular, 139 polymorphisms was also observed . In CYP2E1 c1/c2 individuals cytogenetic, clinical and psychological analyses of four patients with an increase in DEB-induced SCEs is lower when the EPHX is tyr/his deletion in the IL1RAPL1 gene . than when it is his/his. In conclusion, our study supports the thesis that the analyses of networks rather than of a single gene are important P0841. ZNF6: a novel X-linked mental retardation gene in the understanding of complicated biological processes such as identified through array CGH mutagenesis . D. Lugtenberg1, H. G. Yntema1, M. J. G. Banning1, A. R. Oudakker1, H. V. Firth2, L. Willatt2, M. Raynaud3, T. Kleefstra1, J. Fryns4, H. Ropers5, J. Chelly6, C. Moraine3, J. Gécz7, J. van Reeuwijk1, S. B. Nabuurs8, B. B. A. de Vries1, B. C. J. Hamel1, A. P. M. de Brouwer1, H. van Bokhoven1; 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  Po06. Genetic analysis, linkage, and association a photophobia, a nystagmus and reduced visual acuity . Achromatopsia is genetically heterogeneous with variable expressivity . P0843. Haplotype Block Analysis in 2q36 a susceptibility Locus The complete form is recessively inherited . The three achromatopsia for Absense Epilepsy genes are CNGA3, CNGB3 which respectively encode for α and β O. Yalçın, H. Çağlayan; subunits of the cGMP gated cation channel in cone cells and GNAT2 Bogazici University Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, which encodes the α subunit of cone transducin. Turkey. The transducin and the cGMP gated cation channel are important for Childhood Absance Epilepsy (CAE) and Juvenile Absance Epilepsy the amplification and the transmission of visual signal from cones to (JAE) are subtypes of Idiopathic Generalized Epilepsy (IGE) that have the cortical regions . a clear genetic component with an incomplete penetrance . Whole We report here genetic analysis of a large consanguineous Tunisian genome linkage studies resulted in succeptibility loci for CAE and family with nine individuals presenting with complete achromatopsia . JAE on chromosome 8q24, chromosome 5, 3q26, 14q23 and 2q36 . Genetic linkage to the three genes accounting for the majority of Further studies in 3q26 resulted in the identification of a mutation in Cl achromatopsia id est CNGB3 CNGA3 and GNAT2 was investigated . For channel gene in one family . A genome-wide scan in rat models linked this purpose microsatellite markers overlapping these genes loci were 2q36 syntenic region to CAE . An other association study showed a selected D8S273, D8S167 and D2S2311, D2S2175 and D1S2849, low possibility of gene SLC4A3 in 2q36 to contribute to the etiology D1S412 for CNGB3, CNGA3 and GNAT2 genes respectively . of CAE . Studies using candidate gene approach revealed a mutation Genotyping and linkage analysis excluded linkage to these genes . in GABA receptor, a voltage-gated Ca2+ channel gene in one family These results are confirmed by a statistical analysis of Lod Score. A afflicted with CAE. Using haplotype block structure in an association A genome wide scan is currently being performed to allow identification study can be another approach to further clarify the involvement of of a potential new locus for complete achromatopsia . 2q36 in absance epilepsy . Therefore, we aimed to identify haplotype block structure in the Turkish population using 33 SNPs in a 160 kb P0846. Analysis of conserved non-coding sequences (cNss) led region using 35 trios. If haplotype blocks are identified, tag SNPs will to the finding of a 60Mb long inversion on the X-chromosome be used to compare the patient samples with healthy controls . Herein, in patients with Addison’s disease and hypogonadotropic we present a preliminary haplotype structure with 6 blocks in the region hypogonadism analyzed with 21 SNPs in 18 trios . When all 33 SNPs are genotyped B. Skinningsrud1, E. S. Husebye2, E. Frengen1, A. Erichsen3, E. Ormerod4, M. in 35 trios we expect to see a more definite block structure and the Mattingsdal4, D. E. Undlien1,4; presence of recombination hot spots . 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2Institute of Internal Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 3Dept of P0844. Genotype and phenotype correlation of diabetic patients Patology, Ullevaal University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Dept of Medical Genet- and 2 years follow-up ics, Ullevaal University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. B. Volkan-Salanci1, S. Dagdelen2, T. Erbas2, M. Alikasifoglu1; The co-occurrence of Addison’s disease and hypogonadotropic 1Hacettepe University Pediatrics Department Clinical Genetics Unit, Ankara, hypogonadism has been related to intragenic mutations in the DAX1- Turkey, 2Hacettepe University Internal Medicine Department, Endocrinology gene at Xp21 .2 (Dosage sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia Division, Ankara, Turkey. congenita, critical region on the X chromosome, gene 1) . This gene Diabetes is a chronic metabolic disorder with multifactorial etiology . encodes a transcription factor, which together with SF1 (Steroidogenic Many Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) are shown to factor 1), is essential for normal development of the adrenal cortex participate in disease pathogenesis or progression . Among these, and gonads . renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAS) genes are involved in The aim of this study was to map the mutation that led to an X-linked nephropathy development . The aim of this study is to investigate the form of Addison’s disease and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism RAS genotype and phenotype relation in T2DM patients and to study (HH) in a family with four affected males . The patients had apparently the effects of SNP’s on progression to nephropathy . normal karyotype and no mutations in the DAX1-gene (exons, intron, In this study 60 patients’ metabolic parameters (HbA1c levels) and promoter) . X-chromosome linkage analysis was followed by analysis renal functions (urinary albumin excretion, creatinine clearance, BUN of conserved non-coding sequences (CNSs) upstream of the DAX1- and creatinine levels) were evaluated . The patients’ ACE and AT1R gene promoter . This led to the discovery of a 60Mb long pericentric gene polymorphisms were investigated . The patients were followed inversion, where one of the breakpoints for the inversion was located up by a period of 2 years and their metabolic parameters and renal 3 .8kb upstream of DAX1 transcription start . To our knowledge this is the functions were re-evaluated . first report of an inversion on the X-chromosome that causes Addison’s The patients’ mean age was 56 .85 ± 10 .6 years . The mean HbA1c disease and HH . The active use of CNSs to identify disease-causing level, urinary albumin excretion and creatinine clearances were mutations in non-coding DNA sequences has to our knowledge only 7 .72 ± 1 .87%, 38 .3 ± 71 .9 mg/24h and 94 .9 ± 23 .4 mg/ml/1 .73m2, been reported successfully once in a study by Lettice et al . (Hum Mol respectively . BUN and creatinine levels were in normal limits in all of Genet ., 2003) . the patients. No significant relation was found between genotypes and The detected inversion leads to dislocation of a previously these baseline metabolic and renal function parameters . Fourty four predicted conserved SF1 consensus transcription binding site . patients were followed for 20 .84 ± 6 .9 months . The alteration in the Immunohistochemisty showed a seemingly normal DAX1 expression, parameters was not statistically significant (paired t test p>0.05). In but a complete absence of SF1, in testis tissues from the patients with 5 patients urinary albumin excretion were deteriorated . One patient the inversion . Further work is ongoing to determine the mechanisms was DD homozygous and the other 4 was ID heterozygous . HbA1c behind these observations . levels were also worsened in all of these patients . Therefore, in order to investigate the relationship between genotypes and progression to P0847. mutational and linkage analysis in three calabrian nephropathy, follow-up for a longer period is necessary . families with Autosomal Dominant Nocturnal Frontal Lobe Epilepsy P0845. Exclusion of CNGB, CNGA and GNAT genes of E. V. De Marco1, F. Annesi1, S. Carrideo1, P. Forabosco2, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, complete achromatopsia in a consanguineous tunisian family P. Tarantino1, F. E. Rocca1, D. Civitelli1, P. Spadafora1, A. Gambardella3, G. F. Ouechati1, A. Merdassi2, K. Derouiche2, L. Larguech2, L. El Matri2, S. Abdel- Annesi1; hak1; 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), 1Unit of Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases, Institut Pasteur de Italy, 2Institute of Population Genetics, National Research Council, Alghero Tunis, Tunis Le Belvédère, Tunisia, 2Unit of Oculogenetic, Institute of Ophthal- (SS), Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. mology Hédi Rais, Tunis, Tunisia. Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is Complete achromatopsia also referred to as rod monochromacy is caused by mutations in the genes encoding the α4 and β2 subunits of a rare (1/30000 to 1/50000) congenital stationnary retinal disorder the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (CHRNA4 and CHRNB2, characterized by a complete inability to discriminate between colours, respectively) . However, only a minority of ADNLE families carry a Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  mutation of either gene. A third ADNFLE locus has been identified but 82 .1% and 0 .6% respectively . Allele of 8, 11 repeats weren’t revealed mutations linked to the disease have not yet been found . Very recently, in control group . The frequency of the 9, 10 allele was 24 .2%, 75 .8% in variations in the promoter of the corticotropic-releasing hormone gene this group respectively . Odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CRH) have been reported in sporadic and familial patients . Here, we (CI) in individuals with 9 repeats allele (genotypes: 8/9, 9/9, 9/10; n=25 investigated whether nine brain-expressed genes, encoding distinct and n=54 for disease and control groups accordingly) in comparison neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subunits, and with other individuals (10/10 + 10/11 groups; n=59 and n=68 in patients CRH are associated with the disease in three ADNFLE families from and controls accordingly) for significantly increased risk of comorbidity Southern Italy . of alcoholism and tuberculosis is 0 .40 (95% CI 0.21 - 0.75; P=0 .002) . Firstly, exon 5 of CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 genes, harboring all the known It is possible that the 3’ untranslated VNTR functions in the control of mutations, were sequenced in the probands and found negative . Then, expression of the DAT1 gene . we performed a linkage study on 11 affected and 29 non affected individuals belonging to these three families with microsatellite markers P0850. Frequency of α-thalassemia mutations among Iranian and RFLPs encompassing the chromosome localization of the nAChR populations subunit genes and CRH . The following chromosome regions were V. Hadavi1, A. H. Taromchi1, P. Pajouh1, R. Kariminejad1, F. Sahebjam1, N. examined: 1q21 (CHRNB2), 8p21 (CHRNA2), 8p11 .2 (CHRNA6, Almadani1, F. Afroozan1, M. H. Kariminejad1, H. Yang Law2, H. Puehringer3, C. CHRNB3), 15q14 (CHRNA7), 15q24 (CHRNA5/A3/B4), 20q13 .2 Oberkanins3, H. Najmabadi1; (CHRNA4), 8q13 (CRH) . Two point and multipoint linkage analyses, 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, performed by LINKAGE and GENEHUNTER, allowed us to exclude Iran., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2KK Women’s and Children Hospital, the association between ADNFLE and all the examined genes, except Principle Scientific Officer & Diagnostic & Research Lab, Genetic Service, in one family in which a mutation screening in CRH is still in progress . Department of Pediatric Medicine, 229899, Singapore, Singapore, 3ViennaLab These results further illustrate the considerable genetic heterogeneity Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria. for such a syndrome, despite the quite homogeneous clinical picture . Alpha thalassemia is one of the most common hemoglobin gene disorders which is due to deletions or point mutations of α-globin gene. P0848. The influence of VEGF polymorphism on the progression Present study was designed to determine the spectrum of common of ADPKD α-thalassemia mutations in Iran. J. Reiterova1, J. Stekrova2, M. Merta1, V. Tesar1; In present study, total number of 406 patients referred to our center from 1Nephrology Dept.,General Teaching Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty, Charles 1998 till 2005 with hypochromic microcytic anemia and normal HbA2 University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Madical level who were shown to be negative for β-thalassemia genotyping Genetics,General Teaching Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty, Charles Univer- were choosen. They were tested for nineteen most common α- sity, Prague, Czech Republic. thalassemia mutations . Analysis for common deletions was performed A significant phenotypical variability is observed in autosomal dominant using gap-PCR amplification followed by agarose gel electrophoresis polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), the most common hereditary of the resulting PCR fragments . Additional mutations were analyzed kidney disease . Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a potent by reverse dot-blot and by DNA sequencing of alpha 1 and alpha 2 angiogenic agent, a mitogen for endothelial cells . Dysregulation of gene . VEGF expression in the kidney has been demonstrated in a wide range Due to this comprehensive study, it could be stated that -α3.7 mutation of primary and acquired renal diseases . Higher VEGF expression was is the most frequent α-thalassemia mutation in our population and found in polycystic kidneys . contributed about 62% of α-thalassemia mutations in Iran. However, an We examined the influence of the 2578 C/A and the 1154G/A additional 8 mutations (--Med, -α4 .2, α Pa1(GAA), ααcs, α-5nt, -(α)20 .5, αPa2(AAG), polymorphism in the regulatory region of the VEGF gene on the ααcd19) significantly cover 8.3% to 1.3% of mutations and the remaining progression of ADPKD towards end stage renal disease (ESRD) . The 5 mutations consider to be very rare . Northeast has the highest rate -2578C and -1154G allele were described to be associated with higher of -α4.2 mutations, on the contrary to southeast and west which no VEGF production . 287 ADPKD patients who had reached ESRD were 4 .2 mutation have investigated . Also it could be stated that in (17 .7%) analyzed . Patients were divided into three groups: 1 . with ESRD later of individuals no mutation figured out, which could be β-thalassemia than in 63 years , 2 . with ESRD before 45 years and 3 . with ESRD silent or carriers of other type of α-thalassemia. Since 2004 by use between 45-63 years . We compared the frequencies of different of Alpha-globin Strip Assay we could improve the identification of the genotypes between the groups . alpha mutations significantly (76% before 2004 , 88% in 2004). The VEGF 2578 C/A genotype distribution showed no differences among the groups. We observed nonsignificantly higher tendency to P0851. interaction Between the cholesteryl Ester transfer later ESRD in AA females (55 .1±8 .2) in comparison with CC females Protein (cEtP) Gene and APOE in Late Onset Alzheimer’s (51 .7±9 .4) (t-test, p=0 .09) . Disease. The VEGF 1154 G/A genotype distribution showed no differences A. Arias-Vásquez1, A. Isaacs1, Y. Aulchenko1, A. Hofman1, M. Breteler1, B. among the groups. We observed nonsignificantly higher tendency to Oostra2, C. van Duijn1; later ESRD in AA females (56 .3±9 .1) in comparison with AG females 1Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rot- (51 .9±6 .9) (t-test, p=0 .07) . terdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical To conclude, we excluded significant influence of 2578 C/A and 1154 Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. G/A VEGF polymorphisms on the progression of ADPKD . Late onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD) is a complex neurodegenerative IGA MZ CR 7633, 7733 and ZZ MSMT 0021620806. disorder . Of the many genes studied thus far with respect to the disease, the only consistently replicated genetic risk factor has been P0849. Association of a dopamine transporter gene (DAt1) the APOE gene . The APOE*4 allele of this gene may promote amyloid polymorphism with alcohol dependence in Russian population beta (Aβ) plaque fibrillation, which is one of the hallmarks of LOAD. of West siberia APOE may relate to LOAD through cholesterol by regulating the A. V. Marusin, M. G. Spiridonova, V. N. Kharkov, Y. R. Pels, V. A. Stepanov; production of Aβ, with high cellular cholesterol reducing Aβ levels. Scientific Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk Scientific Center, Si- Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) is involved in the same berian Branch of Russi, Tomsk, Russian Federation. pathway through regulation of the HDL levels . We studied both the VNTR-polymorphism in 3’ UTR of the dopamine transporter gene was APOE gene and the I405V polymorphism of the CETP gene in relation examined in patients with alcoholism combined with tuberculosis (n=84) to LOAD and investigated whether this polymorphism is independently in comparison to control population sample (n=122) . The genotype associated with LOAD risk, or acts in concert with the APOE gene . We frequencies obeyed the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in both groups . genotyped 525 LOAD cases and 5404 controls from the Rotterdam The DAT1 VNTR-polymorphism was significantly associated with an Study using a TaqMan allelic discrimination assay . Our results show increased risk of comorbidity of alcoholism and tuberculosis in Tomsk that in the APOE*4 non-carriers group, those homozygous for the V population (maximum-likelihood χ2=10 .75, P=0,030) . The frequencies allele of the I405V polymorphism have a 1 .6 fold (95% CI 1 .1-2 .5, p of the allele with 8, 9, 10 and 11 repeats in patients were 1 .2%, 16 .1%, = 0 .02) increase in risk of LOAD compared to non-carriers . This risk Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  increases to 2 .5 (95% CI 1 .4-4 .5, p = 0 .001) in the APOE*4 carriers EM studies of these ant-egg-like inclusion bodies (Schrøder; Nissen; group (p value = 0 .04 for gene-gene interaction) . Our results suggest Acta Ophthalmol 1979:57:14-9 and 57:435-42) showed a central core that the interaction of CETP with APOE increases the risk of LOAD, consisting of calcium-crystal-like structures surrounded by a transition probably through cholesterol metabolism in the brain . zone containing membrane-limited cytoplasmic bodies and linear five-layered structures. Genome wide linkage analysis was applied to P0852. Androgen receptor gene (cAG) polymorphism in identify the disease causing mutation . n patients with polycystic ovary syndrome materials: Blood was collected from 21 members of the family and P. Ferk1, M. Pohar2, N. Teran1, K. Gersak1; DNA isolated . 1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Uni- methods: A complete genome-wide linkage scan was carried out versity Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Institute of Biomedical Informatics, using the ABI md-10 Linkage Mapping set and ABI3100 sequencer Faculty of Medicine, Vrazov trg 2, Ljubljana, Slovenia. technology . DNA sequencing was performed using ABI BigDye and Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a multifactorial oligogenic trait, with an ABI377, and confirmation of the mutation in family members was chronic anovulation and clinical and/or biochemical hyperandrogenism carried out using restriction enzyme digests . as main characteristics . The gene encoding androgen receptor (AR Results: A LOD score of 3 .91 was obtained for D13S1275 close to gene) (Xq11-q12) has been proposed as being a candidate gene for the gap junction gene GJA3 (CX46), and sequencing of the DNA susceptibility to the syndrome . The (CAG) repeat polymorphism in from two affected members of the family discovered the mutation n exon 1 of AR gene was found to be inversely correlated to the gene’s L11S, c .32T>C, in exon2 . The L11S amino acid change is located in transcriptional activity and consequently to the transactivation potential the protein signal peptide, and is the only CX46 mutation known to of androgen receptor . The aim of the present case-control study was to that affect the signal peptide . The connexins are integral membrane evaluate the incidence of the polymorphism in Slovene PCOS patients . proteins involved in contact and transport between neighbouring cells . One hundred seventeen PCOS patients and 110 age-matched fertile The mutation in the CX46 signal peptide seems likely to explain the controls were genotyped for the polymorphism, using polymerase formation of the inclusion bodies found in the lenses if the altered chain reaction . Serum total testosterone (TT) levels were determined signal peptide disturbs the intracellular trafficking of the premature by radioimmunoassay, and body mass index (BMI) was calculated . protein through the Endoplasmic Reticulum and Golgi Apparatus . Considering either both of the two AR alleles or biallelic means, the distributions between PCOS and control patients were of no statistical P0855. Apolipoprotein A5 gene promoter t-1131c polymorphism significance (P = 0 .334 and P = 0 .376, respectively) . In PCOS women, associates with elevated triglyceride levels and confers BMI and serum TT levels were significantly positively correlated (R susceptibility for ischaemic stroke = 0 .276, P = 0 .002) . However, the number of CAG repeats could V. Havasi1, Z. Szolnoki2, G. Talián1, J. Bene1,3, K. Komlósi1, A. Maász1, F. So- not explain the variability in serum TT levels in PCOS patients with mogyvári4,5, A. Kondacs2, M. Szabó2, L. Fodor4, A. Bodor6, B. Melegh1,3; statistical significance (after adjustment for BMI, P = 0 .938, adjusted R2 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, = 0 .07) . To conclude, the (CAG) AR repeat polymorphism is probably Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Neurology and Neurophysiology, Pándy Kálmán n not a key risk factor for the development of PCOS in Slovene patients, County Hospital, Gyula, Hungary, 3MTA-PTE Clinical Genetics Research Group but its indirect involvement in the pathogenesis of PCOS, by complex of Hungarian Academy of Sciences, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 4Cen- interactions with other susceptibility factors might not be excluded . tral Laboratory, Pándy Kálmán County Hospital, Gyula, Hungary, 5Department of Clinical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged, Szeged, P0853. Association of the AcE genetic polymorphism and the Hungary, 6Department of Pathology, Réthy Pál County Hospital, Békéscsaba, maximal oxygen consumption of human Hungary. E. V. Lekontsev, O. V. Gumerova, E. V. Vorobyova, V. Y. Gorbunova; The possible role of triglycerides (TG) in the pathogenesis of ischaemic Bashkir State Pedagogical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. stroke is still under extensive investigation . Recently, apolipoprotein A 5 Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) is a key component of the (apoA5) gene promoter region T-1131C polymorphism has been shown circulating human reninangiotensin system (RAS) and also adjusting to be associated with elevated serum triglyceride levels . In our work a activity of cardiovascular system . In intron of the 16th gene’s was total of 302 subjects were classified as large vessel associated, small founded the polymorphism (17q23), caused insertion (I) - 287 p .n . or vessel associated or mixed group of ischaemic stroke patients . As a deletion (D) of the Alu-element (Rigat et .all ., 1992) . control group, 289 stroke and neuroimaging alteration-free Caucasian There are three polymorphic genotypes - I/I, I/D, D/D . The purpose of subjects were examined . The level of TG was increased in all patient research was studying the association of the given polymorphism with groups versus the controls (p<0 .05) . The apoA5 -1131C allele frequency a level of the physical working capacity; one of the parameters is the was approximately two-fold in all groups of stroke patients compared maximal consumption of oxygen (MCO) . with the controls (5 vs. 10-12%; p<0.05); and the apoA5 -1131C allele Among the investigated 70 persons by men with high parameters MCO itself was also found to be associated with increased TG levels in all is observed higher frequency of occurrence allele I (46 .2%, 10 .1%, groups . In multivariate logistic regression analysis model adjusted for P=0 .014) and decrease in frequency of occurrence of a heterozygotic differences in age, gender, serum cholesterol, hypertension, presence genotype in comparison with the control . In a group with low values of diabetes mellitus, smoking, drinking habits and ischaemic heart MCO authentic increase of frequency of occurrence of homozygous disease, a significantly increased risk of developing stroke disease genotype D/D is established (87 .8%, 14 .2%, P=0 .014) . was found in patients carrying the apoA5 -1131C allele (P<0.001; OR= Thus influence of polymorphism in gene ACE on level MCO is 2.5 (1.3-4.7)); this association was also proven for all subtypes of the arranged . stroke . The results presented here suggest that the apoA5 -1131C allele is an independent risk factor for the development of stroke . Being P0854. Ant-egg-cataract - distinct phenotype for an autosomal the apoA5 is under the control of the peroxisome proliferator-activated dominant congenital cataract first described in a Danish family receptor-α the current observations theoretically can have long term in 1967 therapeutical consequences . L. Hansen1,2, W. Yao3, K. W. Kjær1,2, H. Eiberg1, M. Funding4, N. Ehlers4, J. F. Hejtmancik3, T. Rosenberg5; P0856. Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and colorectal cancer 1IMBG, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Wilhelm Johansen G. Akpinar, E. Ergul, A. Sazci; Centre Functional Genome Research, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, University of Kocaeli,Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli, Turkey. Denmark, 3National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Depart- Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) gene polymorphism plays a major role in lipid ment of Ophthalmology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 5Gordon metabolism . It has been suggested that ApoE polymorphism might Norrie Centre for Genetic Eye Diseases, National Eye Clinic, Copenhagen, regulate colorectal tumor risk and development . We examined this Denmark. notion for colorectal cancer (CRC) . ApoE genotype was determined A Danish family described in 1967 (Riise; Acta Ophthalmol in 223 patients with CRC and 300 healthy controls from Kocaeli 1967:45:341-6) presents a distinct phenotype of congenital cataract in region of Turkey using a PCR-RFLP method . When alleles and which globular structures resembling ant-eggs are found in the lens . genotypes of 223 patients with CRC were compared with those of Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 6 300 healthy controls . No association was obtained in patients with that DFNB21 may play an important role in genetic load of ARNSHL in CRC (OR=1.011; 95%CI=0.713-1.434; P=0.94). The distribution of Iran. This will be confirmed by screening more families for this locus in the ApoE2/2, E2/3, E2/4, E3/3, E3/4 and E4/4 genotypes was 0 .3%, Iranian deaf population . 12 .0%, 5 .3%, 65%,16 .7% and 0 .7% in controls and 0 .0%, 13,5%, 1 .8%, 68 .6%, 15 .2%, and 0 .9% in patients with CRC . The frequency of P0859. Plakophilin-2 mutations are the major determinant of the ε2, ε3, and ε4 alleles was 9%, 79.34% and 11.67% in the controls familial arrhytmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy in the and 7 .62%, 82 .96% and 9 .41% in patients with CRC .In conclusion, Netherlands ApoE polymorphism is not a genetic risk factor for CRC in Turkey . J. D. H. Jongbloed1, M. Entius2, Z. Bhuiyan3, R. Jongbloed4, J. P. van Tintel- en1, A. C. P. Wiesfeld5, J. van der Smagt6, L. G. Boven1, M. M. A. M. Mannens3, P0857. investigation of seven Known loci associated with R. M. W. Hofstra1, I. M. van Langen3, L. C. Otterspoor2, P. A. F. M. Doevedans2, non-syndromic autosomal recessive mental retardation and L. M. Rodriguez7, A. A. M. Wilde8, I. C. van Gelder4, R. N. W. Hauer2; microcephaly based on stRs marker Homozygosity mapping in 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, The 30 families Netherlands, 2Heart Lung Center, University Medical Center Utrecht, The Neth- S. Esmaeeli Nieh1, S. S. Abedini1, K. Kahrizi1, F. Behjati1, D. Habibi1, S. erlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center Amster- Ghasemi Firoozabadi1, M. Falah1, V. Hadavi2, R. Vazifehmand1, A. W Kuss3, S. dam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Banihashemi1, H. H. Ropers3, H. Najmabadi1,2; Maastricht, The Netherlands, 5Department of Cardiology, University Medical 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- Center Groningen, The Netherlands, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, Uni- ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology versity Medical Center Utrecht, The Netherlands, 7Department of Cardiology, and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Max Planck Institute for University Hospital Maastricht, The Netherlands, 8Department of Experimental Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. Cardiology, Academical Medical Center Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Microcephaly is defined as a reduction in head circumference and In at least 50% of cases Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular this clinical finding infers that an individual has a significant diminution Cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a familial disease with an autosomal in brain volume . Microcephaly can be usefully divided into primary dominant mode of inheritance . Diagnosis is based on clinical criteria microcephaly, in which the brain fails to grow to the correct size proposed by a Task Force in 1994. Recent identification of mutations during pregnancy, and secondary microcephaly, in which the brain in the plakophilin-2 (PKP2) gene in 27% of ARVC patients suggests has the expected size at birth but subsequently fails to grow normally . an important role for this gene in this disorder . This will facilitate early Hereditary microcephaly can be classified as X-Linked or autosomal, identification of persons at risk. Our goal was to assess the prevalence and syndromic or non-syndromic . Seven out of ten Non-Syndromic of PKP2 mutations in patients with (supposedly) ARVC in four Dutch Autosomal Recessive Mental Retardation (NS-ARMR) loci are tertiary referral centers . associated with microcephaly, including MCPH1-MCPH6 which belong A total of 96 index patients were analyzed; 56 patients fulfilled ARVC to the family of MCPH (autosomal recessive primary microcephaly), criteria whereas 40 did not . The PKP2 gene was screened for mutations and ARFGEF2 . using DGGE/DHPLC and direct sequencing . In 24 out of 56 index The objective of this study was to investigate seven known loci patients (43%) fulfilling the criteria, mutations were identified. Four associated with autosomal recessive mental retardation with different mutations were found more than once: 2386T>C, 235C>T, microcephaly in 30 Iranian families . These 30 families have been 397C>T and 2489+1G>A . Haplotype analyses revealed that all of selected from 264 families which referred from different parts of Iran to these were founder mutations. Of the 14 different mutations identified, the Genetics Research Center . Each family was subjected to complete 4 were missense, 7 nonsense, 2 insertion-deletion and 1 splice-site clinical examinations and karyotype abnormalities have also been mutation . Eleven of these were novel . Mutations were found in 17/23 excluded . (73%) proven familial ARVC patients, whereas 11 proven non-familial We performed Homozygosity mapping by using STRs (Short Tandem cases, were non-carriers. In 2 out of 40 patients (5%) not fulfilling Repeats) markers . So far we analyzed 17 families for MCPH5 locus, ARVC criteria, mutations were identified. out of which, one family was linked to this locus . In conclusion, PKP2 mutations can be identified in up to 43% of Dutch patients fulfilling Task Force criteria for ARVC. Identical mutations occur P0858. Linkage analysis for 50 iranian families with autosomal frequently . These results will facilitate early recognition of persons at recessive non-syndromic hearing loss for DFNB21 locus risk and future studies of potential genotype-phenotype relationships . P. Imanirad1,2, S. Hemmati1, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Mohseni1, K. Kahrizi1, A. Daneshi3, M. Farhadi3, N. Meyer4, R. J. H. Smith4, H. Najmabadi1; P0860. screening ARX Gene in iranian Families with X-linked 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- mental Retardation ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cellular and Molecular Biology Depart- S. S. Abedini1, K. Kahrizi1, S. Esmaeeli Nieh1, F. Behjati1, S. Ghasemi Firooz- ment, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Research Center abadi1, S. Banihashemi1, A. Tzchach2, H. H. Ropers2, H. Najmabadi1; of Ear, Nose, Throat, and Head and Neck Surgery, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 1Genetics Research Center,University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Iran, 4Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, Department of Otolar- Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular yngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. Genetics, Berlin, Germany. Background: Congenital hearing loss occurs in 1 out of 1000 to 2000 The recently identified gene ARX (Aristalles-Related Homeobox), births and about 50% of all cases are estimated to be of genetic origin . codes the ARX protein, an important transcript factor that belongs to About 70% of hereditary hearing loss is non-syndromic with autosomal one of the three largest classes of homeoproteins, the paired (Prd) recessive inheritance accounting for 80% of the genetic load . To class. Several mutations have been identified in ARX gene, which assess the importance of responsible loci in Iranian population, we are responsible for a wide spectrum of phenotypes, including both screened 50 consanguineous families with Autosomal Recessive Non- nonsyndromic X-linked mental retardation (MRX), and syndromic Syndromic Hearing Loss (ARNSHL)for DFNB21, which was linked to (MRXS) forms such as X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia ARNSHL in Middle East countries . (XLAG), Partington syndrome and X-linked infantile spasm syndrome . Materials and Methods: 50 consanguineous families with at least The most common mutation in ARX gene identified is a duplication 24 three affected children, previously excluded by mutational analysis bp (24 bp dup) in exon 2 . This duplication leads to an expansion of the from GJB2 and GJB6 genes, were included in this study . We used second polyalanine tract of ARX protein . three polymorphic markers including D11S1998, D11S4464, and The aim of this study is to obtain the relative prevalence of ARX D11S1299 in this study . mutations in the families which fragile X has been ruled out with Results: Three families were linked to DFNB21 and two novel mutations established or putative X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) pattern . have been detected so far . In two families a 266 Del T mutation and a Up to now, we have collected 60 probands from 60 families with two large 9611bp deletion that starts from intron 9 and includes exon 10 in or more affected individuals obtaining informed consent form has TECTA gene were detected . been from the parents of probands . The chromosomal analysis by Conclusion: This study showed that mutations in DFNB21 locus are standard cytogentics method, did not show any abnormality . As the the third common cause of ARNSHL in Iranian population . It seems first step these families were screened for the most common form of Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  mutation, 24 bp dup, and follow by SSCP( Single Strand Conformation P0863. Association study of the candidate region 9p22 in italian Polymorphisms) and DNA sequencing for the entire ARX gene . So far families with asthma we have identified one individual with 24 bp dup. A. Begnini, M. Biscuola, E. Trabetti, G. Malerba, C. Bombieri, R. Galavotti, L. Xumerle, P. F. Pignatti; P0861. A fast and powerful method for pedigree-based Department of Mother and Child, Biology and Genetics, Section of Biology and quantitative trait loci association analysis Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. Y. S. Aulchenko1,2, D. de Koning3, C. Haley3, C. M. van Duijn1; In a previous genome scan for asthma in 123 Italian families, 1Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Institute of Cytology & phenotyped for skin prick test positivity to common aeroallergens Genetics SD RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Roslin Institute, Roslin, (SPT), total serum elevated IgE (IgE), bronchial hyperresponsiveness United Kingdom. to methacholine (BHR), clinical asthma and rhinitis, linkage on Studies of quantitative traits (QTs) using pedigrees are a promising chromosome 9p22 has been detected for SPT or for IgE (Am J Hum approach to identification of novel loci (QTLs) related to human Genet . 2002, Vol . 71 n . 4 Abs 1662) . health and disease . Pedigree-based QTL association analysis using We now performed a fine mapping and association study in this region information on allele transmission (TDT-like approach) is fast, reliable using a set of 19 families that presented non-negative linkage for SPT and extendable, but when ethnic stratification can be ignored, the or IgE . measured genotype approach may have greater power . In the latter Twenty-five SNPs spanning a region of 2.6 Mb harbouring several approach, a marker studied for association is tested as a covariate in candidate genes were seleceted and analyzed . a polygenic model accounting for additive genetic relationships within Patients were genotyped by Minisequencing (11 SNPs), melting curve the pedigree . However, in complex genealogies (which are especially analysis of fluorescent real time PCR (4 SNPs) or enzimatic restriction typical for genetically isolated populations) the measured genotype (10 SNPs) . analysis may be very time consuming, which makes genome screening An association study was performed by the Trasmision Disequilibrium impractical . We have developed a new and fast step-wise method for Test (TDT) . genome-wide pedigree-based QTL association analysis . The idea of Data show TDT significant associations after permutation test, among the proposed method is to perform polygenic analysis using complete which rs2584538 (p= 0 .0079 for asthma), rs1332712 (p= 0 .008 for pedigree information and to use residuals as a novel QT, which can be IgE), rs1889088 (p= 0.00079 for BHR; p= 0.0066 for IgE, p= 0.0023 for analysed using conventional regression analysis . Using simulated and rhinitis; p= 0.0094 for SPT), rs960232 (p=0.001 for rhinitis). real data we show that the non-centrality parameter, which links directly We will perform haplotype analysis and will extend the genotyping of to the power, may be two to four times greater for measured genotypes the relevant polymorphisms on a larger sample of families . compared to the TDT approach . When no QTL is present, the step- Aknowledgments: Italian Ministry for University and Research, FIRB wise approach is slightly conservative, but when QTL is present it’s complex diseases . statistical power is close to that of the measured genotypes approach . Our method provides a fast, powerful and relatively simpe means P0864. the ATGL gene is associated with free fatty acids, of undertaking a genome-wide QTL association analysis in general triglycerides and type 2 diabetes pedigrees that facilitates empirical significance testing strategies and C. Vollmert1, I. M. Heid1,2, V. Schoenborn3, A. Lingenhel3, T. D. Adams4, P. N. may also be used for 2D genome screening for interacting QTL . Hopkins4, T. Illig1, R. Zimmermann5, R. Zechner5, S. C. Hunt4, F. Kronenberg3; 1GSF National Research Center for Environment and Health, Munich-Neuher- P0862. Phenome and syntropic genes berg, Germany, 2Ludwig-Maximilian-Universität München, Munich, Germany, V. P. Puzyrev; 3Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 4University of Utah School of Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk Scientific Centre, Russian Academy of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 5Karl-Franzens-University, Graz, Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Austria. Like 100 years ago, exploration of relationships between phenetic and Adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) was recently described to genetic variability, genome and phenome, is still of current importance . predominantly perform the initial step in triglyceride hydrolysis and Sequencing of human genome has shown that an important practical therefore seems to play a pivotal role in the lipolytic catabolism of stored difference between genome and phenome is that while the genome fat in adipose tissue. In the first study investigating genetic variations is bounded (approximately 3 bilion base pairs), the phenome is not within the ATGL gene in humans, twelve polymorphisms identified via (its bound depends on how far we wish to go) (Raigen, Eppig, 2000) . sequencing and database search were studied in 2434 individuals In thirties of last century, famous Russian geneticist Serebrovsky of European ancestry from Utah . These polymorphisms and their foreknew this while formulating statement about “unity of infinite haplotypes were analyzed in subjects not taking diabetic medication number of traits and finite number of genes”. In postgenomic era, for association with plasma free fatty acids (FFA) as primary analysis, phenotyping takes on special significance in resolving of the problem. as well as triglycerides and glucose as a secondary analysis (n=1701, Our approach to phenotyping for common diseases gene mapping is 2193 or 2190 respectively) . Furthermore, type 2 diabetes (T2DM, based on the phenomenon of polypathies . n=342 out of 2434) was analyzed as an outcome . FFA concentrations Phenomenon of combination of several diseases in one individual and/ were significantly associated with several SNPs of ATGL (p-values from or in its relatives was noted in XIX century and was reflected in the idea 0 .015 to 0 .00003), consistent with additive inheritance . The pattern was of “arthritism” (Bouchard, 1890) . Later in the beginning of XX century similar when considering triglyceride concentrations . Furthermore, two this idea was developed by German pathologists who proposed to SNPs showed associations with glucose levels (p<0 .00001) and risk designate combined diseases by the term “syntropy” (Pfaundler, 1921) . of T2DM (p<0 .05) . Haplotype analysis supported and extended the Such “combinations” are perhaps non-random and have evolutionary shown SNP association analyses . genetic basis . We call genes which are involved in susceptibility to such These results complement previous findings of functional studies in disease combinations as genes of syntropies (Puzyrev, 2000) . Thus, mammals and elucidate a potential role of ATGL in pathways involved combined diseases (syntropies) comprise those units of phenome that in components of the metabolic syndrome . might correspond to some gene set, sample of co-regulated genes with similar structure (syntropic genes) . P0865. the dyslipidemia and obesity associated gene, FOXc2, We apply this approach to analysis of relationships between genome contributes to atherosclerotic changes at the vessel-wall level and phenome, studying such syntropies as cardiovascular continuum K. Komulainen1, P. J. Karhunen2, L. Peltonen1, M. Perola1; diseases and metabolic syndrome, autoimmune syntropy . 1Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2School of Medicine, University of Tampere and Research Unit of Laboratory Center, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. Transcription factor gene forkhead box C2 (FOXC2), a key regulator of adipocyte metabolism, has been associated with coronary heart disease related risk factors such as variation in plasma lipid levels and obesity. To extend the assessment of the significance of FOXC2 Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  gene from lipid levels of serum to quantitative atherosclerosis at the Haplotypes were characterised using five microsatellite markers, either vessel-wall level, we studied informative variants across the FOXC2 intragenic or flanking the ATM gene (D11S1819, NS22, D11S2179, gene locus in an autopsy study sample with extensive measurements D11S1778 and D11S1294) . This analysis has shown that patients of arterial atherosclerotic changes of the coronaries, abdominal aorta carrying the same mutation also shared the same STR haplotypes, and vessels of brain . in agreement with a founder effect . Taken together, these mutations The autopsy study sample consisted of 700 males 33 to 70 years old accounted for more than 35% of the Italian AT patients . These with sudden death in Helsinki area . In the analysis of covariance, the observations indicate that STR haplotypes prescreening should be FOXC2 gene showed association with coronary narrowings (P=0 .02), part of ATM genetic testing protocol in the Italian population . calcified (P=0.0007) and complicated (P=0.02) lesions of the coronary arteries and atherosclerosis of the brain (P=0 .01) . The data suggest P0868. Association of cARD15 Polymorphisms with Atopy- that the association of FOXC2 gene becomes evident especially in the Related traits in a Population-Based cohort of caucasian more severe and progressed states of atherosclerosis . Furthermore, the N. Klopp1, S. Weidinger2, L. Rümmler2, S. Wagenpfeil3, H. Baurecht3, J. Hein- strongest association was observed with the C-512T -polymorphism, rich4, H. Behrendt5, H. Wichmann4, J. Ring2, T. Illig4; which has shown suggestive functional importance in a previous study . 1Institute of Epidemiology, GSF-National Reseach Center Munich-Neuherberg, Our results underline the importance of the FOXC2 gene as a risk Germany, 2Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, TU Munich, factor for dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis and give more insight into Germany, 3Institute for Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, TU Munich, the possible pathogenesis associated with these genetic variants . In Germany, 4Institute of Epidemiology, GSF-National Research Center Munich- our autopsy data, a gene that earlier associated with plasma lipid levels Neuherberg, Germany, 5Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, subsequently associated with severe atherosclerosis at the vessel-wall GSF-National Research Center Munich-Neuherberg, Germany. level . Further functional studies are needed to truly establish the role of Background: Influences of microbial pathogens are crucial for the different FOXC2 variants in lipid metabolism related diseases . maturation of the immune system . CARD15 is a cytosolic receptor involved in bacterial recognition by APCs . CARD15 polymorphisms P0866. Association of sNP in the tNFsF4 gene with coronary have been associated with Crohn’s disease . Recently, associations artery disease and myocardial infarction in italian population with atopic phenotypes have been reported in children . L. Vecchione1, M. Bertoli1, F. D’Amico1, P. Borgiani1, G. Novelli1,2, F. Romeo3, Objective: Within a large population of German adults (n=1875) we R. Mango1,3; evaluated eight CARD15 polymorphisms for associations with atopic 1Dept. of Biopathology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2University of Ar- phenotypes . kansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States, 3Dept of Internal Methods: Subjects were phenotyped by standardized questionnaires Medicine, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy. and interviews as well as total and allergen-specific IgE measurements. Atherosclerosis, the leading cause of death in developed countries, Genotyping was performed using MALDI-TOF MS (Matrix-Assisted is the pathological basis for coronary artery disease (CAD), acute Laser Desorption Ionization - Time of Flight mass spectrometry) . myocardial infarction (AMI), cerebral infarction, and peripheral vascular Haplotypes were estimated using the SAS/Genetics module . disease . Recent functional studies in a murine model, suggested a Results: Subjects with a T allel at rs1077861 had a decreased risk possible role of TNFSF4 (tumor necrosis factor ligand superfamily to develop asthma (OR=0 .648, p=0 .013), whereas presence of an A member 4), also called OX40 ligand (OX40L), in atherogenesis . The allele at rs3135500 was significantly associated with an increased risk OX40L generates costimulatory signals by interacting with OX40 on (OR=1 .343, p=0 .036) . In addition, a CARD15 haplotype revealed to be T lymphocytes and it enhances the proliferation and differentiation protective against the development of asthma (OR=0 .326, p=0 .003) . of T lymphocytes, important processes in the initiation, progression Subjects with an A allele at position rs5743266 or a T allele at rs2066842 and destabilization of atherosclerotic plaque . The human TNFSF4 had a significantly decreased risk to develop allergic rhinoconjunctivitis gene, encoding the OX40L, was mapped to 1q24 .3-25 .1 . Recently, with ORs of 0 .820 ( p=0 .049) and 0 .801 (p=0 .025) . Polymorphism in two independent Swedish population was showed the association rs2066845 showed a significant association with increased total serum of rs 3850641 A>G SNP, located in intron 1 of the TNFSF4 gene, with IgE (OR=2 .155, p = 0 .006) . AMI susceptibility. To confirm this association in Italian population, we Conclusion: Genetic variants of CARD15 that might result in screened a group of 150 individuals with AMI, 150 individuals with inappropriate immunomodulation are not only associated with CAD angiographically documented and 100 controls with angiographic autoimmune diseases but also with atopic disorders . evidence of clean coronary arteries . All subjects were genotyped by allelic discrimination assay (Taqman assay). Our data confirm the P0869. Locus heterogeneity in AsD associated with AV-block association of the rs 3850641 A>G SNP with susceptibility to AMI . L. De Roy1, I. Gutierrez-Roelens2, C. Ovaert1, T. Sluymans1, K. Devriendt3, H. In particular the G allele was significantly more represented in AMI G. Brunner4, M. Vikkula2; individuals than in controls (P=0,003) . Furthermore the allelic frequency 1Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiology dept., Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, distribution found in patients with AMI was similar to total group of University of Louvain Medical School, Brussels, Belgium, 2Human Molecular patients (CAD + AMI). The present study confirms the association Genetics dept., Université catholique de Louvain & Christian de Duve Institute, of this SNP with AMI susceptibility and extends the association to Brussels, Belgium, 3Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 4Dept. of CAD susceptibility, providing evidence that TNFSF4 gene product is Human Genetics, University Medical Center St Radboud, Nijmegen, The Neth- involved in the process of atherogenesis . erlands. The prevalence of congenital heart defects is approximately 1% of all P0867. Haplotypes in ataxia-telangiectasia italian patients reveal live births . Identifying the genes responsible for cardiac malformation is ancestral founder effects the first step to understand pathogenesis. Heterozygous mutations in I. Torrente1, A. De Luca1,2, M. Magliozzi1, M. Piane3, L. Chessa3, B. Dallapicc- the CSX/NKX2-5 gene have been identified to cause atrial septal defect ola1,3; (ASD) and/or atrioventricular conduction disturbance, characterized by 1IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, progressive prolongation of the PR interval . There is great variability in 2Department of Pathology and Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre, Vancou- expressivity of the phenotype . ver General Hospital, Vancouver, DC, Canada, 3Department of Experimental We screened 4 sporadic patients and 3 index cases of families with ASD Medicine and Pathology, University “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy. and/or conduction defects . In one of them, a CSX/NKX2-5 mutation Ataxia-Telangiectasia (AT) is a rare autosomal recessive disease was identified. This novel mutation (p.Tyr256X) was inherited in a caused by mutations in ATM gene on chromosome 11q23 .1 . The ATM 3-generation family causing 5 individuals to have cardiac anomalies gene is very ranging from ASD to arrhythmias . Surprisingly, no CSX/NKX2-5 large, spanning a genomic region of 150 kb, and is comprised of 66 mutation was found in the 2 other families presenting a characteristic exons . Analysis of short tandem repeat (STR) haplotypes of Italian phenotype of CSX/NKX2-5 mutated individuals . Moreover, an ataxia-telangiectasia (AT; MIM# 208900) patients was carried out in intragenic or whole gene deletion was excluded in one of the families . 25 unrelated This suggests genetic heterogeneity for ASD with conduction defects . families carrying six common AT mutations, 8283delTC, 7517delGAGA, (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be) (http://www.icp.ucl.ac.be/vikkula) 3894insT, 3802delG, 3576G>A (K1192K), and 8977C>T (R2993X) . Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  P0870. Association of the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A) multiplex families was 2 .8:1 (37 males:13 females), which appears to with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in Spanish adult be lower than the typical male:female ratio of 4:1 . These data support patients our hypothesis that ASD in some families may be caused by autosomal L. Brunso1,2, M. Ribasés1,2, J. A. Ramos1, R. Bosch1, M. Nogueira1, E. García1, recessive inheritance . Linkage analyses were conducted in multiplex M. Bayés3, M. Casas1, B. Cormand2; families . One family maps to the AUTS1 locus on chromosome 7q, 1Servei de Psiquiatria, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, whereas others map to novel autism loci with multipoint LOD score of 2Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Pro- 2 .4-2 .78 generated from single families without pooling . The fact that grama Gens i Malalties, Centre de Regulació Genòmica (CRG), Barcelona, linked loci differ in each family suggests genetic heterogeneity . Spain. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity (ADHD) is the most common P0872. Exclusion of chromosome regions 8p and 8q and 12q in neuropsychiatric disorder of childhood and it can persist into a large indian family with autosomal dominant stuttering adolescence and adulthood . Its etiology is multifactorial, with A. Sreenivasarao1, S. K. Nath2, R. Memon1, J. V. Solanki3, R. Uppala1, R. Up- involvement of both genetic and environmental factors . Several lines pala1; of evidence suggest a role of the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4) 1Green Cross Blood Bank & Genetic Centre, Ahmedabad, India, 2Arthritis and in the genetic susceptibility to ADHD . Thus, the serotonin transporter Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,, has been involved in impulsive behaviour, it plays an important role in Oklahoma City, OK, United States, 3Department of Animal Genetics & Breed- the dopaminergic system, which is involved in ADHD, and is a target ing, Veterinary College, Gujarat Agriculture University, Anand, India. of different drugs used in the pharmacological treatment of ADHD, Stuttering (STUT) is an early childhood speech disorder characterized such as imipramine or venlafaxine . To evaluate the participation of by involuntary syllable repetitions, sound prolongations or interruptions the SLC6A4 gene in ADHD we considered the functional 5HTTVNTR (audible and silent) . It begins in childhood between the ages of 3-6 . polymorphism within intron 3 and performed a case-control association It is a painful symptom and greatly interferes with a child’s emotional study in a sample of 99 ADHD adult patients and 99 healthy controls and psychological development and also affects their daily social matched for age, sex and ethnicity. Although no significant differences or occupational functioning . It has an average prevalence of one in were observed in allele frequencies, the genotype distribution of the 100 individuals, but varies among various ethnic groups . It affects 5HTTVNTR polymorphism differed significantly between the ADHD disproportionately between genders (4:1 male-female ratio) . The sample and the controls (P=0 .018), due to an overrepresentation of genes responsible for STUT1 (OMIM 184450) and STUT2 (OMIM 5HTT-12R carriers in the group of patients (P=0 .009, OR=3 .68) . We did 609261) have been mapped to chromosome 18p and proximal not detect sex influence, and subdivision of the patients according to 18q (Am. J. Med. Genet. 124A:133-135, 2004) and 12q (Am. J. the clinical subtypes of inattentive, hyperactive-impulsive or combined Hum. Genet. 76:647-651, 2005), respectively . No causal gene (s) ADHD, did not produce any significant association, which could be has yet been identified. We have studied a large five-generation explained by the relatively small sample size and reduced statistical Indian pedigree with non-syndromic stuttering in which the anomaly power . Although preliminary, our results suggest that the 5HTT-12R segregates as an autosomal dominant trait . The onset is during early allele of the 5HTTVNTR polymorphism within the SLC6A4 gene may childhood . The pedigrees consist of 68 individuals with 21 affecteds predispose to ADHD and support a serotoninergic participation in the (17 males/4 females) . The age distribution of these affecteds is 4-65 etiology of this neuropsychiatric phenotype . years . Severity of the phenotype was variable among affecteds and no skipping of generation was observed . Two-point linkage analysis and P0871. Identification of gene(s) involved in autosomal recessive haplotype data generated using markers in the known candidate loci on autism spectrum disorder (AsD) chromosomes 12 and 18 did not show involvement of the above linked S. Yoo1,2, E. M. Morrow1,2, R. J. Ferland1,3, R. S. Hill1,2, A. Bodell1,2, K. Apse1,2, L. regions . Systematic genome-wide linkage analysis, using Affymatrix A. Rappaport4, J. Ware5, E. G. LeClair5, R. M. Joseph6, S. Al-Saad7, S. Balkhy8, 10K microchips is in progress to identify the stuttering causing cause G. Gascon8,9, N. Motavalli10, A. Hashmi11, C. A. Walsh1,2; gene(s) in this family. Email: u_c_rao@hotmail.com 1Department of Neurology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, BIDMC, Boston, MA, United States, 2Division of Genetics, Children’s Hospital Boston P0873. screening of mYO15 gene mutations in DFNB3 locus in and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 3Department of Biol- autosomal recessive non- syndromic GJB2 and GJB6 negative ogy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, United States, 4Department of hearing loss iranian population Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital Boston and Harvard Medical School, Boston, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Mohseni1, P. Imanirad1, S. Arzhangi1, K. Kahrizi1, A. MA, United States, 5Department of Psychiatry, Children’s Hospital Boston and Daneshi2, N. Almadani3, M. Farhadi2, N. Meyer4, R. J. H. Smith4, H. Najmabadi1; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 6Department of Anatomy 1Genetic Research Center of University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation and Neurobiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United of Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research Centre of Ear, Nose, States, 7Kuwait Center for Autism, Kuwait City, Kuwait, 8Department of Neuro- Throat, and Head and Neck Surgery, Iran university of Medical sciences, sciences and Pediatrics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Karimi-Nejad & Najmabadi Pathology and Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 9Clinical Neurosciences & Pediatrics, Brown University Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Molecular Oto- School of Medicine, Providence, RI, United States, 10Department of Child and laryngology Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Adolescent Psychiatry, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 11Department of Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. Pediatrics, Combined Military Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan. Background: Mutations in myosin XV are responsible for congenital Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by profound deafness DFNB3 in humans and deafness and vestibular deficits in social interaction, impaired communication, and unusual and defects in shaker 2 mice . Full-length myosin XV transcript contains 66 repetitive behaviors and interests . Previous segregation analyses of exons and encodes 365-kDa protein . MYO15 has at least 50 exons autism have revealed that some subsets of autism may be caused by spanning 36 kilobases and is essential for the graded elongation of autosomal recessive mechanism . Consanguineous pedigrees facilitate stereocilia during their functional maturation .Mutations in this gene the recognition and mapping of recessively inherited neurological have been reported in Indonesia, North America and also in our two disorders . The goal of this study is to use the Arabic Middle Eastern neighbor countries Pakistan and India; therefore we decided to study populations to map and identify autosomal recessive autism spectrum this locus in our population . disorder (ASD) genes in order to better understand their classification, Materials and methods: Fifty families with autosomal recessive non- pathogenesis, and potential treatments . We so far have recruited 65 syndromic hearing loss with two or more affected children originating consanguineous families with autistic children, 20 out of which are from different ethnic groups of Iranian population that were negative for multiplex families . SignatureChip Human Genome Microarray were GJB2 and GJB6 mutations, that are located on the most prevalent locus performed on probands from 35 families, and chromosomal anomalies (DFNB1) of hearing loss, were screened for DFNB3 locus by linkage were detected in 6 cases; interestingly, all patients with chromosome analysis . We used D17S2196, D17S842, D17S1857, D17S2187 and deletions or duplications were from families with one affected individual, D17S975 STR (short Tandem Repeat) markers for this study . underscoring the importance of cytogenetic testings in ASD, especially Results: Two out of fifty families were linked to this locus. Mutation in families with one affected child . Moreover, the male:female ratio in detection of these two families is performing . Conclusion: We Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 0 concluded after DFNB1, DFNB4 and DFNB21 myosin XV gene Denmark, 2Department of Audiology Bispebjerg Hospital, Copenhagen, Den- mutations are responsible for the most prevalent cause of autosomal mark, 3Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Copenhagen, Denmark, recessive non- syndromic hearing loss in Iranian population . 4Gl. Kongevej 25, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Department of Audiology Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark, 6Seligmannsvej14, Vejle, Denmark, 7Department of P0874. Absence of DFNB9 Locus, as the cause of Non- Audiology Sønderborg Hospital, Sønderborg, Denmark, 8Department of Audiol- syndromic Autosomal Recessive Hearing Loss in the iranian ogy Bispebjerg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. population The Branchio-Oto-Renal (BOR) syndrome is an autosomal dominant G. Asaadi Tehrani1,2, E. Taherzadeh1, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Mohseni1, K. developmental disorder characterized by hearing loss and associated Kahrizi1, N. Nikzat1, A. Daneshi3, M. Farhadi3, R. J. H. Smith4, H. Najmabadi1; branchial and renal anomalies with a prevalence of 1:40 .000 . BOR is 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation caused by mutations in the EYA1 (Eyes absent homolog) gene (8q13), Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Department, Science the SIX1-gene (14q21 .3), or in a third locus on 1q31 . Six Danish and Research Unit, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, families were studied . In two out of three large families (Fam A and 3Research Center of Ear, Nose, Throat, and Head and Neck Surgery, Tehran, B) linkage analysis showed significant LOD-score to EYA1 (multipoint Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, LOD score: Fam A: Z = 6.88; Fam B: Z = 5.78), which encodes a Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, transcriptional co-activator with protein-tyrosine phosphatase activity . Iowa, IA, United States. Sequencing of EYA1 revealed two splice-site mutations: IVS10-1G>A Inherited hearing impairment affects one in 2000 newborns . Non- and ISV12+4A>G, but no abnormalities in the other four probands . syndromic prelingual forms are inherited mainly as autosomal The IVS10-1G>A mutation, which is known (http://www .medicine . recessive traits, of which 20 genes are currently known . Mutation in uiowa .edu), was predicted to move the splice-site one nucleotide the genes that encodes connexin 26 and 30 account for up to 50% and thereby introduce a frame-shift and a premature stop codon at of these cases .The gene encoding Otoferlin (OTOF), is responsible amino acid residue 387 . The new splice-site mutation, IVS12+4A>G, for the DFNB9 subtype of prelingual hearing impairment . Different co-segregated perfectly with BOR in 12 affected/11 unaffected over mutations has been reported in the OTOF . So far , mutation in number four generations and is predicted (https://splice .cmh .edu/) to move the of regional countries such as Lebanon, Turkey, India and some other splice-site four nucleotides, leading to a frame-shift and a premature European countries like Germany, France, Spain and etc . have been stop codon at amino acid residue 461 . Both mutations are predicted to reported . We screened 50 Iranian families with autosomal recessive disrupt the hydrolase region of the EYA1 protein . nonsyndromic sensorinural deafness , which were negative for GJB2 We identified the disease causing EYA1 mutations in two out of six gene mutations . Homozygosity mapping for these families using Danish BOR families, and identified two splice site mutations, of following STRs markers, D2S1324, D2S174, D2S144, D2S158 and which one is new . It remains to be investigated if larger genomic D2S405 was carried out .We have not found any family which could rearrangements in EYA1, or mutations in other BOR genes/loci can be mapped to DFNB9 in our population . These results suggests that explain BOR in the remaining four families . mutation in OTOF gene does not contribute as a major cause of Non- Syndromic heredity hearing loss in our population . P0877. the genetic variation in the c-reactive protein locus has an effect on cVD risk P0875. Polymorphisms in the Glucocorticoid Receptor Gene and M. Alanne1, K. Komulainen1, K. Auro1, K. Silander1, V. Salomaa2, L. Peltonen1, susceptibility to major Affective Disorders M. Perola1; D. Grozeva1, E. Green1, S. Caesar2, S. Hyde2, C. Fraser1, I. Craig3, A. Farmer3, 1National Public Health Institute – KTL, department of Molecular Medicine, P. McGuffin3, L. Jones2, I. Jones1, G. Kirov1, M. J. Owen1, N. Craddock1; Helsinki, Finland, 2National Public Health Institute – KTL, department of Epide- 1Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United King- miology and Health Promotion, Helsinki, Finland. dom, 2Department of Psychiatry, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United C-reactive protein (CRP) is a major acute-phase reactant and an Kingdom, 3Institute of Psychiatry, London, United Kingdom. independent predictor of future cardiovascular disease (CVD) events . A major hypothesis that has been suggested for the pathogenesis of We analysed two separate, prospectively followed Finnish cohorts, Bipolar and Unipolar disorders is the corticosteroid receptor hypothesis . FINRISK 92 and 97, (n=14140) from which 2225 individuals were It focuses on the impaired corticosteroid receptor signaling as a primary genotyped using a case-cohort design to study the effect of variation in factor for the developing of the disorders . For understanding Bipolar the CRP gene on the risk of CVD . All haplotype tagging SNPs (htSNPs) disorder, we have to understand the mechanisms that control the range with frequency >5% in the SeattleSNP database were analysed . and stability of emotions and it is shown that variations in expression Four of the six selected htSNPs formed 5 common haplotypes . In time- of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) gene can contribute to the tuning to-event analysis with Cox’s proportional hazard model, two haplotypes of emotional stability . There is evidence that chronic dysregulation of showed significant association to CVD events in women. Female hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis activity could be associated with carriers of a haplotype tagged by rs3091244(G/A/T)-A had 2 .7 times the onset and course of Depression . higher risk for CVD event than non-carriers in the FINRISK 92 sample The GR gene is a member of the steroid receptor family and is located (95% confidence interval:1.0-7.2, p=0.05). In combined analysis of the on chromosome 5-5q31 .3 . In the brain GR is thought to modulate two cohorts the risk was 2 .0 times higher (1 .1-3 .7, p=0 .02) . Female emotional behavior and cognitive functions . We examined whether carriers of a haplotype tagged by rs2794521(C/T)-C had a significantly four polymorphisms (a SNP altering a BclI RFLP, N363S, rs33388 and lower risk for CVD event in the FINRISK 92 sample (hazard ratio rs33389) in the GR gene confer susceptibility to Affective Disorders . (HR):0 .27, 0 .1-0 .9, p=0 .03) . The same trend was observed in FINRISK These SNPs have been shown to be associated with changes in the 97 females and in combined analysis for females (HR:0 .8, ns . and sensitivity to glucocorticoids . HR:0 .5, p=0 .02, respectively) . These two haplotypes did not associate We studied two large well-diagnosed samples of patients with Bipolar to serum CRP concentration in the FINRISK 92 sample and none of disorder and Major Depression, and matched controls . We did not the haplotypes associated with CVD risk in males in either cohort . observe association between developing the diseases and any of the Variation in the CRP gene may have an effect on the risk of CVD in variants . Our results show that none of these polymorphisms exerts females as suggested by these results in two independent Finnish a major influence on susceptibility to Bipolar and Unipolar Affective population cohorts . disorders .Currently we are examining the data to study the haplotype pattern, and to test the possible influence of clinical covariates and P0878. Androgen receptor gene trinucleotide repeats as a subtypes marker for tracing disease in intersex patients M. D. Omrani; P0876. Branchio-Oto-Renal Syndrome: Identification of a new Uromieh Medical Science University, Uromieh, Islamic Republic of Iran. splice-site mutation in one out of six Danish families Mutations of the androgen receptor (AR) gene give rise to a wide array K. M. Sanggaard1,2, K. W. Kjaer1, H. Eiberg3, T. Johnsen4, S. Gimsing5, J. Dyr- of phenotypic abnormalities . Various mutations of the AR gene and mose6, K. O. Nielsen7, N. D. Rendorff1, L. Tranebjaerg1,8; expanded CAG repeats at exon 1 of that gene have been reported in 1Wilhelm Johansen Center for Functionel Genome Research, Copenhagen, patients with infertility and neurodegenerative diseases . However, the role of the AR gene trinucleotides repeats has not been systemically Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 1 studied in those with hypospadias or genital ambiguity . confirmed by diagnostic restriction enzyme digests of the families and Screening of the AR, LH, SRD5A2, 17 B HSD receptors and SRY gene 60 normal persons were used as control . were carried out in a family with ambiguous genitalia using automated Results: Mutations were identified in three families. A LOD = 3.43 for sequence analysis on the ABI Prism 310 machine . Characterization of D1S3466 resulted in identification of the amino acid change S73F, the 3 patients and their healthy family members did not showed any c .218C>T, in exon2 of the gap-junction protein GJA8 (CX50) in one mutations in the mentioned genes . Analyzing mother and her children ADCC family . A LOD=2 .9 was obtained for D21S1114 close to CRYAA AR exon1 showed that mother is heterozygote for both CAG and GGN in another ADCC family and a mutation R21W, c .61C>T, was detected repeat . All affected children inherited the longer CAG and GGN repeat in exon1 . Finally, a LOD = 3 .0 was obtained for D21S1114 in the from their mother and all their healthy siblings inherited shorter CAG ADCCMC family and a mutation R116H, c .337G>A, was proved in and GGN repeat . Only one girl has heterozygous situation like her exon3 of CRYAA . mother . Our results indicated that disease locus is in linkage disequilibrium P0881. characterization of two new truncating PMM mutations to the CAG and GGN trinucleotide repeats in the AR gene . One of in cDG-ia patients: a deep intronic point mutation and a deletion the healthy girls of the family has inherited the expanded repeats of 20 kb. which means she is a potential carrier of the disease locus and she E. Schollen1, L. Keldermans1, P. Briones2, A. Sanchez-Valverde3, M. Adamow- will pass the disease locus to her offspring . It is possible to offer her icz4, G. Matthijs1; prenatal diagnosis producers . In addition our founding could help the 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Institut de Bioquímica Clinica, counseling of the affected family member regarding the use of intra- Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pam- cytoplasmic sperm injection . plona, Spain, 4Department of Metabolic Diseases, Warsaw, Poland. Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation type Ia (CDG-Ia), caused by P0879. Evaluating the accuracy of genetic testing for mutations in PMM2, represent the most frequent type of a group of cardiovascular disease susceptibility recessive metabolic disorders characterized by a defect in the N- O. A. Makeeva1, K. V. Puzyrev2, E. N. Pavljukova2, O. G. Ivanova1, M. V. Gol- glycan synthesis . The clinical presentation varies between a very ubenko1, V. P. Puzyrev1; severe multisystem disorder to a mild neurological picture . A plethora 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Re- of PMM2 mutations have been described . The majority of them search Institute of Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation. are of the missense type, reflecting the requirement of a minimal Testing for common disease susceptibility is considered to be of phosphomannomutase activity for a cell or organism to be viable . the greatest complexity . However several genetic tests for common We characterized two new truncating mutations in two CDG-Ia diseases are to be appearing in medical practice in few years . patients with an enzymatically confirmed PMM deficiency. Patient 1 is While studying the genetic basis for cardiovascular diseases, we compound heterozygous for the p .V231M (c .691G>A) mutation and a detected several genetic polymorphisms as being risk factors for deep intronic point mutation (c .639-15 .479C>T) . This variant activates various CVD in Russian population . In particular we had noted that a cryptic splice donor in intron 7, resulting in an in-frame insertion of the contribution of genetic polymorphisms to CV endophenotypes 123 bp between exon 7 and 8 . Patient 2 is compound heterozygous for interindividual variability could be strictly dependent on the presence the p .V44A (c .131T>C) mutation and a large deletion of approximately of other certain risk factors, such as diabetes mellitus 2 or obesity . 20 kb including exon 8 of the PMM2 gene . The transcripts of this For example ‘opposite’ NOS3 haplotypes were associated with the truncated allele include exons 1 to 7 from the PMM2 gene and different presence of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in patients with essential fragments of the proximal gene CHSP_1 . hypertension along and hypertension combined with DM2 . So we These types of mutations have not been described before in CDG- think that for the aims of susceptibility testing, genetic tests should be Ia patients and stresses the importance to combine PMM2 mutation combined with the information on CV risk factors existing in patient screening on genomic DNA with analysis of the transcripts and/or with yet in order to increase test accuracy . To evaluate the usefulness of the enzymatic analysis of the phosphomannomutase activity . Next genetic testing, we studied a sample of 53 males with middle age of to the exonic deletions, which currently receive more attention than 54 years to reveal predisposition to LVH . Test panel consisted of 3 before, it is likely that deep intronic mutations represent an increasingly polymorphisms (2 variants in ACE and one - in calcineurin A alfa gene, important category of mutations . which were associated with LVH in our previous study independently from the other ‘classical’ risk factors ) . It was detected that genetic P0882. A novel deletion of sAtB2 is associated with cleft palate ‘diagnosis’ (predisposed or not for LVH development) was confirmed K. Writzl, B. Peterlin; by echocardiography in 59% . This was comparable with the share of UMC Ljubljana, LJUBLJANA, Slovenia. genetic component, known to be around 60% for this common trait . De novo translocation interrupting the transcription unit of SATB2 (special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 2) gene located on 2q32- P0880. mutation analyses in families with congenital/infantile q33 has been reported to be associated with cleft palate only . Mutation cataract analysis of 70 unrelated patients with cleft palate only did not reveal T. Rosenberg1, W. Yao2, K. Kjær3,4, H. Eiberg3, J. F. Hejtmancik2, L. Hansen3,4; any coding region variants . We tested for the presence of the copy 1Norrie Centre for Genetic Eye Diseases, National Eye Clinic, Hellerup, Den- number of SATB2 gene in a sample of 92 patients with cleft palate only mark, 2National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3IMBG, using a quantitative real-time PCR approach . In one patient (1%) a de University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Wilhelm Johansen Centre novo SATB2 deletion was detected . for Functional Genome Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Thus, our study supports the strong evidence of an important role for Denmark. SATB2 in the palate development . Families with congenital/infantile cataract (CC) including cataracts associated with micro-cornea (CCMC) were studied to identify cataract- P0883. Fine mapping of the region on the chromosome 5q32 in causing mutations . More than 20 cataract genes or loci are known scandinavian families with celiac disease to be associated with either recessive or dominant isolated inherited S. Adamovic1, Å. Torinsson Naluai2, S. Nilsson3,4, Å. Hellqvist5, A. H. Gudjons- cataracts but only two genes are known to be related to the association dottir6, H. Ascher7, J. Wahlström1; of cataract and micro-cornea . 1Institution of Biomedicin, Göteborg, Sweden, 2Core Facilities/Göteborg Ge- materials: Six large families with ADCC and one large ADCCMC family nomics, Göteborg, Sweden, 3Core Facilities/Göteborg Bioinformatics, Göte- as well as eight small families with ADCCMC are investigated . borg, Sweden, 4Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg, Sweden, 5Core methods: Locus specific haplotyping was done in two of the large Facilities / Göteborg Bioinformatics, Göteborg, Sweden, 6Dept. of Pediatrics, families with isolated cataract and complete genome wide linkage The Queen Silvia Children´s Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden, 7Nordic School of analysis was performed in the ADCCMC family . Two point linkage Public Health, Göteborg, Sweden. analyses were performed and LOD scores > 3 were obtained . We performed a genome wide scan in 106 Scandinavian multiplex Candidate genes were identified by DNA sequencing using BigDye families with celiac disease (Naluai et al, EJHG 2001) . After typing v1.1 technology and an ABI 377. The identified mutations were further additional markers in the region on chromosome 5q31-33 the NPL Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  score reached a significant level of 4,2 (p=0,000003). We continued serum lipid levels and insulin resistance . There are also other our study by fine mapping a part of this region (approximately 6 interesting candidate genes,e .g .CEL (Carboxyl ester lipase) in the cM) between markers D5S2017 and D5S434 in order to perform region . Mutations in CEL cause pancreatic dysfunction . an association analysis . For this study we analysed 54 SNPs and 8 microsatellites . The SNPs were chosen with consideration to their P0886. stR panel for PcR-based diagnosis of the cmt 1A validation status and position in the region . We focused on possible duplication in Ukraine candidate genes within this region . SNPs chosen had minor allele N. V. Hryshchenko1, S. A. Kravchenko1, G. V. Skyban2, G. M. Bychkova2, N. A. frequencies above 0,1 . The average distance between the markers Pichkur3, L. A. Livshits1; was approximately 50kb . 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics National Academy of Science of The analysis indicated some haplotypes that showed a nominal Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Scientific Center of Radiation Medicine Academy of association (p<0,001). Although promising, it was not significant after Medical Science of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 3Medical Genetic Center, Ukrainian correction and could not fully explain the linkage peak, so further Children Hospital (OkHMATDET), Kyiv, Ukraine. investigation of the region is necessary . Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy (CMT) is one of the most common human hereditary disorders affecting 1:2500 individuals . CMT has P0884. Haplotyping of iVs8 5t-Poly(tG) in cBAVD and been separated into two clinical/pathological categories: CMT1 (70%) pancreatitis patients using a simple allele-specific method and CMT2 (30%), which further subdivided according to genetic P. Garagnani1,2, P. Selva2, C. Rossi3, S. Ferrari3, M. Cenci3, D. Luiselli1, V. Man- mapping criteria into -A, -B, -C, and so forth . The major mutation tovani2,3, G. Romeo3; results in CMT1A (68%-90% of CMT1) - is microduplication of 1,4 Mb 1Dip. Biologia Evoluzionistica Sperimentale, Lab. di Antropologia Molecolare, in 17p11 .2 chromosome region . To determine the most informative Bologna University, Bologna, Italy, 2CRBA Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bo- markers panel of STR-PCR method duplication detection we perform logna, Italy, 3U.O. Genetica Medica Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. the analysis of polymorphisms in three STR loci (D17S921, D17S1358 The IVS8 5T in CFTR gene is an allelic variant of intron 8 that in and D17S122) from the 17p11 .2 chromosomal region in 52 unrelated trans with a severe CFTR mutation can result in variable phenotypes, non-CMT volunteers . The most informative locus was D17S921 with ranging from normal to congenital bilateral absence of vas deferens observed index of heterozygosity 73,1% . The overall informativness (CBAVD), or mild cystic fibrosis. Recent studies report a correlation for the CMT1A-duplication detection in current use STR panel was between the exon 9 skipping caused by 5T allele and the adjacent calculated as 93,6%. Furthermore, the limitations and difficulties in upstream repeat of 9-13 TG . 5T-carrier individuals with either 12 or 13 the results interpretation obtained by the currently used method for TG are more likely to exhibit an abnormal phenotype than those with CMT1A-duplication analysis in Ukraine have been analyzed . We less than 12TG . performed the CMT1A tandem duplication analysis using our STR We describe here a rapid and simple method for direct haplotyping panel for autosome-dominant CMT1 patients and their relatives . the TG repeats in 5T individuals by allele-specific fluorescent PCR. CMT1A duplications were found in 29 patients (from 17 unrelated 5T-specific primer 5’-CCCCAAATCCCTGTTAAAAAC and D4- families) of total 21 autosome-dominant CMT families from Ukraine . labelled common primer 5’-GGCCATGTGCTTTTCAAACT are used The patients from 3 CMT families were homozygous in all three loci for PCR amplification. PCR fragments ranging from 120 to 126 bp, (non-informative cases) . It has been shown that current use STR panel corresponding to 10TG-13TG, were detected by automated capillary analysis is important for CMT1A duplication detection, early differential electrophoresis (CEQ8000, Beckman) . Method was assessed in 30 diagnosis of CMT including prenatal diagnosis and genetic consulting DNA samples carrying 5T allele, in which T-TG tract was previously in high-risk families . However, to increase the informativness of genotyped by direct sequencing or by cloning into a plasmid vector CMT1A-duplication diagnosis new highly polymorphic STR loci have followed by sequencing in ambiguous cases . to be involved into analysis . As the method resulted specific, accurate and simple, we further tested the TG repeat in 5T-positive CBAVD and chronic pancreatitis P0887. Family based association approach provides further patients, and in normal controls . 100% (7/7) CBAVD, 44,4% (4/9) evidence for a role of the CHRM gene in cognition chronic pancreatitis patients and 48,4% (15/31) normal controls M. F. Gosso1,2, M. J. van Belzen3,2, E. J. C. de Geus1,2, J. C. Polderman1, P. showed 12TG. Our results confirm the pathogenic role of 5T-12TG in Heutink3,2, D. I. Boomsma1,2, D. Posthuma1,2; CBAVD . Moreover, the high prevalence of 5T-12TG haplotype makes 1Dept of Biological Psychology, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, our method an useful tool for a reliable estimation of the disease risk 2Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research – CNCR, Vrije Universiteit, in 5T individuals . Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Section of Medical Genomics, Dept of Clinical Genetics and Anthropogenetics, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Nether- P0885. Is there an association between cystic fibrosis and fatty lands. acid transport protein ( FAtP) genes? Identifying genes for variation in the range of normal intelligence could K. Eiklid, M. Møller; provide important clues to the genetic etiology of disturbed cognition Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. in e .g . autism, reading disorder, and ADHD . Individual performance Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) have mutations in the gene coding across a single aspect of cognitive ability is highly predictive of for the cAMP dependent chloride ion transporting channel in the performance on other aspects of cognitive ability . apical membrane of epithelial cells . There is poor correlation between Cholinergic neurotransmission of muscarinic acetylcholine receptor genotype and phenotype in CF and modifying genes may play a role genes (CHRM) has been implicated in higher brain cognitive functions in disease severity . such as attention, learning and memory . The gene encoding mAChR2 Patients with CF have been shown to have abnormal metabolism of (CHRM2) on 7q31-35, appears to be predominantly expressed on fatty acids . The fatty acid transport proteins (FATPs) are involved in the presynaptic terminals of ACh containing neurons . Pharmacological uptake of essential long chain fatty acids in humans and are coded for and electrophysiological studies suggest these receptors serve as by 6 known genes, SLC27A1-6. autoreceptors, playing a fundamental role in Ach (negative) release Forty CF-patients, homozygous for the most common severe CF regulation . mutation, F508del, and 146 normal healthy blood donor controls with A family based genetic association test was implemented using no F508del mutation were analyzed with respect to markers close to quantitative transmission disequilibrium test (QTDT) . A sample of 667 the 6 FATP genes to see if there was any association between CF individuals from 304 Dutch families was used from which cognition and FATP genes . We used dinucleotide markers from The ABI linkage phenotypes were previously collected from several studies from mapping set, version 2 .5 . The results were analyzed with the Mann- the Netherlands Twin Registry . Three tagging-SNPs (t-SNPs) were Whitney test and the two sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test . selected (rs1174206, rs324640, rs324650) . The strongest association, Marker D9S194 showed a week association with SLC27A4 on after multiple test correction, was between rs324650 on intron 5 chromosome 9q31 .11 . Further testing of markers in the candidate and performance IQ (PIQ), where the T allele was associated with gene in the region will be done . FATP4 is expressed in the pancreas an increase of 4 .6 IQ points (p<0.001) . We hypothesise that a non- and intestine and has been associated with fasting and postprandial coding polymorphism(s) might be involved in regulation of expression Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  of alternative splicing of the CHRM2 gene, which in turn may affect frequency distributions of the CG gene within the patients and healthy mAcHR2 transcription, as well as the fine-tuning negative feedback groups in Russian ethnic group . of this particular receptor . Further analyses involving more genetic variants will provide us more insight in order to elucidate the complex P0890. Genetic polymorphism in matrix metalloproteinase-9 and interplay among genetic variants and its ensuing consequences . cOPD severity D. G. Yanbaeva1, G. F. Korytina1, S. Z. Zagidullin2,3, T. V. Victorova1,2; P0888. Evaluation of Aneuploidy incidence in Arrested Embryos 1Institute of Biochemistry & Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State and correlation Between sperm-FisH and sperm-Apoptosis Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Ufa City Hospital No 21, Ufa, Results Russian Federation. T. Cankaya, C. Ozkinay, C. Gunduz, E. Tavmergen, F. Ozkinay; Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a major group of proteases Ege University, Izmir, Turkey. known to regulate extracellular matrix turnover and so they have Chromosomal abnormality rates in the embryos are observed more been suggested to be important in the process of lung disease frequently than in spontaneous abortions and it has been reported associated with tissue remodeling . Increased concentrations of MMP- that the incidence of aneuploidies varies between 23% and 89% in 1 (collagenase) and MMP-9 (gelatinase B) are present in BALF from embryos in the literature . patients with COPD, and there is increased activity of those enzymes In this study we investigated: in the lung parenchyma of patients with emphysema . 1 . Chromosomal aneuploidy rate for chromosome 13,16,18,21 and 22 MMPs are considered as one of the candidate genes in the susceptibility in arrested embryos, to COPD . A few of naturally occurring polymorphisms of MMP gene 2 . The relationship between the aneuploidies found in arrested embryos promoters have been identified and found to alter transcriptional activity. and viability rate of embryos obtained in the same cycle, We determined the prevalence of following polymorphisms: -1607G/ 3 . The relationship between the aneuploidy rate in arrested embryos GG (MMP1), -1562C/T (MMP9), and -82A/G (MMP12) in 320 COPD and sperm apoptosis, sperm FISH for chromosome X,Y and 18 and patients (II-IV GOLD stages) and 421 healthy subjects to examine spermiogram . the association with the development of pulmonary emphysema . Twenty arrested embryos were analysed using PGD FISH probes Interestingly, -1562T allele of MMP9 frequency was higher in subjects (13,16,18,21 and 22) . The sperm which was obtained from the father suffering from very severe COPD (GOLD stage IV) than in patients with of the arrested embryos was analysed using FISH probes (X,Y and stages II and III (0 .154 versus 0 .085, P=0 .011) . Association analysis 18) . To evaluate apoptosis, TUNEL test was performed on sperm . revealed that -1562T allele is a risk factor for development of severe Results: Chromosomal aneuploidy frequency in arrested embryos was COPD (OR=1 .96, CI 95% 1 .22-3 .34) . Moreover, carriers of -1562T found to be 80% . There was no relationship between the aneuploidies allele were more prevalent among stage IV COPD patients younger found in arrested embryos and the viabilty rate of the embryos obtained than 55 years compare to patients with less severe COPD of the same in the same cycle or total aneuploidy rate in sperm . No correlation was age group (P=0.02; OR=4.22, CI 95% 1.22-15.25). found between sperm apoptosis and chromosomal aneuploidy rates These results suggest that the polymorphism of MMP9 could be a found in arrested embryos. There was a significant correlation between genetic marker for the development severe clinical course of COPD . the spermiogram and the number of chromosome aneuploidies in the arrested embryos . P0891. cytokine polymorphisms and chronic rejection after Conclusion: Although there is no significant correlation between organ transplantation the sperm FISH, the sperm apoptosis results and the number of C. Patuzzo; chromosomal aneuploidies in embryos, we propose the spermiogram Sect. of Biology and Genetics, Verona, Italy. results are efficacious as an indication of preimplantation genetic Graft failure due to chronic rejection, a degenerative process diagnosis . mediated by cytokines and growth factors, remains a significant problem after transplantation: perivascular inflammation, fibrosis and P0889. Analysis of the group-specific component (GC) gene intimal thickening lead to occlusion of graft arteries The implication of haplotypes in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary cytokines in acute or chronic rejection has been evaluated in several disease studies . In particular IL10 gene -1082 G/A, -819 C/T, and -592 C/A G. F. Korytina, L. Akhmadishina, D. Yanbaeva, T. Victorova; polymorphisms, TNFalpha -308 G/A and Arg25Pro TGFbeta have been Institut of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. associated with increased levels of heart, kidney or liver transplant Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an inflammatory rejection . IFNgamma gene 874 T/A polymorphism or IL4R alpha Q576R condition of the respiratory system have been associated with post-transplantation immunological failure . including partially reversible bronchial obstruction and progressing Intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 gene E469K polymorphism chronic respiratory insufficiency. Along with the environmental factors, has been associated with protection from vasculopathy after cardiac hereditary predisposition is implicated in COPD development . Chronic transplantation . inflammation plays a special role in COPD pathogenesis. Group The aim of our study is to look for a cytokine polymorphism pattern specific component is known to bind with vitamin D, extracellular correlated to risk modification for long term graft failure. actin and endotoxin . CG enhances the neutrophil chemotactic activity Until now a total of 118 DNA samples from patients with heart and lung of complement component 5a (C5a) peptide produced during the transplant rejection (30 heart and 14) or without transplant rejection activation of the complement cascade . (48 heart and 26 lung) have been collected . The purpose of this study was to investigate the association of the Eleven gene polymorphisms were analyzed by restriction or by ARMS- GC gene haplotypes with COPD . Polymorphisms Glu416Asp and PCR analyses: TGF-beta (Arg25Pro, Leu10Pro), IL-10 (-1082 G/A, - Thr420Lys in the GC gene were investigated in cases of Tatar and 819 C/T, -592 C/A), IL-6 (-174 G/C), IFN-gamma (874 T/A), TNF alpha Russian COPD patients (N=298) and in cases of ethnically matched (-308 G/A), IL-4Ralpha (Q576R), ICAM-1 (G241R, E469K) . healthy individuals (N=237) living in Ufa, Russia . The distribution of single polymorphism alleles or of three point IL10 Analysis of the GC gene polymorphisms in healthy individuals from two haplotypes were not significantly different in transplant patients with ethnic group living in Republic of Bashkortostan revealed statistically or without chronic rejection . This study will be extended to a larger significant differences in the haplotypes and phenotypes frequency number of patients .Acknowledgements: Italian Ministry of Education, distributions between Tatars and Russians (χ2=10 .403, P=0 .012 and University and Research , COFIN . χ2=14 .87, P=0 .02, respectively) . The GC*1F/1S phenotype of the GC gene is the most widespread in Tatars (36 .79%), while the GC*1S/2 phenotype occurs with highest frequency in Russians (33 .85%) . The GC*2 haplotype was associated with higher risk of COPD in Tatar ethnic group (30.05 vs 18.96% in the control group; χ2=7 .35, P=0 .008, OR=1 .86 CI 95% 1 .17-2 .93) . But at the same time we did not find any differences in the haplotypes Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  P0892. Homozygosity mapping of variant late-infantile neuronal P0894. Association of the A1359G polymorphism of the cNR1 ceroid lipofuscinosis in turkish families gene and central nervous system tumors E. Siintola1, M. Topcu2, A. K. Anttonen1, B. A. Minassian3, A. D. Paterson3, M. M. Núñez Lozano1,2, S. Perdomo Velásquez1,2, J. Gómez Moreta3, R. González Liu3, H. Lohi3, A. E. Lehesjoki1; Sarmiento1,2; 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Neuroscience Center, Biomedicum 1Centro de investigación del cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Unidad de Medicina Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Pediatrics, Molecular, Departamento de Medicina, Salamanca, Spain, 3Hospital Virgen Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Section of Child Neurology, Ankara, Vega, Departamento de Neurocirugía, Salamanca, Spain. Turkey, 3Genetic and Genomic Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, CNR1 gene is located in chromosome 6 and encodes the human Canada. cannabinoid receptor CB1 . This is a main brain receptor endogenous Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are a group of autosomal for anandamina ligans and marijuana constituents, and has a recessive neurodegenerative disorders with a variable age of onset . widespread distribution in the central nervous system (CNS) . This Within NCLs, the late-infantile onset group (LINCLs) is the most receptor is implicated in many physiological functions as pain control, genetically heterogeneous with three genes identified (CLN2, CLN5, anxiety response, movement coordination, corporal temperature and CLN6) . A variant form of LINCL (vLINCL) present in Turkish regulation, appetite, inflammatory process and addictive development patients (CLN7) has been considered a distinct entity genetically phenomena . CNR1 has a common polymorphism A1359G in third and is clinically characterized by an onset age of 2-7 years, epileptic position in its codon 453 which corresponds to a synonymous change seizures, myoclonus, psychomotor deterioration, loss of vision, and in aminoacid Thr . A previous report has linked this polymorphism to premature death . brain tumors . We previously showed that in a subset of Turkish patients vLINCL is We have analyzed this CNR1 polymorphism in 156 patients diagnosed caused by mutations in either the CLN6 or the CLN8 gene . In eleven of glioma and 300 control subjets, both groups aged more than 50 . We families, we excluded by haplotype analysis all known human NCL found a significant difference (p<0,033) in allele distribution between loci as well as the three loci homologous for genes underlying NCL- glioma patients and controls . Our results suggest that the A allele in like phenotypes in animal models (CTSD, CLCN3, and CLCN7), CNR1 gene may confer susceptibility for glioma in people aged more suggesting that these families represent “true” Turkish vLINCL . We than 50 for its significantly association. performed a genome-wide scan using 378 microsatellite markers (modified Applied Biosystems LMS-2/MD10 set, Finnish Genome P0895. myosin iXB variant increases the risk of celiac disease Center, University of Helsinki) in seven of these families, but found and points towards a primary intestinal barrier defect no single genomic region showing overlapping homozygosity in all A. J. Monsuur, E. Van Oort, A. Zhernakova, M. R. Bevova, M. C. Wapenaar, families . Instead, several homozygous regions were observed in C. Wijmenga; a subset of the families suggesting genetic heterogeneity and the Complex Genetics Section, Utrecht, The Netherlands. existence of more than one NCL-causing, novel gene in the Turkish Celiac disease has probably become the best-understood immune- patients . In order to increase the informativity of the analysis, we related disorder . The disease presents in the small intestine and results undertook a genome-wide scan with Affymetrix GeneChip 50K array . from the interplay between multiple genes and gluten, the triggering Homozygosity mapping using this high-density genotyping dataset will environmental factor . Although HLA class II genes explain 40% of the be performed using GENEHUNTER . We are currently in the process heritable risk, non-HLA genes accounting for the majority of the familial of analyzing the results . clustering have not yet been identified. Here we report significant and replicable association (P = 2 .1 x 10-6) to a common variant located in P0893. Large phenotypic variability in 26 novel families with cm- intron 28 of the myosin IXB (MYO9B) gene . Homozygosity for the at- AVm caused by a mutation in the RAsA1 gene risk allele confers a 2 .3 higher risk to disease (P = 1 .55 x 10-5) . Myosin N. Revencu1, L. M. Boon1,2, O. Enjolras3, J. B. Mulliken4, M. Vikkula1; IXB is an unconventional myosin and is expressed in several cells, 1Human Molecular Genetics dept., Université catholique de Louvain & Christian including leukocytes and epithelial cells . Its Rho-GTPase activating de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 2Centre for Vascular Anomalies, Cliniques domain can negatively control Rho proteins, which are involved in universitaires St-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Con- cytoskeletal modifications and tight junction assembly, suggesting sultation des Angiomes, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, 4Vascular Anomalies myosin IXB has a role in the epithelial barrier . This may point to a Center, Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. primary impairment of the intestinal epithelial barrier, and may explain Capillary Malformation-Arteriovenous Malformation (CM-AVM) (MIM why immunogenic gluten peptides are able to pass through this barrier . 608354) is a recently identified phenotype characterised by atypical MYO9B could also be an interesting candidate gene for several capillary malformations (CM) associated with either arteriovenous other disorders since increased permeability of the epithelial barrier malformation, arteriovenous fistula, or Parkes Weber syndrome (PWS) is also seen in e.g. inflammatory bowel disorders, type 1 diabetes, (Eerola I., 2003; Boon L.M., 2005). The most prominent feature is the and asthma . Alternatively, myosin IXB may play a role in controlling presence of atypical CMs, which are small, round-to-oval in shape bacterial invasion of epithelial cells and wound closure . We are and pinkish-red in color . We showed that the CM-AVM is caused by currently elucidating the exact function of myosin IXB in celiac disease mutations in the RASA1 gene and reported 6 different mutations . The and trying to identify the true functional gene variant that causes the RASA1 gene codes for p120-RasGTPase-activating protein (p120- observed genetic association . RasGAP), which is one of the most important inactivators of Ras . Here we report 25 distinct mutations in 26 novel families with CM- P0896. coeliac Disease susceptibility conferred by DR3/DR3 AVM . The mutations were spread throughout the gene . Twenty-four homozygotes vs DR3/DR7 heterozygotes in a southern mutations caused a premature stop codon: 10 nonsense, 7 frameshift European population and 7 splicing mutations, suggesting a loss of function as the most B. Hernandez-Charro1, A. Bengoa1, E. Donat2, I. Miner1, F. Sánchez-Valverde3, likely mechanism. In one family, a missense mutation was identified M. A. Ramos-Arroyo1; (Y426C) . Sixty-six individuals carrying a RASA1 mutation were 1Department of Genetics, Virgen del Camino Hospital, Pamplona, Spain, 2Gas- identified in these families: 44 had CMs, 20 had CMs plus a high-flow troenterology Unit, Children´s Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 3Department of lesion (9 AVM, 1 AVF and 10 PWS) and 2 were nonpenetrant carriers . Pediatrics, Virgen del Camino Hospital, Pamplona, Spain. In summary, 30 different RASA1 mutations have been identified so far, The HLA-associated susceptibility to develop celiac disease (CD) clearly delineating the CM-AVM phenotype . A considerable proportion is mainly conferred by the DQA1*05 and DQB1*02 alleles encoding of patients (30%) had, besides the atypical CMs, a high-flow lesion. the DQ(α1*05, β1*02) heterodimer (HLA-DQ2). These alleles can be Its specific clinical, radiological and genetic characteristics should carried in cis position on the DR3 haplotype, or in trans on the DR3/ avoid the confusion with other vascular anomalies, such as hereditary DR3, DR3/DR7 and DR5/DR7 haplotypes combinations . In Northern benign telangiectasia or Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome . Our data also Europe DQB1*02-DRB1*03 and DQB1*02-DRB1*07 haplotype suggests that the CM-AVM phenotype could be a relatively frequent frequencies are very similar and they both seem to confer comparable genetic disorder . risk to the disease (Louka et al, 2002) . In Southern Europe the DR3/ (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be) (http://www.icp.ucl.ac.be/vikkula) DR7 genotype is relatively common while the DR3/DR3 is rarer, and Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  a higher risk has been proposed for the heterozygotes compared to nevertheless we found allelic frequencies to be closer to those those DR3 homozygotes . observed in some homogenous populations: 0 .076, 0 .030 and 0 .046 In order to address this hypothesis, we investigated the effects for the R702W, G908R and 1007fs mutations, respectively. Significant of different haplotypes carried in trans to the DQA1*05-DQB1*02 associations were found for the R702W and for patients carrying two haplotype in CD families of Spanish origin, using a previously described mutations to an early age of onset and stricturing pattern . Additionally, statistical method by Louka et al, 2002 (Other Haplotype Test) . A sample the presence of at least one mutation was correlated to the disease . of 225 affected individuals (112 from Navarra, 80 from Valencia and 33 The presence in heterozygosity of R702W mutation, or two CARD15 from Basque Country) who carried at least one DQB1*02-DQA1*05- mutations is associated to an early age of onset and stricturing pattern, DRB1*03 haplotype and their parents were included in this study . while patients with at least one mutation presented association with We confirmed that DQB1*02-DRB1*03 and DQB1*02-DRB1*07 stricturing and ileal form . We observed that frequencies of these groups are strongly associated with CD susceptibility (p= 5,7x10-7 and p= were lower than in Caucasian populations, although similar ranges of 0,001, respectively). However, we found no significant difference in frequencies were observed to those in homogeneous populations . transmissión of one of these haplotypes (p=0,887 and p=0,451) . None of the other haplotypes tested showed significant evidence of risk P0899. Frequency of double mutant alleles in cystic fibrosis modification (p= 0,17). patients from serbia and montenegro Our study shows that DR3/DR3 and DR3/DR7 genoptypes haplotypes D. Radivojevic1, M. Djurisic1, T. Lalic1, M. Guc-Scekic1, P. Minic1, A. Sovtic1, M. confer similar degree of risk predisposition to develop CD in Southern Tzetis2, E. Kanavakis2; European populations . 1Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece. P0897. congenital hip dislocation: a case-control association Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosome recessive disease study for analysing the role of different candidate genes in Caucasians .More then 1300 mutations in CF transmembrane K. Rouault1, V. Scotet1, F. Dubrana2, B. Fenoll3, F. Gaucher4, D. Tanguy5, C. conductance regulator (CFTR) gene are causative for both classic and Yaacoub6, C. Férec1; atypical presentations of the disease .Complex alleles with more then 1INSERM U 613, Brest, France, 2Department of orthopaedic surgery, CHU one mutations in cis are rare,but observed in some populations . La Cavale Blanche, Brest, France, 3Department of paediatric surgery, CHU Since 1995.,in order to confirm the clinical diagnosis of CF,we Morvan, Brest, France, 4Department of orthopaedic surgery, Hotel Dieu, Pont have screened 179 patients for molecular defects in CFTR gene . L’Abbé, France, 5Department of physical medicine, Centre de Perharidy, A total of 18 mutations covered 82 .41% of CF alleles,with F508del Roscoff, France, 6Department of orthopaedic surgery, CH Cornouaille, Quim- showing a frequency of 72 .35% .For almost 30% of the CF alleles (51 per, France. patient),mutation screening covered the entire coding region using Congenital dislocation of the hip (CDH), is a public health matter DGGE and sequencing of PCR-amplified genomic DNA.As a result,we because of its high frequency, the severe functional handicap identified double mutant alleles in 2 patients of those investigated induced if it is not treated early and its natural evolution towards hip (2/51) .Both patients were compound heterozygous for F508del osteoarthritis . This disease presents a mechanical component linked to inherited from one parent,and S466X with R1070Q in cis, inherited the pregnancy and delivery conditions, but the ethnical predispositions from the other parent .Patients were unrelated but from the same region and the familial aggregation observed suggest that it also presents of our country,which suggest that their families might have common a genetic component . We set up an association study in the area of ancestor from whom they inherited this unusual allele .Patients were Finistère (western Brittany, France) where CDH is particularly frequent females,with similar clinical symptoms;7 years old,age at diagnosis in order to study the implication of candidate genes . To date, 241 CDH before first year of life.Chloride sweat values were more then 91mmol/ patients have been recruited and the cohort is composed of 91 .3% of L,they were PI since birth,with obstructive lung disease and chronic women (n=220 - sex-ratio: 1:10) . The pathology was bilateral in 60 .0% cough .In both cases phenotype was severe despite the fact that one of of cases and when it was unilateral, it affects as often the left than the the mutations (R1070Q) belongs to class IV (mild mutations) . right hip (48 .9 vs 51 .1%) . Primiparity was observed in 42 .3% of cases We will discuss if these results suggest that double mutant alleles and breech presentation was documented in 12 .4% of patients . In this might be more common than expected and therefore have important cohort, 15.0% of the patients had a high birthweight (≥ 4kg) and 5.4% implications for molecular diagnosis and genetic counseling of families were postmature babies (≥ 42 weeks of gestation). The candidate at risk in our country . genes which are studied in first intention include genes involved in the mechanisms of development of members (HOXB9) and in the P0900. the 8.1 ancestral haplotype is associated with delayed constitution of cartilaginous tissue (COL1A1 and COL2A1) . This study onset of colonization in cystic fibrosis will report the preliminary results of the first association study made J. Laki1, I. Laki2, K. Németh3, R. Újhelyi4, O. Bede5, E. Endreffy5, K. Bolbás2, K. on CDH and will highlight the role of candidate genes in this complex Gyurkovits2, E. Csiszér6, E. Sólyom7, A. Halász8, É. Pozsonyi9, K. Rajczy9, Z. disease . Prohászka1, G. Fekete3, G. Füst1; 13rd Department of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, P0898. Frequency of CARD1 mutations in Patients with crohn’s 2Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for Chest Diseases of the Reformed Church Disease from toledo, spain: Genotype-Phenotype correlation. of Hungary, Mosdós, Hungary, 32nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis C. de Diego1, M. Alcántara2, J. Valle2, M. J. Pérez-Grueso2, C. Muñoz-Rosas2, University, Budapest, Hungary, 4Heim Pál Children’s Hospital, Budapest, Hun- J. M. Carrobles2, P. Martínez-Castro1; gary, 5Department of Pediatrics, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 63rd 1Hospital Virgen de la Salud, Genetics, Toledo, Spain, 2Hospital Virgen de la Department of Pulmonology, National Koranyi Institute for TB and Pulmonology, Salud, Gastroenterology, Toledo, Spain. Budapest, Hungary, 7Borsod-A-Z County and University Teaching Hospital, Crohn’s Disease presents a complex multifactorial etiology with genetic Pediatric Health Centre, Miskolc, Hungary, 8Svabhegy Children’s Hospital, and environmental factors implied in the disorder . Epidemiological Budapest, Hungary, 9National Institute of Hematology and Immunology, Buda- studies showed that three major CARD15 mutations have been pest, Hungary. described as associated to CD: R702W, G908R and 1007fs . We Rationale: Major cause of death in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is studied frequencies of these three CARD15 mutations in patients from colonization with S. aureus and P. aeruginosa . The wide phenotypic Toledo, Spain . variation in CF patients -with similar genetic background- suggests One hundred eighty-three patients with Crohn’s Disease and one that genes other than the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance hundred seventy-two healthy controls from Toledo, Spain were included regulatory (CFTR) gene modify the disease . The 8 .1 ancestral in this study . All of these individuals were genotyped for the three haplotype (8 .1 AH) in main histocompatibility complex is associated CARD15 mutations (R702W, G908R and 1007fs) . Association analyses with alterations of the immune response . to establish genotype-phenotype correlations were performed . Objective: To study the influence of carriage of 8.1 AH on frequency The control population exhibits frequencies of CARD15 mutations and onset of colonization in CF patients . within the range of results of previous studies . Frequencies observed in study population, methods: DNA samples of 72 CF patients (39 CD patients were lower than those reported in Caucasian populations; homozygous and 33 heterozygous for the ΔF508 mutation of CFTR Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 6 gene) were genotyped for the member alleles of the 8 .1 AH: HLA- P0903. Genetic polymorphism of CYP1A1, GSTM1 and CYPC DQB1*0201, HLA-DRB1 *0301, RAGE -429C, HSP70-2 -1267G and is associated with susceptibility to non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma TNF-α -308A . Patients were recruited from seven Hungarian CF and chronic lymphocytic leukemia in adult Russian patients. centers. Colonization was verified by regular clinical and bacteriological O. A. Gra1, A. S. Glotov2, E. A. Nikitin3, A. B. Sudarikov3, A. S. Zasedatelev1, T. screening . V. Nasedkina1; Findings: Frequency of colonization was significantly (p=0.0002) 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Mos- lower in the 8.1 AH carriers; age, gender and ΔF508 genotype- cow, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s Scientific and Research Institute of Obstetrics adjusted odds ratio to be colonized of the carriers vs . non-carriers was and Gynecology, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Saint-Petersburg, 0.04 (0.006-0.29). Patients with 8.1 AH had significantly (p=0.0002) Russian Federation, 3Hematologic Scientific Center, Russian Academy of Medi- longer colonization free period compared to non-carriers . conclusion: cal Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. Our novel observations demonstrate that the 8 .1 AH is associated with At present the association of different polymorphic variants of delayed onset of colonization in CF, presumably by influencing defense biotransformation system genes with the increased risk to develop mechanisms against infections . oncological diseases is investigated actively . We developed a biological microchip which allows to analyze 18 mutations in eight genes of P0901. Beta 2 adrenergic receptor polymorphisms in cystic biotransformation system: CYP1A1, CYP2D6, GSTT1, GSTM1, Fibrosis liver disease MTHFR, MTRR, NQO1, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and NAT2 . This biochip S. Gambardella1, M. R. D’Apice1, S. Ciacci1, S. Petrocchi1, E. Giardina1, T. has been used to study 76 non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma patients (NHL), Santostasi2, L. Narzi3, S. Quattrucci3, G. Castaldo4, F. Salvatore4, C. Colombo5, 83 chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients (CLL) and 177 healthy G. Novelli1; control subjects . It was found that individuals carrying heterozygous 1Department of Biopathology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Departiment and homozygous variants of CYP1A1 gene showed statistically di Biomedicine, Bari University, Bari, Italy, 3Center for Cystic Fibrosis of Lazio, significant increased CLL risk: for 4889A>G and 6235T>C (OR = 1.75, University La sapienza, Rome, Italy, 4Department of Biochemistry and Medical p = 0.03); for 4887C>A, 4889A>G and 6235T>C (OR = 1.69, p = 0.02). Biotechnology, Federico II University, Naple, Italy, 5Center for Cystic Fibrosis of GSTM1 null genotype individuals showed a 1 .8-fold increased NHL Lombardia, Milan, Italy. risk (p = 0 .04) . In combined results, subjects with the „unfavorable“ Cystic fibrosis (CF; #219700) is a disorder caused by mutations in the polymorphic variants of CYP1A1 gene and GSTM1 null genotype CFTR gene that encodes a chloride conducting channel expressed revealed statistically significant increased CLL risk: for combination in the apical plasma membrane of the epithelial cells . The disease is with heterozygous and homozygous variants 6235T>C (OR = 2 .42, characterized by a wide variability of clinical expressions which include p = 0.02); with polymorphic variants 4889A>G and 6235T>C (OR = pancreatic insufficiency, lung disease, hepatic manifestations, and male 2.24, p = 0.007); with polymorphic variants 4887C>A, 4889A>G and infertility . It is possible that the wide phenotypic spectrum is modulated 6235T>C (OR = 2 .20, p = 0 .005) . Besides it was obtained that men by “modifier genes” which directly or indirectly interact with CFTR carrying heterozygous and homozygous variants gene CYP2C9 gene product . Recently, biochemical and functional analysis of CFTR, showed statistically significant increased CLL risk: for 430C>T (OR = revealed that this protein interacts with protein containing multiple PDZ 2.7, p = 0.026); for 430C>T and 1075A>C (OR = 2.1, p = 0.02). Our domain . We studied beta-2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2), a protein data demonstrate that polymorphic alleles of genes CYP1A1, GSTM1 containing a PDZ domain, belonging to the G protein-coupled receptor and CYP2C9 might increase the risk of NHL and CLL in the Russian superfamily and expressed in different tissues including the apical population . membrane of the epithelial cells . We genotyped 52 CF patients (E) with hepatic involvement, carrying two class I mutations, homozygous P0904. Number of deafness genes in israel: up to 8 F508del, or compound heterozigous for a class I allele and F508del . We Z. N. Brownstein1, O. Dagan1, D. Giloni2, T. Walsh3, M. King3, M. Frydman2, K. selected as control subject 47 CF patients without hepatic involvement B. Avraham1; (CFC) and 30 unaffected individulas (C) . 1Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, We genotyped three polymorphisms in the ADRB2 gene, -47C/T, Israel, 3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. Arg16/Gly and Gln27/Glu and derived haplotypes . We observed that Hearing loss (HL) is a highly heterogeneous genetic disorder, with over haplotype -47C-Gly16--Glu27 is differently distributed between CF 100 genes predicted to be involved . Until recently, mutations in four classes (E= 21,5% vs . CFC= 2,7%) p=0,001 . This haplotype is present genes were known to lead to non-syndromic HL (NSHL) in the Israeli in the normal population with a frequency of 18 .1% . population . These include GJB2, GJB6, MYO3A, and POU4F3. Of Though the number of CF patients is small, and these data need to be these, GJB2 mutations are the most common, associated with 39% confirmed in larger studies, they suggest that the ADRB2 gene might of children born with HL . Loci for 2 more genes for deafness have be a modifier gene for liver disease in CF . recently been mapped in Israeli families with otosclerosis (OTSC4) and progressive NSHL (DFNA51) . P0902. sequence analysis of CFTR coding region in croatian Mutations in GJB2 and GJB6 cause congenital recessive SNHL, population usually severe to profound . Three different mutations in MYO3A are J. Knezevic1, T. Matijevic1, I. Barisic2, J. Pavelic1; responsible for progressive late onset high tone SNHL, inherited in 1Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer a recessive mode . A dominant POU4F3 mutation leads to late onset Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Department of progressive HL . We have recently found that a SLC26A4 mutation is Pediatrics, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. involved in post lingual progressive recessive HL accompanied with an Cystic fibrosis is one of the most common recessive disorders in enlarged vestibular aqueduct . We also found that a CDH23 mutation is Europe affecting approximately 1 in 3 000 individuals . More than associated with congenital profound recessive deafness . 1200 mutations have been identified in cystic fibrosis transmembrane For syndromic HL, mutations causing USH1, USH2, and USH3 have conductance regulator gene (CFTR) . The most frequent mutation, been found in Israel, all involving combined deafness and blindness accounted for about 67% of CF chromosomes, is ΔF508. Only four due to retinitis pigmentosa . These include mutations in the USH2A other mutations (G542X, N1303K, G551D and W1282X) have overall gene in Iranian and Moroccan Jews and the N48K USH3A mutation frequencies higher than 1%; most other are rare and specific for in Jewish Ashkenazi individuals with postlingual progressive HL . The some population subgroups . The aim of this study was to reveal the R245X mutation of the PCDH15 gene causing USH1F was identified frequency of CF mutations by sequencing analysis of coding region . only in Ashkenazi Jews, . Our previous results by INNO-LIPA CFTR detection kits on total of 41 It has been estimated that there are 8-9 genes in Israel for recessive unrelated CF patients from Croatia revealed only 6 different mutations HL, and attempts to identify all the deafness genes in this population accounted for 68,29% diseased alleles . Here we analyzed only are underway . those samples from previous study that were wild type homozygous or mutated heterozygous . We found three new mutations, so far not P0905. Angiotensinogen m235t polymorphism is associated detected in our population: S466X (exon 10), Y569C (exon 12) and with symptoms of depression in a population-based study and a E585X (exon 12) . family-based studyGenetic analysis, linkage, and association  S. Lopez Leon1, C. Janssens2, H. Tiemeier1, A. Hofman1, Y. Aulchenko1, P. In patients of type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) the process of Snijders1, S. Claes3, B. Oostra1, C. van Duijn1; atherosclerosis is accelerated . Presence of positive family history 1Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The of type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated with adverse changes in Netherlands, 2Department of Public Health, Erasmus MC, University Medical lipoprotein and glucose metabolism of nondiabetic patients . Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Molecular Genetics Department, Flan- Our study aimed to compare anthropometric data, lipid and glucose ders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, metabolism and inflammatory factors in T2DM patients with positive Belgium. family history [Fam (+)] and negative family history [Fam(-)] of T2DM . Objective- Although several lines of evidence suggest that We are studied 22 T2DM patients whose first degree relatives suffered angiotensinogen (AGT) is involved in depression, no study has from T2DM and 33 patients without T2DM among close relatives . considered the relation between the AGT gene and unipolar depression . Methods . Weight, height, waist and hip circumference were The present study examines the association between the AGT M235T determined, body mass index and waist to hip ratio were calculated . polymorphism and symptoms of depression in two independent Fasting serum glucose and insulin were measured and used populations . Method- Cross-sectional data from two independent for calculation of insulin resistance index by homeostasis model Dutch cohorts were used for the analyses: 1) The Rotterdam assessment (HOMA IR) . Lipoprotein parameters (TC, TG, HDLC,) Study, a population-based study among 7,983 individuals 55 years were determined enzymatically, C-reactive protein by a highly sensitive and older in an outbred population, and 2) the Erasmus Rucphen immunoprecipitation test and fibrinogen by the method of Clauss. Family Study (ERF), a family-based study of 2,727 relatives from a Results . In the Fam(+) male patients T2DM was diagnosed genetically isolated village . Symptoms of depression were assessed significantly earlier than in Fam (-) (49.27±5.27 yr and 52.33±0.98 yr, with the Centre of Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES- respectively) . Fam (+) males with T2DM had also three times more D) . We compared mean CES-D scores between the MM, MT, and TT frequently cardiovascular complications than the Fam(-) patients . genotypes of the AGT M235T polymorphism . In the family-based study Serum glucose level of Fam(+) male T2DM subjects was marginally we additionally calculated to which extent AGT M235T explains the higher as compared to Fam(-) male patients . Lipoprotein parameters heritability of the CES-D scores by performing a variance components and inflammatory markers did not differ between the studied groups. analysis . Results- In both populations we found a significant relation Conclusion . Preliminary data showed that positive family history has between the AGT M235T polymorphism and CES-D scores in men . In certain relation to some studied indices in male T2DM patients, the ERF the heritability estimate for CES-D scores was 32% . When AGT dependence was not noticed in females . genotype status was included in the analysis the heritability decreased to 31% . The AGT genotype contributed to 1% of the total variance in P0908. susceptibility to type 1 Diabetes mellitus and type 2 the CES-D scores . Conclusion- Our findings suggest that the AGT is a Diabetes mellitus related with polymorphisms located in iDDm2 susceptibility gene for symptoms of depression . Since the association region was only seen in men, different pathways in depression may be M. L. Toma1, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, M. Stavarachi1, N. Panduru1, A. M. involved in men and women . Craciun2, L. Gavrila1, D. M. Cheta2; 1Institute of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Romania, 2”N.Paulescu” Institute P0906. Hypertension genes are genetic markers for vascular of Diabetes , Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, Bucharest, Romania. complications in type 2 diabetes Contribution of insulin (-23Hph, +1127Pst) and IGF2 (IGF2Apa) gene M. Yazdanpanah1, F. A. Sayed-Tabatabaei1, A. Hofman1, Y. S. Aulchenko1, B. polymorphisms are tested for association with Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus A. Oostra2, B. H. C. Stricker1, H. A. P. Pols3, S. W. J. Lamberts4, J. C. M. Witte- (T1DM) and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) . man1, J. A. M. J. Janssen4, C. M. van Duijn1; The aim of this case-control study was to analyze the role of IDDM2 1Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rot- polymorphisms to the T1DM and T2DM susceptibility . terdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetic, Erasmus Medi- Clinical information and biological samples from 400 unrelated cal Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Department of Epidemiology & Romanian Caucasian subjects were collected . They are fall into four Biostatistics,and Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, equal groups: T1DM (men: women, 53:47, age 34±7 year, duration of Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medi- T1DM 19±8 year), control T1DM (fasting glicemia 97±9 mg/dl), T2DM cal Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (men: women, 59:41, age 55,7±8,1 year, duration of T2DM 13±8,4 Type 2 diabetes often lead to vascular complications . Several genes year), control T2DM (fasting glicemia 93±6 mg/dl) . The control T1DM involved in salt sensitivity and in the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) and control T2DM groups were matched for both age and gender with play a role in the regulation of blood pressure and vascular pathology . T1DM and T2DM groups respectively . We examined the association between alpha-adducin 1 gene (ADD1) The -23Hph, +1127Pst and IGF2Apa polymorphisms were genotyped Gly460Trp polymorphism, angiotensinogen gene (AGT) M235T by PCR-RFLP . polymorphism and the angiotensin II type 1 receptor gene (AT1R) The distribution of genotypes in all groups was in agreement with C573T polymorphism with vascular complications and mortality in type Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium . 2 diabetes . The study was part of the Rotterdam Study, a population- In addition, the reduce number of recombination between -23Hph and based cohort study of 7983 subjects aged > 55 years . For ADD1, +1127Pst sustains the strong linkage between these polymorphisms . we observed that TT carriers had both a higher risk of hypertension We found a strong association between -23Hph +/+ (95%CI; (RR = 2 .57, 95% CI: 1 .05 - 6 .32), and high levels of atherosclerosis 1,8664<OR<6,408; p<0,0001) and +1127Pst-/- (95%CI; as measured by the mean common carotid intima media thickness 1,9429<OR<6,7237; p<0,0001) genotypes and T1DM development. (IMT) (p trend = 0 .03) . The risk of mortality in diabetic patients with This result is very similar with those published in the literature . The hypertension was higher in TT carriers compared to the GG carriers distribution of IGF2Apa genotypes do not differs significant between (RR = 1 .83, 95% CI: 1 .07 - 3 .16) . For AGT, carriers of the T allele T1DM and control T1DM (p>0,05) . Comparing with other Caucasian had significantly higher mean systolic and diastolic blood pressure (p population, no difference in alleles or genotypes frequencies of = 0 .01, p = 0 .05), a higher risk of hypertension (RR = 1 .85, 95% CI: analyzed polymorphisms between T2DM and control T2DM has been 1 .28 - 3 .67), and a higher risk of carotid artery plaque (RR = 1 .57, 95% observed . This result could represent a feature of Romanian population CI: 1.04 - 2.38). Furthermore, TT carriers of AT1R had a significantly or a bias caused by study design . increased mean carotid IMT (p = 0 .04) compared to the CC genotype . Our results suggest that the genes involved in salt sensitivity may be P0909. Analysis of sNP polymorphisms in iDE gene in patients important determinant of vascular complications in patients with type with type 2 diabetes mellitus from Russia 2 diabetes . O. V. Pivovarova, P. A. Slominsky, M. I. Shadrina, A. V. Artem’eva, S. Limbo- rska; P0907. Lipid profile and glucose metabolism in patients of type 2 Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. diabetes mellitus in relation to family history The aetiology of complex type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) involves both E. Kurvinen1,2, K. Aasvee1, H. Tupits3; environmental and genetic factors . Insulin degrading enzyme (IDE) 1National Institute for Health Development, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Tallinn Children`s gene represents a strong positional and biological candidate for T2DM Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 3North Estonia Regional Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  susceptibility . IDE is the Zn requiring metalloproteinase, which plays a markers . principal role in the insulin degradation . The linkage to chromosome Results: We have identified two kindreds, CM-50 and CM-100 in which 10q23-q25 (where IDE gene maps) was identified for T2DM and early-onset DCM segregates as an autosomal dominant trait . Clinical related quantitative traits . IDE knockout mice are characterized by characteristics of this unusual form of DCM were sudden cardiac death decrease insulin degradation, hyperinsulinemia, glucose intolerance . (SCD) and severe diffuse myocardial fibrosis. In the two families a It is interesting that significant evidence are demonstrated for effects total of 32 individuals were considered affected, 25 unaffected and 9 of sequence variations in IDE on both T2DM and plasma insulin and of unknown status . Peak two point LOD scores >3 .0 were obtained glucose levels in some human populations of European descent, independently with each family using the markers D10S1773 and whereas such associations are not shown in other populations . To D10S1483 respectively . Haplotype analyses in the two families evaluate a role of IDE gene polymorphisms in T2DM development in identified substantial locus overlap, and when considered together, Russia, we studied 5 SNPs within the IDE gene and in its region in 99 defined a critical interval of 14.0 centimorgans between D10S1237 patients with T2DM and 102 controls . An initial case-control analysis and D10S1723. Multipoint linkage analyses confirmed this interval and revealed no significant differences in distribution of genotypes and generated a peak LOD score of 8 .2 . alleles between groups of diabetic and control subjects . We found no conclusions: We have mapped a novel locus for cardiomyopathy, associations between studied sequence variations and T2DM risk . We diffuse myocardial fibrosis and SCD to chromosome 10q25-q26. can make a preliminary conclusion that analysis of Russian population Identification of the causative gene will be an important step in provides no evidence of the contribution of IDE polymorphisms to understanding the fundamental mechanisms of heart failure and T2DM susceptibility . sudden death . P0910. Genomewide linkage of a large Korean family with dilated P0912. characterization of dinucleotide bands to differentiate cardiomyopathy between homozygotes and heterozygotes in diagnosis analysis S. Provost1, J. Lim2, Y. Yoon2, I. Lee2,3, J. Kim2,3, M. Dubé1, K. Song2; B. Rabbani, H. khanahmad, A. Rezaeian, R. Sarrami, M. Abachi, R. Bagheri, 1Montreal Heart Institute, Montreal University, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 2Univer- G. Baharamali, S. Zeinali; sity of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 3Asan Medical Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Re- Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea. public of Iran. Aims: Dilated cardiomyopathy is a disorder characterized by cardiac Backgrounds: Microsatellites are sequences made up of single dilation and systolic dysfunction . So far sixteen genes have been shown repeats (1-6 bp) which are repeated side by side through out the to cause autosomal dominant familial dilated cardiomyopathy . We human genome . Short tandem repeats (STRs) are powerful genetic identified a large Korean family from the Cheju Island showing a clear tools for genetic mapping and could be used for human identification dominant Mendelian inheritance pattern of dilated cardiomyopathy and due to their high level of polymorphisms . Among STRs, dinucleotides we proceeded to locate the underlying gene in this family by using are more difficult to type. Here in, dinucleotide repeats were used for genetic linkage . diagnostic purposes . mEtHODs: Twenty nine members of this four generation pedigree methods: DNA amplification of two repetitive regions of factor VIII gene were recruited, including DNA from six clearly affected individuals . The of 70 unrelated individuals was performed . The PCR products were diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy was made by our group according detected on 10% polyacrylamide gel by silver nitrate staining . Many to standard criteria . Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood bands were seen when working with dinucleotides which led us to samples . 392 microsatellite markers at an average of 9 cM distance genotyping errors . For characterizing each band, they were recovered were genotyped throughout the genome . We used a dominant genetic from the gel . The recovered bands were cloned for sequencing analysis model with 0 .95 penetrance, 0 .001 phenocopy rate, and a disease and each band was characterized . allele frequency of 0 .001 . Individuals younger than 40 years of age Results: Detected bands were the result of errors produced during were set to undetermined status for the analyses . PCR processing . Allelic bands were the ones with stronger intensity . REsULts: Five regions with LOD scores above 1 were found in Minor bands were also seen including stutter bands, shadow bands, parametric two-point linkage analysis on chromosomes 1, 2, 7, 13 non-temple products, microvariety bands, and bands formed by and 21 . Linkage to D1S1595 was strongly supported by the multipoint the mutations in the repetitive region itself . Also heteroduplex and linkage analysis with a LOD=2 .82, the highest score in the study . Fifteen conformational bands were the result of electrophoresis conditions . additional markers were added in the D1S1675 to D1S2107 interval . conclusions: STR markers allow rapid testing of carrier detection, Haplotype analysis with the additional markers allowed the definition prenatal diagnosis and genetic transmission Studies . Therefore of a 27 cM candidate interval (45 .9 Mb) including the centromere and indicating the errors are important for defining the true allele and flanked by markers D1S1675 and D1S104. genotyping the population. We have concluded that these definitions cONcLUsiONs: The interval contains the known candidate gene were effective for detecting PCR processing errors in studying LMNA encoding the laminin A/C which we will pursue . dinucleotide repeats that would lead to mistyping of heterozygotes and homozygotes . P0911. A novel locus for dilated cardiomyopathy, diffuse myocardial fibrosis and sudden death on chromosome 10q25- P0913. Dopamine D2 receptor gene polymorphisms and their q26 contribution to personality traits S. Sasse-Klaassen1, P. T. Ellinor2, S. Probst1, B. Gerull1, A. Toeppel1, G. A. V. Kazantseva, D. A. Gaysina, E. K. Khusnutdinova; Krings3, P. Nürnberg1,4, H. C. Hennies1,4, L. Thierfelder1,5, C. A. MacRae2; Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa’s Scientific Centre, Russian Acad- 1Max-Delbrueck-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 2Cardiovas- emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. cular Research Center, Charlestown, MA, United States, 3Clinic for Pediatrics, The heritability of human personality traits has been estimated between Cardiology Division, Charité, Berlin, Germany, 4Cologne Center for Genomics, 30 and 60%, based on data from twin and adoption studies . It has been Cologne, Germany, 5Franz-Volhard Clinic, HELIOS Clinics GmbH, Charité, demonstrated that common genetic polymorphisms in the dopamine Berlin, Germany. D2 receptor gene (DRD2) have been associated with Novelty Seeking Background: Genetic studies have mapped multiple loci for inherited and other personality traits characterized by detached, schizoid, or dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), a major cause of non-ischemic heart avoidant behaviour . failure . However, the mutated genes responsible for the majority of In this study healthy Russian subjects (n=287) who administered cases have yet to be been identified. Cattel‘s 16PF Questionnaire (16PF CPQ) and Eysenck Personality methods: DCM was diagnosed on echocardiography if the left Questionnaire (EPQ) were analyzed with regard to the DRD2 TaqIA ventricular end diastolic dimension was > 117% of normal when and NcoI polymorphisms. We observed significant association corrected for body surface area and age and there was evidence of between DRD2*N1 allele and Rule-consciousness (F=4 .509, p=0 .035) impaired contractility i .e . left ventricular ejection fraction was < 0 .50, or score, and between DRD2*N2 allele and Vigilance score (F=4 .078, fractional shortening was < 28% . Genome-wide linkage analysis was P=0.044) of 16PF CPQ. Using GLM we found statistically significant conducted using a 10 centimorgan resolution panel of microsatellite correlations between the presence of *A1 allele of TaqIA polymorphism Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  and gender with Self-reliance of 16PF CPQ (F=4 .298, p=0 .039) . There genetic counseling, may shed lights on the nature and mechanism of were tendencies toward association between the DRD2*A2 allele and disease causing mutations as well . Openness to change (F=4 .499, p=0 .035) and Privateness (F=4 .638, p=0 .032) scores when gender was entered as the second factor . In P0916. Parkin mutations in patients with early-onset contrast, one-way ANOVA didn’t reveal any differences among the two parkinsonism groups - *N1-presense versus *N1-absence or *N2-presence versus F. E. Rocca, F. Annesi, P. Tarantino, I. C. Cirò Candiano, S. Carrideo, D. Civi- *N2-absence allele carriers of NcoI polymorphism - in any of the telli, G. Provenzano, E. V. De Marco, M. Salsone, G. Annesi; EPQ and CPQ personality dimensions . According to QTLs approach Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone increased level of significance can be revealed whether combined (Cosenza), Italy. effect of polymorphic variants of genes coding for components of Parkin gene mutations are reported to be a major cause of early-onset neurotransmitter systems of brain are taken into the consideration . parkinsonism (age at onset <45 years) in families with autosomal recessive inheritance and in isolated juvenile-onset parkinsonism P0914. Electrocardiograms in Down syndrome patients: siblings (age at onset <20 years) . The mutations in the parkin gene are also control extremely varied and include many different point mutations and exonic L. Jurkėnienė, I. Andriuškevičiūtė, A. Sinkus; rearrangements affecting all 12 of the coding exons . To evaluate the Kaunas medical University, Kaunas, Lithuania. frequency of parkin mutations in patients with isolated early-onset Chromosome syndromes are polymorphic because of chromosome parkinsonism, we studied 61 patients selected with an age at onset <45 imbalance lowering the threshold of appearance for inherited years from southern Italy, by conventional and quantitative polymerase multifactorial traits . This means that these traits could be inherited chain reaction . Among the 61 patients with early-onset parkinsonism in chromosome patients from their parents more frequently than but without family story, 13 (21 .3%) had mutations in the parkin gene: 7 in their siblings . According to this hypothesis we investigated carried single heterozygous mutations (Thr55Ile, Asp18Asn, Lys32Thr, electrocardiograms (ECG) in Down syndrome (DS) patients . The single Asp86Asn, Met192Leu, Leu261Leu, Arg42Pro); 1 was compound parameter of ECG (individual peak amplitude, the duration of it and heterozygous (Leu174Leu, Arg402Cys); 5 carried simple homozygous interval between it) per se is the final reflection of multiple hereditary mutations (Arg42Pro, 202-203delAG, ex2-3 del, ex3 del) . 5 of these components beginning since histogenesis . mutations were not previously described (Thr55Ile, Asp18Asn, The ECG’s were studied in a group of 302 patients with cytogenetically Lys32Thr, Asp86Asn, Leu174Leu) . The majority of mutations detected proven trisomy-21 . For all of them typical 12 standard leads were in this study affected the ubiquitin domain and the C-terminal two ring taken in region hospitals . The age of patients ranged in the limits from finger domains (R1-R2), which probably resulted in a loss of function 1 to 46 yrs (average age 15 .3 yrs) . It seems that for such heterogenic of the parkin protein . The role of heterozygous parkin mutations as contingent it is difficult to choose adequate control group, especially potential PD susceptibility factor remains to be determined . having in mind the fact that in hospitals and outpatient departments ECG is recorded when some heart pathology is suspected . In all P0917. serotonin genes and their role in eating disorder aspects, in our opinion, siblings are the best for control . ECG’s were behaviours taken for 278 brothers and sisters (age interval ranged from 1 to 60 M. C. T. Slof - Op ‚t Landt1,2, I. Meulenbelt2, E. F. van Furth1, P. E. Slagboom2, yrs, average age 20 .0 yrs) . The ECG anomalies were divided up into M. Bartels3, D. I. Boomsma3; 15 classes following manifestations usual for physicians . Pathology 1National Centre for Eating Disorders, Leidschendam, The Netherlands, in ECG was found in 173 (57 .0%) DS patients and in 108 (38 .9%) of 2Leiden University Medical Centre, Molecular Epidemiology Section, Leiden, their siblings . The most frequent ECG pathology in DS patients is the The Netherlands, 3Department of Biological Psychology, Vrije Universiteit, Am- bundle branch blocks (p<0 .01) and the ventricle preexcitation (short sterdam, The Netherlands. PQ and WPW syndrome) is possible . Eating disorders (ED), e .g . anorexia and bulimia nervosa, are characterized by severely disordered eating behaviour, mainly affecting P0915. mutant DmD allele carried by different maternal X young women . Despite substantial efforts to identify causal pathways chromosomes in two brothers for ED, very little is known about the aetiology of these disorders . In M. Czakó1, E. Endreffy2, E. Morava3, G. Kosztolányi1; a pilot sample of adolescent twins (N=579) and their non-twin siblings 1Clinical Genetics Research Group, Department of Medical Genetics and Child (N=142) of the Netherlands Twin Registry a factor analytic approach Development, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Pediatrics, was used on the items assessing ED behaviours and traits such as, Albert Szent-Györgyi University Medical School, Szeged, Hungary, 3Institutes dieting, fear of weight gain, and importance of body weight or shape of Neurology and Pediatrics, University Radboud Nijmegen Medical Center, on self-evaluation to define a broad ED phenotype. The majority of Nijmegen, The Netherlands. these items could be explained by one underlying factor representing Segregation analysis of chromosomes carried by affected individual a quantitative measure of such a broad ED phenotype . Using the twin- is a helpful approach for genetic counseling when the mutation itself sibling design it was subsequently indicated that individual differences is not identifiable. The interpretation of the finding, however, may in this factor are mainly explained by an underlying genetic mechanism be erroneous, since the mutant allele could be transmitted from one in females . chromosome to the other by recombination event during homologous In the current study we report on whether genes involved in the serotonin pairing, as the case presented indicates . pathway contribute to the broad ED phenotype . We collected items In two brothers Duchenne muscular dystrophy was proved by describing the broad ED phenotype in a larger sample of adolescent mutation analysis of the dystrophin (DMD) gene showing deletion of twins and their siblings (questionnaires were sent to 2000 families) as exons 45-50 . We performed microsatellite marker analysis of the X part of the Dutch Health Behaviour Questionnaire, DNA samples are chromosomes in the family, in order to identify the X chromosome available for 241 MZ twins and 155 DZ twin pairs . SNPs within the carrying the mutation in the obligate carrier mother . The markers in (5’ serotonin receptor 1A (n=3), 1D (n=4), 2A (n=3) and 2C (n=1) genes DYS MSA, 3’ DYS MS, IVS44SK21, DMD-45, DMD-49, DMD-50, DysI, are measured and currently analysed .We will present results of the DysII, STR-44, STR-45, STR-49, STR-50) and around (DXS451) the family based haplotype association analyses for these genes and the DMD gene showed that the two brothers have, as expected, identical X broad ED phenotype in this sample . chromosomal region . Surprisingly, however, markers on the distal short and long arms (DXS207, DXS691, DXS1283E) could be assigned to different maternal X chromosomes in the two sons, indicating that the DMD gene carrying the deletion might have been transferred between the two maternal X chromosomes . Moreover, further extended marker analyses of samples taken from the maternal grandparents and other members of the mother’s family suggested germinal mosaicism of the mother . Our case shows that well-constructed microsatellite marker analyses, in addition to help Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 00 P0918. mutational analysis of EFHc1 gene in italy families with reproductive age . The main direction of conservative therapy of Juvenile myoclonic Epilepsy endometriosis patients is the recovery of unstable hormone status F. Annesi1, F. E. Rocca1, P. Tarantino1, E. Mannarino1, E. V. De Marco1, D. with anti-estrogens drugs . However, some patients are resistant Civitelli1, G. Provenzano1, S. Carrideo1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, M. Salsone1, A. for hormone-modulate therapy and have severe side effects . Gambardella1,2, G. Annesi1; Retrospective analysis of the results of hormone therapy allowed to 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone divide patients to two groups according to hormone therapy efficiency. (Cosenza), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Group 1(54 patients) revealed positive responses to combined Italy. surgical and therapeutic treatment . Some women have demonstrated Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) is a common form of generalized conspicuous resistance to this kind of treatment and were arbitrarily epilepsy starting in adolescence . Recently, a major JME locus was attributed to group 2 (63 patients) . An increased frequency of A1 allele mapped to chromosomal region 6p12 .p11 and it was associated of the CYP19 gene was observed in group 2 as compared to group with mutations in the EFHC1 gene . This gene contains 11 exons and 1 (32% versus 17%, p <0 .01) . Carriers of the A1/A6 genotype were encodes a protein of 640-amino acids that contains 3 DM10 domains registered in 30 .6% of group 2 as compared to 4 .7% in group 1 (p and an EF hand calcium-binding motif . <0 .01) . Analysis of combination of functionally impaired alleles of the In this study, we screened for mutations in the EFHC1 gene 25 families GSTM1, GSTT1 and NAT2 revealed significant difference between from Italy in which at least two members had a typical form of JME . two groups of patients . The combination of the GSTT 0/0 and NAT2 25 families were selected and families with fewer than two affected S/S (p<0.05; OR 8.3), GSTM1 0/0 and NAT2 S/S (p<0.01; OR 8.6), members were excluded from the study . In each patient the diagnosis GSTM1 0/0 and GSTT1 0/0 (p<0.05; OR 10.5) genotypes significantly of JME was done according to the ILAE criteria . After informed consent, increased in group 2 . Total analysis of the GSTM1, GSTT1 and DNA was isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes by standard NAT2 genes revealed significantly higher frequency of functionally methods and each exon of EFHC1 gene was amplified and sequenced impaired genotypes in group 2 as compared to group 1 (68 .6% and using intronic primers . 13 .0% respectively, p<0 .001,OR 14 .6 ) . These data suggest that the We have identified three heterozygous mutations: the F229L mutation, polymorphisms metabolisms genes is associated with different effect previously described, and the novel mutations P429P and R353W of hormone therapy in endometriosis patients . among affected members of 4 unrelated families . EFHC1 gene has been associated with JME in six out 44 families from P0921. Vascular ependymoma, a newly recognized ependymal Belize, Los Angeles, and Mexico . The authors detected 3 heterozygous tumor entity including clear cell ependymoma, is associated mutations (F229L, D210L, D253Y) and one double heterozygous with chromosome 19 trisomy mutation (P77T, R221H) . The results of our study are important as E. Rousseau1,2, M. Ruchoux3, F. Scaravilli4, F. Chapon5, S. Jindrichova2, M. they extend for the first time the distribution of EFHC1 mutations to Vikkula2, C. Godfraind1; Caucasian populations . Moreover, our data provide further evidence 1Laboratory of Pathology, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, for the high level of genetic heterogeneity associated with JME, as 2Human Molecular Genetics dept., Université catholique de Louvain & Christian most of our JME families did not carry any mutations . de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 3Laboratory of Neuropathology, Hôpital Roger Salingro, Lille, France, 4Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Neu- P0919. An early-onset progressive encephalopathy with rology, Queen Square, London, United Kingdom, 5Laboratory of Neuropathol- myoclonus and dystonia (PEmD) mapping to chromosome ogy, CHU, Caen, France. 16pter Monosomy 22 and gain of chromosome 7 are more frequent in spinal N. Duru1, S. A. Ugur1, N. Selçuk2, A. Dervent3, Z. Yapıcı4, A. Tolun1; cord ependymomas while monosomy 9, gain of chromosome 1q, and 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, loss of 6q and 13, are more frequently observed in intracranial ones . Turkey, 2Pediatrics Clinic, Haseki Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, In the present study, we analyzed the genomic profile of monosomy 9 Turkey, 3Department of Pediatric Neurology, Istanbul University Cerrahpaşa ependymal tumors in order to better understand their tumorigenesis Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Department of Neurology, Istanbul University and clinico-pathological characteristics . Using microsatellites on Istanbul Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey. chromosome 9, we selected in a series of 147 ependymal tumors, 9 We describe a novel recessive myoclonic encephalopathy characterized tumors with a monosomy, and one with loss of the p arm . Most of by very early onset and a steady progressive course . In addition to these tumors shared common clinical and histological features, various types of myoclonic seizures, clinical features include episodic reminiscent of a rare tumor, the clear cell ependymoma . Subsequently, phenomena as dystonia, alternating, post-ictal enduring hemipareses, we performed array-CGH on an enlarged series of tumors chosen autonomic involvements and periods of obtundation and lethargy . on the basis of their histological appearance . We observed trisomy Developmental and neurological retardation, accelerated with systemic 19 to be the most frequent chromosomal alteration in this series . infections, lead to a full deterioration . We present two subjects in a Architecturally, the tumors were characterized by compact aspect, Turkish inbred community . The onset is within 2 months after birth, presence of branched capillary network, and regularly dispersed cells . and death occurs within eight years . We designated the disease Some of them presented foci of clear cells . progressive encephalopathy with myoclonus and dystonia (PEMD) . In conclusion, our results allow us to describe a new sub-group A genome-wide scan for the family and subsequent fine mapping amongst ependymal tumors, the vascular ependymoma to which localized the gene responsible for the disease to the 5 .98 Mega base clear cell ependymoma belongs . They are characterized by trisomy of (10 .36 cM) p-terminus of chromosome 16 . The maximum multi-point chromosome 19 frequently associated with monosomy 9 and interstitial logarithm of odds score 4 .338 was obtained around D16S3124 . deletion of 13q. Such a finding is of importance for further research on Several genes map to the gene locus, including SLC9A3R2, SYNGR3, specific pathways involved in ependymal tumor tumorigenesis. These SSTR5 and ATP6V0C . Other metabolic genes mapping to the gene data also underscores the heterogeneity within ependymal tumors and locus will also be discussed . Although the molecular basis for this new the need for further genetic dissection, a mandatory step to establish encephalopathy with predominantly myoclonic and dystonic features targeted treatment of ependymal tumors . remains unidentified, the localization of a gene responsible for the novel disorder may have benefits for families afflicted with diseases P0922. implication of chromosome 18 in essential hypertension exhibiting similar clinical features, as they can be tested for linkage to by sib-pair analysis and association studies: putative the locus . involvement of the RKHD gene M. Ribasés1,2, B. Guzmán3,4, D. González-Núñez3,4, A. Botey3, E. Poch3, B. P0920. Analysis of polymorphisms metabolisms genes (cYP19, Cormand1; Gstm1, Gstt1 and NAt2) in endometriosis patients with 1Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, different efficiency of hormone-modulate therapy. Barcelona, Spain, 2Servei de Psiquiatria, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, N. Shved, T. Ivashchenko, N. Kramareva, M. Aseev, V. Baranov; Barcelona, Spain, 3Servei de Nefrologia, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, Ott’s institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. 4Laboratori d’Hormonologia, Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Endometriosis is an estrogen-dependent disease of women of Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 01 Essential Hypertension (EH) is a common risk factor for cardiovascular disease, including FPF . diseases, end stage renal disease, stroke and peripheral vascular We have identified 14 Newfoundland (NL) FPF kindreds, from which diseases . We tested the implication of loci on chromosomes 9, 17 48 affected individuals and 268 unaffected family members have and 18 in the hypertensive phenotype by combining sib-pair linkage been recruited . We have also assembled a cohort of 24 “sporadic” analysis and case-control association studies . The selection of PF patients . The mean age of diagnosis in the familial group was 59 these chromosomal regions was based on previous evidences from years, compared with 63 years in the sporadic group (not statistically comparative genomics in rat models and from genome-wide linkage significant). However while no patient in the sporadic group was studies in humans . For the sib-pair analysis, a total of 27 microsatellites diagnosed prior to age 40, almost 20% of the familial group were were genotyped in 58 pedigrees with hypertensive sibling-pairs from diagnosed by this age, suggesting that FPF should be considered in Spain. Linkage analysis showed significant excess allele sharing at any NL patient diagnosed with PF prior to 40 . Newfoundland’s minimum the D18S474 marker on 18q21 .1, as shown by maximum likelihood prevalence of FPF is 120 cases/million, which is over 100-fold greater of allele sharing methods (LOD=3 .24 p=0 .00011) and non-parametric than that of the United Kingdom, so that the NL population appears to linkage calculations (NPL=3 .32, p=0 .00044) . On the contrary, we did be enriched for this Mendelian disorder . not obtain significant results with any of the markers analysed on SFPTC has been excluded in these 14 kindreds by immunohistochemistry chromosomes 9 and 17 . We then focused on the Ring Finger and KH and DNA sequencing . Two of the families are large, with 7 or more Domain Containing gene (RKHD2), located 6 Kb distal from D18S474 affected individuals, and are conducive for gene mapping using a and putatively involved in ubiquitination . We performed a case-control traditional linkage analysis approach . Therefore, genome-wide scans association study based on linkage disequilibrium in 112 hypertensive using microsatellite markers have been performed . This analysis has patients and 156 controls . We analysed two RKHD2 tagged SNPs identified several regions of interest which are being examined more covering the entire gene, rs1941958 and rs1893379, and observed thoroughly . a significant overrepresentation of the 1-2 RKHD2 haplotype in the group of hypertensive patients in comparison to controls (2P=0.0004; P0925. Limb girdle muscular dystrophy 2i in spanish and OR=2 .32) . We also detected epistatic effects between the two RKHD2 croatian population SNPs (2P=0.002; OR=3.5). Our data confirm the implication of A. Freixas1, N. Canki-Klain2, M. Olive3, M. Rodriguez1, M. Calaf1, J. Colomer4, chromosome 18 in EH and supports a contribution of RKHD2 to the R. Arteaga5, M. Baiget1, P. Gallano1; genetic susceptibility of this complex phenotype . 1Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Zagreb University School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Hospital de Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Sant Joan P0923. A novel recurrent mutation in AtP1A2 gene in a de Deu, Barcelona, Spain, 5Hospital Valdecilla, Santander, Spain. Portuguese family with familial hemiplegic migraine Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy type 2I (LGMD2I) is an autosomal M. J. Castro1, K. R. J. Vanmolkot2, J. Barros3, C. Lemos1, J. Sequeiros1, R. R. recessive muscular dystrophy caused by mutations in the Fukutin Frants2, J. M. Pereira-Monteiro3, A. M. J. M. van den Maagdenberg4; Related Protein (FKRP) . This gene is located at 19q13 .3 and contains 1UnIGENe-IBMC and ICBAS, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Dept of four exons . Immunohistochemical analysis is not possible to date Human Genetics, LUMC, University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Dept because no specific antibodies have been isolated. Thus, mutational of Neurology, Hospital Geral Santo AntÃ³nio, Porto, Portugal, 4Depts of Human analysis is the method to obtain an accurate molecular diagnosis of Genetics and Neurology, LUMC, University of Leiden, Leiden, Portugal. the disease . The aim of this work is: 1) to diagnose the patients with Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) is an autosomal dominant subtype clinical features suggesting LGMD2I, 2) to observe the frequency of this of migraine with aura, with hemiparesis characterizing the attacks . pathology in these two populations and, 3) to offer genetic counselling Genetically, FHM families can be linked to 19p13 presenting mutations to the affected families . in the CACNA1A gene (FHM1), or linked to 1q23 with mutations in We studied 60 Spanish and 10 Croatian patients presenting a LGMD2I ATP1A2 gene (FHM2) . Recently, a third gene for the disease was phenotype and in whom we previously excluded a dystrophinopathy, reported in 2p24, the SCN1A gene (FHM3) . For FHM1 several recurrent LGMD2A, LGMD2C and LGMD2D . The molecular study was performed mutations have been described and allow a more accurate genotype- following two steps: phenotype correlation . For ATP1A2 however, recurrent mutations 1) The analysis of the L276I mutation (reccurrent in North European are described only once, and other mutations are present in single population) by restriction enzyme analysis . (small) families . Our aim was to investigate the involvement of ATP1A2 2) The sequencing of the unique coding exon 4 . gene in a Portuguese family with pure FHM . Six multiallelic markers We found four missense mutations in seven patients: E55Q, R143S, surrounding the ATP1A2 gene were genotyped and haplotype analysis L276I and G373S, two of them were novel mutations: E55Q and G373S . was compatible with involvement of the ATP1A2 locus . Scanning the Their pathogenia were demonstrate analysing 50 chromosomes from ATP1A2 gene for mutations was performed by direct sequencing of all normal controls and 50 chromosomes from other myopathy patients . exons and flanking regions, using genomic DNA of one patient of the The L276I mutation was identified in four patients (3 Spanish and 1 family. Thus we identified the M731T mutation, previously identified in Croatian) and should be considered the more frequent FKRP mutation a Dutch pure FHM family, and confirmed cosegregation of the mutation in the populations studied . The low number of FKRP mutations with the disease phenotype in our family . Comparison of haplotypes identified despite the patients were very well classified could indicate of both the Dutch and the Portuguese family with the M731T mutation the low frequency of LGMD2I in these two populations . indicated that the mutation is recurrent rather than result of a common founder effect . This mutation is disease-causative in our family, also P0926. Five years study of Fragile X syndrome because recent functional and kinetic consequences on ATPase pump A. R. Kordi1, S. Esmaeeli Nieh1, B. Gholami2, R. Kariminejad2, R. Kariminejad2, functioning were reported . Comparison of the clinical features in the S. S. Abedini1, K. Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1,2; two families revealed a clear association with pure FHM for the M731T 1Genetics Research Center,University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- mutation . ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P0924. High prevalence of familial pulmonary fibrosis in The Fragile X syndrome is the most common form of inherited Newfoundland, suggestive of a novel genetic etiology. mental retardation . It is caused by expansion of CGG triplet repeats B. Fernandez1, B. Noble1, G. Fox1, R. Batia1, E. Sala1, D. Fernandez1, M. F. in Fragile X Mental Retardation 1 (FMR1) gene . Normal individuals Beers2, M. O. Woods1; have <50 CGG repeats and permutation carriers have 50-200 repeats, 1Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NF, Canada, 2University of but affected individuals whom are known as full mutation have over Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. 200 repeats which are generally hypermethylated and this leads to Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) is a form of interstitial lung disease transcriptional silencing of the encoded Fragile X Mental Retardation that is usually diagnosed between ages 50-70 yrs . Up to 3% of IPF Protein (FMRP) . patients have a familial form of the disease (familial pulmonary fibrosis The objective of this study was to confirm the clinical observations or FPF) . In 2001, autosomal dominant mutations in the Surfactant with positive result using molecular genetics methods . In this regard Protein C gene (SFPTC) were shown to cause familial forms of lung we have examined a total of 268 unrelated mental retard individuals Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 0 from two centers, Genetics Research Center (GRC) and Kariminejad P0929. Toward the identification of the gene responsible for and Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center . These families had FtDU-17 pedigree which were suggestive of X-Linked and were clinically P. Rizzu1,2, S. E. van Mil1,2, B. Anar1,2, D. Sondervan1,2, Z. Bochdanovits1,2, P. suspected for Fragile X syndrome . In order to detect the CGG repeats Heutink1,2, J. C. van Swieten3; in FMR1 gene, we used PCR and Southern blot analysis with non 1VU University Medical Center Department of Human Genetics, Section Medi- radioactive DIG labeled StB12 .3 probe . cal Genomics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Center for Neurogenomics and We identified 85 probands with Fragile X syndrome which represent Cognitive Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Erasmus University Medi- 31 .7% of tested probands (85/268) . Prenatal testing was performed cal Center Department of Neurology, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. following a positive carrier test in 14 mothers; According to the results Ubiquitin-positive frontotemporal dementia (FTDU) is the most common from 10 CVS (Chorionic Villus Sampling) and 4 amniocentesis, 3 out of pathological FTD subtype characterized by ubiquitin-positive, tau- 6 females and 2 out of 8 males had full mutation for CGG repeats . negative inclusions in the dentate gyrus and in the superficial layers of the fronto-temporal cortex . P0927. cGG repeat transmission in an extended FRAXA Family During our genetic-epidemiological study aimed to obtain a full from south india ascertainment of FTD patients in the Netherlands we identified two M. N. Guruju1, K. Lavanya2, B. Thelma3, A. Jyothy2, M. Sujatha2, M. P. J. S. large FTDU-17 families where we found linkage to chromosome Anandraj2; 17q21. By fine mapping we were able to exclude the MAPT gene in 1Duke medical centre, Durham, NC, United States, 2Institute of Genetics And which mutations have been previously found in several FTD families Hospital for genetic diseases, Hyderabad, India, 3Dept of Genetics, University linked to 17 (FTDP-17) and significantly refine the linkage interval of Delhi, New delhi, India. to approximately 3 .4 cM . The reduced critical region is located in a Fragile X syndrome is a common form of inherited mental retardation, gene-rich chromosomal area with 118 known genes . In our effort to affecting 1 in 4000 males and 1 in 8000 females. This was the first identify the gene responsible for FTDU we have already excluded triplet repeat disorder discovered, with the CGG repeat polymorphism mutations in 30 functional positional candidate genes but a daunting in the first exon of the FMR1 gene . Since the discovery of the FMR1 mutation analysis effort would be required to investigate them all . gene responsible for the fragile X syndrome, molecular diagnosis of Arguing that a common founder effect may take place for FTDU-17 fragile X is widely used, specially Southern blot analysis was found to as it did for the FTDP-17 MAPT-P301L mutation in the Netherlands be of great use in determining the mosaic pattern in the number of CGG we are using a linkage disequilibrium approach to further reduce the repeats as well as methylation of CpG island . The mechanism leading FTDU-17 critical region . We are currently genotyping 96 tag SNPs on to mosaicism of the CGG repeat is still elusive . We have screened 132 seventy unrelated FTD familial cases to identify a shared ancestral unrelated mental retardation cases, of which 7 cases were found to be chromosomal segment, where the responsible gene would be located . positive for fragile X syndrome . An extended family of 5 generations This approach will reduce the size of the critical region allowing us to has been identified, in this family total of 11 affected males, 3 mosaic focus on a smaller number of genes . females, 3 carrier females and a permutation carrier male have been identified using stb12.3 probe. Of the 11 affected males 3 were mosics P0930. Genetic and clinical investigation of familial hematuria. with varying methalytion status. In the first patient we report a mosaic many patients develop progressive chronic renal failure from pattern of normal, premutation and full mutation, he has two sibs ,one focal segmental glomerular sclerosis male and one female, .who were found to be clinically normal . we have C. Voskarides1, L. Damianou2, V. Neocleous3, I. Zouvani4, C. Christodoulidou2, anlysed CGG repeat status in his sperms and in his sibs to see the V. Hadjiconstantinou2, K. Kyriakou3, K. Ioannou5, C. Patsias6, E. Alexopoulos7, transmission of CGG repeat status from mosaic male to his sibs . A. Pierides5, C. Constantinou Deltas1,3; 1University of Cyprus, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 2Evaggelismos Hospital, Athens, P0928. Frequency of carriers for Friedreich ataxia in the Greece, 3Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 4Gener- Portuguese population al Hospital of Lefkosia, Histopathology Department, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 5General J. Cerqueira1, E. Cruz1, J. Sequeiros1,2; Hospital of Lefkosia, Nephrology Department, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 6General Hos- 1IBMC - CGPP, Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Porto, Portugal. pital of Larnaka, Nephrology Department, Larnaka, Cyprus, 7Aristotle University Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is a neurological disorder, caused by a of Thessaloniki, Medical School, Nephrology Clinic, Thessaloniki, Greece. large GAA repeat in intron 1 of the FRDA gene . FRDA is the most We investigated the genetic causes that led several of our patients to common early-onset recessive ataxia in Caucasian populations . Its progressive renal failure and sometimes to end-stage renal disease with prevalence was estimated to be around 1:25,000-1:50,000, while the the characteristic histopathologic finding of focal segmental glomerular estimated frequency of carriers is 1:60-1:120 in most Indo-European sclerosis (FSGS) . We studied 90 patients and healthy relatives from 12 populations . families who presented with autosomal dominant FSGS, as a primary We followed an affected family for genetic counselling and cascade- or secondary finding in renal biopsies. We performed genetic linkage testing, through which 3 expansion carriers were found in the general analysis on four chromosome regions with candidate genes that have population (spouses) . This prompted us to study the frequency of been linked to the development of FSGS . Those are: 19q13 (ACTN4), carriers in the Portuguese population, in anonymized Guthrie cards 11q22 (TRPC6), 6p12 (CD2AP) responsible for primary FSGS, while from IGM (Medical Genetics Institute, Porto; courtesy of Dr. Maximina gene locus 2q36 (COL4A3/COL4A4) has been linked to familial Pinto) . hematuria, thin basement membrane disease (TBMD) and secondary We have thus analyzed 1059 blood spots (529 females, 530 males), FSGS . Clinical investigation led to the finding of familial hematuria as uniformly distributed by the 20 districts of Portugal, according their the initial symptom as well as the identification of young subjects who population density. DNA was extracted quantified and tested for the had inherited the affected haplotype without proteinuria or renal failure . FRDA (GAA) expansion, by PCR, electrophoresis and Southern Haplotype analysis showed that 8 families are genetically linked to locus n blotting . 2q36, 3 to locus 19q13 and one family to 11q22 . For 2q36 the total LOD A total of 2118 alleles were sized for their GAA repeat . Small normal score is 7 .7, clearly implicating either one of collagen genes COL4A3/ alleles (<12 GAA) represented 94,2% and large normal alleles (12-33 COL4A4 . Mutations in genes COL4A3/COL4A4 are responsible for GAAs) 5,1% . We found 10 expansion carriers (66 -1700 GAAs), with three syndromes: Autosomal recessive Alport, autosomal dominant an aleatory geographic distribution, as well as 3 pre-mutation carriers Alport Syndrome and autosomal dominant TBMD with progression (34 - 65 GAAs) . Carrier frequency was estimated to be 1:106 . This is in to chronic renal failure and FSGS . These three syndromes present agreement with values mentioned in the literature for other European with phenotypes that are part of a continuous spectrum of symptoms populations . This information will be important to foresee the needs for not always permitting a clear diagnosis. Identification of the mutations testing and do better risk estimates in counselling of families affected . will significantly facilitate differential diagnosis in cases of vague or complex clinical presentation, enabling timely and suitable therapy .Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 0 P0931. mapping quantitative trait loci for expression of disease molecular characterization of a large family with GFND . Biological susceptibility genes samples were obtained from 22 subjects: 7 alive patients, 14 healthy N. J. Bray, P. Holmans, M. van den Bree, L. Jones, N. J. Craddock, M. J. relatives and 1 deceased patient . Haplotype analysis allowed us to Owen, M. C. O’Donovan; narrow the critical region . Mutational analysis of candidate genes is Dept Psychological Medicine, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, ongoing . United Kingdom. Heritable differences in gene expression are considered to play an P0934. No evidence of del(GJB6-D13s1830) mutation in important role in susceptibility to complex traits, including many human prelingually non-syndromic hearing impaired croatians and diseases. Genetic influences on gene expression may be trans-acting slovenians as well as cis-acting, and are thus not limited to the gene locus itself . I. Medica1,2, G. Rudolf1, A. Maver1, N. Teran1, H. Jaklič1, B. Peterlin1; Recent studies have demonstrated that expression of a gene is a 1Div. of Medical Genetics, Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, UMC, Ljubljana, phenotype that is amenable to linkage analysis . These studies have Slovenia, 2Outpatient Pediatric Clinic, Pula, Croatia. also indicated that a large proportion of the heritable variance in gene About 1 in 1000 children is affected by hearing loss at birth or in early expression is attributable to trans-acting polymorphism . Our studies childhood (prelingual deafness) . At least 50% of cases are attributed are based on the principle that if cis-acting variation within a ‘disease to genetic factors . Among hereditary non-syndromic deafness, gene’ influences susceptibility to disease through effects on that gene’s autosomal recessive forms predominate . The DFNB1 related disorder, expression, then genes containing trans-acting polymorphism with the caused by mutations in the GJB2 and GJB6 genes, accounts for 50% same effect on the disease gene will also be susceptibility genes for of autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss . Approximately the disorder . For complex disorders, the effect size of these loci will 98% of individuals with DFNB1 related disorder have two identifiable necessarily be greater on the intermediate expression phenotype than GJB2 mutations and 2% of them have one identifiable GJB2 mutation on the clinical phenotype, and thus should be more easily detected . and one of two large deletions of GJB6 . We examined 119 subjects As a method for mapping novel susceptibility loci, we have conducted with prelingual non-syndromic hearing impairment (63 Croatians and linkage analysis of the expression of several susceptibility genes for 56 Slovenians) by polymerase chain reaction, for the presence of the neuropsychiatric / neurodegenerative disorders, using real-time PCR 35delG/GJB2 and the del(GJB6-D13S1830) mutations . The 35delG/ measures in large CEPH pedigrees . Analysis of the schizophrenia GJB2 mutation was found in 21 Croatian subjects (33 .3%) and in 28 susceptibility gene DTNBP1 will be presented . Slovenian subjects (50%) . In 11 of them the mutation was found in the heterozygous state and sequenceing revealed a second mutation P0932. complex approach for the estimation of Renin- in 10 of them (compound heterozygotes) . The del(GJB6-D13S1830) Angiotensin-Bradykinin sytem genes polymorphism mutation was not found in our group of patients . Our results contribute contribution in arterial hypertension in children to the knowledge of geographic distribution and population genetics of A. S. Glotov1,2, G. I. Obraztsova3, T. E. Ivaschenko1, A. S. Zasedatelev2, T. V. the GJB2 and GJB6 mutations in the Europeans . Nasedkina2, V. S. Baranov1; 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federa- P0935. Glomuvenous malformations are caused by lack of tion, 2Engelgardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, glomulin, a specific marker of vascular smooth muscle cell 33Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Academy, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federa- differentiation tion. V. Aerts1, B. A. S. McIntyre1, P. Brouillard1, M. Amyere1, L. M. Boon1,2, V. Vas- Renin-angiotensin-bradykinin system (RABS) is a regulator of arterial silev3, J. B. Mulliken4, M. Vikkula1; (blood) pressure and water-salt balance in human . A lot of genetic 1Human Molecular Genetics dept., Université catholique de Louvain & Christian polymorphisms of this system are associated with cardiovascular de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 2Centre for Vascular Anomalies, Division diseases . However, proper interpretation of these multi-gene of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 3Cell associations usually encounters substantial problems in evaluation Biology Unit, Université catholique de Louvain & Christian de Duve Institute, of particular gene polymorphism contribution in pathogenesis of the Brussels, Belgium, 4Vascular Anomalies Center, Children’s Hospital, Harvard disease . So, there is a clear cut necessity for the development of new Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. approaches more objective evaluation of gene testing studies . Glomuvenous malformations (GVMs) are localized cutaneous The “score” analysis amenable for the standard Mann-Whitney U test vascular lesions, histologically characterized by the presence of mal- is applied . The polymorphisms of the REN (I9-83G>A), AGT (M235T), differentiated smooth muscle-like glomus cells around distended ACE (I/D), AGTR1 (1166A>C), AGTR2 (3123C>A), BKR2 (-58T>C vein-like channels . GVMs are often hereditary and transmitted as и I/D) genes have been studied by PCR and PCR/biochip analysis an autosmal disorder . The gene was linked to chromosome 1p21-22 in children with arterial hypertension (N=179) and in the relevant and named glomulin (glmn) (Boon et al, 1999) . To date, 27 different population group (N=158) . The “score” analysis has been shown that inherited mutations have been identified. The majority of the changes polymorphisms of renin-angiotensin-bradykinin system genes plays cause the appearance of a premature stop codon and probably result essential role in development of arterial hypertension in the boys as in non-sense mediated mRNA decay (Brouillard et al, 2002 & 2005) . well as in pathogenesis of stable form of arterial pressure in girls . Nevertheless, haploinsuffisance may not be sufficient to create a lesion, as a “second-hit” mutation was identified on the second allele P0933. Toward the identification of the gene of the in one lesion (Brouillard et al, 2002 & 2005) . glomerulopathy with fibronectin deposits. By in situ hybridisation, we have shown that glomulin is specifically F. Mari1, R. Artuso1, K. Sampieri1, M. Carmellini2, E. Bresin3, A. Renieri1; expressed in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) during murine 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Transplantation Surgery, University of Siena, development (McIntyre et al, 2004) . We now show that glomulin Siena, Italy, 3Centro di Ricerche Cliniche per Malattie Rare, Ranica, Bergamo, expression begins in VSMCs after desmin, h-caldesmon and smooth Italy. muscle myosin heavy chain, but before the expression of smoothelin- Glomerulopathy with fibronectin deposits (GFND) is an autosomal b (McIntyre et al, submitted) . We also demonstrate that glomus cells dominant renal disease, which is characterized by glomerular in GVMs do not express glomulin nor smoothelin-b, in contrast to fibrillary deposits that show strong immune reactivity to fibronectin. venous malformations (McIntyre et al, submitted) . This complete Patients with GFND develop albuminuria, microhematuria, arterial lack of glomulin supports the notion of GVMs being inherited in a hypertension, renal tubular acidosis type IV, and ESRD disease in the paradominant fashion . second to sixth decade of life . Few clinical reports have been reported We conclude that glomus cells have been deviated in their differentiation to date . The genetic cause of GFND is still unknown . A candidate gene process due to a complete lack of glomulin expression. (vikkula@ approach strategy (uteroglobin gene and fibronectin gene) did not sort bchm .ucl .ac .be) any result . A subsequent genome-wide linkage analysis revealed a critical region of 4 .1 cM in 1q32 . Mutation analysis of three candidate genes among 93 genes contained in the critical region failed to detect any pathogenetic mutation . We report here an accurate clinical and Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 0 P0936. Polymorphisms of the glutathione S-transferase GSTM1, and 51 normal Hb were analyzed . DNA sequencing was carried out GSTT1 and GSTP1 loci: possible protective role of GSTP1 at position -530bp comprising silencer II ATxTy polymorphism and - Val105Val genotype in embryogenesis. 300bp comprising silencer I 69969 C->T SNP . The HbFMaltaI were M. S. Nazarenko, V. P. Puzyrev, I. N. Lebedev, E. Y. Bragina, M. V. Vozdvi- further typed for the XmnI genotype . Results: 69969C/T was in HWE for zhenskaya; both HbFMaltaI and normal controls . (AT)xTy was in HWE for normal State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. controls but not for the HbFMaltaI (χ2=17.34; p<0.005). Two HbFMaltaI The aetiology of early pregnancy loss remains unclear, but it may be homozygotes carried the homozygous (AT)(T) allele . Genetic data 9 5 multifactorial with a possible genetic predisposition and involvement analyzed by Linkage Disequilibrium Analyzer (LDA) and PHASE v2 .1 .1 of environmental factors . Genetic polymorphisms in glutathione S- software strongly suggests linkage disequilibrium (LD) of the (AT)(T) 9 5 transferases (GSTs) resulting in altered detoxification may contribute to allele with HbValletta and HbFMaltaI (χ2=93.30; p<0.001; D’=1.00; LR: increased exposure of the conceptus to endo- or exogenous toxins and p<0.001) in the Maltese population. A statistically significant association therefore play a role in the individual susceptibility to early pregnancy between (AT)xTy genotypes and the XmnI site in HbFMaltaI (χ2=7.6; loss . The aim of this study was to investigate the selective role of p=0 .023) was also observed . Discussion: The (AT)(T) allele as shown 9 5 GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1 polymorphisms in the human embryo by the HbFMaltaI homozygote samples, occurs on the same haplotype . viability . We studied 171 embryos with normal karyotype that had been All HbFMaltaI heterozygotes carried at least one of this allele type . spontaneously aborted between the 6th and 12th week after conception The (AT)(T) is in tight linkage disequilibrium with HbValletta and 9 5 and 135 adult controls for the GSTM1 deletion (null), the GSTT1 HbFMaltaI . HbFMaltaI may therefore serve as a model to understand deletion (null) and the GSTP1 Ile105Val functional polymorphisms . better, both at the gene and protein level of interactions that occur in GSTM1 and GSTT1 null genotypes were determined in 84 (49%) and vivo . 42 (25%) spontaneous abortions, and 74 (55%) and 32 (24%) controls, Estimated Haplotypes by PHASE software v2 .1 .1 respectively . GSTM1 and GSTT1 genotype distributions did not differ significantly between these two groups. Regarding GSTP1 genotypes, the proportion of Val105 homozygotes was significantly lower in the Haplotype Haemoglobin69758c/tAtxty69969c/tAllele count spontaneous abortion group than in the control individuals (5% versus 13%, P=0 .02) . In conclusion, the GSTP1 Val105Val genotype may be 1 HbF t 7 7 t 55 protective in the early human development . 2 HbF t 7 7 c 25 P0937. Analysis of the HMOX1 gene in south African patients with variegate porphyria 3 HbF c 7 7 t 33 M. G. Zaahl1, K. J. H. Robson2, N. du Plessis1, L. Warnich1; 1Department of Genetics, University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch, South 4 HbF c 9 5 t 37 Africa, 2MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. 5 HbF c 9 5 c 2 Variegate porphyria (VP) demonstrates substantial variability in clinical presentation . More than 90% of South African VP patients present 6 HbF c 11 3 t 9 with the protoporphyrinogen oxidase gene (PPOX) R59W mutation due to a founder gene effect . However, phenotypic variations are 7 HbFMaltaI c 9 5 t 63 observed between these individuals, suggesting the involvement of yet unidentified modifier genes. A potential candidate modifier gene total 224 is the haem-oxygenase 1 gene (HMOX1) that is involved in cleavage of the haem ring at the alpha methene bridge to form biliverdin . In this P0939. Genetic and functional mechanisms of ABcA12 study we investigated the HMOX1 gene as a possible modifier locus associated Harlequin ichthyosis for VP in the South African population . The study population consisted of 25 well-characterised R59W heterozygous VP patients, including A. C. Thomas, E. A. Norgett, T. Cullup, E. A. O’Toole, D. P. Kelsell; patients with skin symptoms (11), acute attacks (2), acute attacks in The Centre for Cutaneous Research, Barts and the London Queen Mary combination with skin lesions (5) and asymptomatic patients (7) . PCR School of medicine and dentistry, London, United Kingdom. Harlequin ichthyosis (HI) is the most severe recessive congenital amplification was performed on the promoter and coding region of the ichthyosis . Due to impaired barrier function of the skin neonates have HMOX1 gene followed by heteroduplex single-strand conformation often died within 2 days of birth . Using SNP chip technology and polymorphism (HEX-SSCP) analysis . Subsequent DNA seqeuncing subsequent sequencing our previous studies detected that mutations revealed several variants in the promoter region [(GT) ; (GT) ; (GT) ; 13 21 23 in the gene encoding ABCA12 [(ATP)-binding cassette transporter] (GT) ; (GT) at(GT) ; (GT) at(GT) ], intron 2 (IVS2-19C→T and 27 15 14 13 20 underlie the skin disease HI in 11 out of the 12 patients studied . In this IVS2-31T→C), exon 4 (R237G) and intron 5 (IVS5+51delTGGCTGTC study we have sequenced the ABCA12 gene of a further 13 patients, TGACT). The variants IVS2-19C→T (2 of 7) and R237G (1 of 7) were the results show all of them contain either nonsense substitution or identified only in the asymptomatic group, comprising 43% (3 of 7) frameshift mutations . Non-denaturing HPLC analysis and Agilent DNA of this group. Variants identified exclusively in the patient group were oligo arrays showed the presence of a heterozygous whole exon observed in 12% of this group . This study demonstrates the potential deletion in a patient with no mutations previously located with standard involvement of HMOX1 variants as a protective mechanism against sequencing . These mutation data establish ABCA12 as the major HI the development of symptoms associated with VP in R59W mutation gene . individuals and warrants further studies . Immunofluorescence demonstrated completely absent ABCA12 protein expression in HI skin (n=2) with expression throughout normal, control P0938. Linkage Analysis of the Atxty genotype on Haemoglobin epidermis, most strongly in the stratum granulosum . Furthermore F malta i in the maltese population markers of late epidermal differentiation, such as transglutaminase J. Borg1, A. E. Felice1,2; 1 and ZO-1, had a highly abnormal distribution in HI skin being 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, expressed in the lower layers of the epidermis including the basal cell University of Malta, MSIDA, Malta, 2Department of Pathology (On Campus), layer . In summary mutations have been found in all HI patients studied University of Malta, MSIDA, Malta. to date and exon copy number experiments should be considered Introduction: HbFMaltaI or [α2γ2 2117(G19) His->Arg] is a when screening for HI . Immunostaining has proven that this protein haematologically and clinically benign Gγ globin variant found in 1.8% is completely absent in HI skin and that the normal pattern of late of the Maltese newborn . It is linked to a stable abnormal haemoglobin, epidermal differentiation is severely impaired . These data suggest an HbValletta or [α2β2 287(f3) Thr->Pro]. The ATxTy motif 5’ to the β important role for ABCA12 in early epidermal differentiation in addition globin gene was investigated by genetic linkage analysis . Methods: A to effective barrier function . total of 112 samples (224 chromosomes) that included 61 HbFMaltaI Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 0 P0940. Genetic studies of the iranian deaf population Project EUROHEAR, LSHG-CT-20054-512063; Karadeniz Technical H. Najmabadi1, N. Meyer2, K. Kahrizi1, Y. Riazalhosseini1, A. Daneshi3, M. University Research Fund, 2002.114.001.3 Farhadi3, M. Mohseni1, N. Bazazzadegan1, F. Esteghamat1, M. Avenarius2, C. Nishimura2, S. Arzhangi1, K. Javan1, K. Jalalvand1, R. J. H. Smith2; P0942. DFNB1 mutations are not the most frequent cause of 1Genetics Research Center, University of the Social Welfare and Rehabilita- hearing loss among iranian population tion Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology S. Hemmati1, M. Mohseni1, N. Bazazzadegan1, S. Arzhangi1, K. Kahrizi1, N. Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa Nikzat1, A. Daneshi2, M. Farhadi2, R. J. H. Smith3, N. Meyer3, H. Najmabadi4; City, IA, United States, 3Rasoul Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sci- 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research Center of Ear, Nose, Throat, During last six years, total of 1395 families with hearing loss have and Head and Neck Surgery, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Oto- been referred to our center for genetic testing . Thirty eight families had laryngology Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and syndromic hearing loss . Majority of families had autosomal recessive Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 4Genetic Research non syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) pattern of inheritance . In 97 Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. probands, no other affected relative could be identified - we classified Background: Congenital profound deafness has a known genetic these as simplex cases . GJB2 mutation screening was complete in origin in more than 50% of all cases . The majority of the non 1246 patients with presumed ARNSHL; initially we tested for 35delG syndromic hearing loss shows an autosomal recessive inheritance mutation . Persons either negative or heterozygous for this mutation pattern . DFNB1 is characterized by congenital, non-progressive mild- were analyzed by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography to-profound sensorineural hearing impairment . This locus contains and direct sequencing . We found GJB2-related hearing loss in 210 GJB2 and GJB6 genes that encode connexin 26 and connexin 30, of 1246 (15.6%) ARNSHL cases. Identified deafness-causing allele respectively . Mutations in the GJB2 gene account for more than 50% variants included 20 mutations which 507insAACG, 329delA, 363delC of the recessive non syndromic deafness . and Q80L are the novel mutations and they have not been reported in materials and methods: In this study, we investigated 50 other populations . The objective of this study is to identify the gene(s) consanguineous families with at least two affected individuals that involve in ARNSHL in Iranian Populations. As the first step the 14 already had been tested negative for mutations in GJB2 and GJB6 known loci of ARNSHL with three and more affected individuals are genes for linkage to DFNB1 locus . being investigated by homozygosity mapping using STRs Markers . Results: In order to find the linkage, genetic linkage analysis with three Whole Genome Screening using SNP typing has been performed for STR markers (D13S787, D13S633, and D13S292) was performed and the families which can not be localized to the known loci . So far over 6 none of the 50 families was linked to DFNB1 . years, we have been able to collect over 722 families with two or more conclusion: This data suggest that it is unlikely that other genes in affected deaf and our linkage result have identified 3 new Loci which this region are involved in autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing have not been mapped previously . loss (ARNSHL) in Iranian population . P0941. mutations in GJB, TMC1, TMPRSS and MYO1A cause P0943. the FViii gene polymorphisms in moldovan patients with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss in turkish hemophilia A patients N. Sirocova; E. Kalay1,2, A. A.P.M. de Brouwer1,3, R. Caylan4, A. Heister1, E. Krieger5, N. National Center of Reproductive Health, Medical Genetics and Family Planning, Sahin-Calapoglu2, F. Cremers1, C. W.R.J. Cremers3, H. G. Brunner1, A. Karagu- Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. zel2, H. Kremer3; Hemophilia A is a common X-linked bleeding disorder affecting 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical approximately 1 in 5000-10000 males . It is caused by various mutations Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Department of Medical Biology and Ge- in the FVIII (FVIII) gene, leading to deficiency of functional coagulation. netics, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey, We report the results of polymorphism analysis on a series of Moldovan 3Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical patients with hemophilia A to evaluate its value for carrier detection . Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Fac- The study was performed in 42 unrelated male patients with hemophilia ulty of Medicine, Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey, 5Center for A . Relatives from their families were also studied for carrier detection . Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Total genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood according to Netherlands. standard procedures . A single nucleotide polymorphism in the FVIII Autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) is the most gene HindIII/intron19 and an extragenic St14 (DXS52) VNTR were common form of hereditary hearing impairment . Although high genetic studied by PCR-based methods . Also these markers were analyzed in heterogeneity, mutations in the GJB2 (DFNB1) are a remarkably control group (64 unrelated X-chromosomes) . frequent cause of ARNSHL in all populations studied so far . The presence of the restriction site HindIII+ was observed in 40 .5% Ninety unrelated familial patients with ARNSHL from the northeast of of hemophilia A patients . The frequency was similar to that observed Turkey were evaluated . Screening for mutations in the GJB2 gene in controls (35,9%) . Determination of the length of the St14 VNTR revealed five already described mutations, p.G12fsX13 (35delG), led to observation of twelve alleles ranged from 670bp to 2900bp . p .W24X, p .R104fsX109 (310del14), p .E120del and p .R184P . In The 1690bp-allele was the most frequent allele with 42% and 35% addition, two novel mutations, p.Q80K and p.P173S, were identified. frequency in patients and in control group, respectively . The expected In total, these mutations explain the ARNSHL in 29 (32 .2%) of the heterozygozity rate was 0 .787 . Of 42 families with hemophilia A 36 patients . 35delG was the most common mutation, accounting for 76% (86%) were informative for these two polymorphisms . Twelve female of all mutant GJB2 alleles . relatives (except patients’ mothers) from 11 hemophilia A families A number of families with a single or without a GJB2 mutation and were analyzed for carries status . In 7 of them the carrier status was suitable for homozygosity mapping were selected and analysed . rejected . Homozygosity was detected in four families for TMC1 (DFNB7/11), Thus, the results indicate that these polymorphisms are suitable for the in three families for TMPRSS3 (DFNB8/10) and in one family for carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis in Moldova . MYO15A (DFNB3) . Subsequent sequencing of the coding region and exon-intron boundaries of these genes revealed four novel TMC1 mutations, p .Y259C, p .P274L, p .R445H, R362fsX367, in 4 (4 .4%) families . In TMPRSS3, one known mutation, p .P404L, and two novel mutations, p .R216L and p .Q398X, were found in 3 (3 .3%) families . In MYO15A, one novel mutation, p.G1831V, was identified in 1 family. Our results indicate that besides mutations in GJB2, mutations in TMC1 and TMPRSS3 contribute remarkably to ARNSHL, especially considering the high level of genetic heterogeneity of ARNSHL . This work was supported by European Commission FP6 Integrated Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 06 P0944. the second most prevalent locus (DFNB4) in the iranian P0946. Polymorphic sequence variations in Hereditary patients with hearing loss Hemorrhagic telangiectasia genes M. Mohseni1, K. Kahrizi1, C. Nishimura2, N. Bazazzadegan1, G. Asaadi Teh- P. Bayrak-Toydemir1,2, F. Gedge1, J. McDonald1,3, R. Mao1,2; rani1, M. Sayfati1, M. Taghdiri1, P. Jamali1, A. Daneshi3, R. J. H. Smith2, H. 1ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, Najmabadi1; United States, 2University of Utah, Department of Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- United States, 3University of Utah, Department of Radiology, Salt Lake City, UT, ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research United States. Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Univer- Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is a multisystemic sity of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 3Research Center of Ear, Nose, Throat, vascular dysplasia characterized by direct arterio-venous connections . and Head and Neck Surgery, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. The prevalence of this autosomal dominant disorder is estimated to Background: The mutation in SLC26A4 gene in DFNB4 locus is be 1 in 10,000 . Although there is marked age-dependent and variable responsible for syndromic(Pendred syndrome) and non-syndromic clinical expression, the most frequent findings include epistaxis, hereditary hearing loss(HHL) . In many population the mutation in this telangiectases, and arteriovenous malformations (AVM) . gene have been reported as the second cause of HHL . The objective HHT is genetically heterogeneous with two known genetic forms . HHT1 of our study was to investigate the prevalence of SLC26A4 mutations and HHT2 are caused by mutations in the endoglin (ENG) and activin in our HHL consanguineous families . A receptor type II-like 1 (ACVRL1) genes, respectively . More than materials and methods: After complete clinical examination the 90% of these mutations are novel and most of them are missense . consent form was taken from each family . we included 77 families Hence, differentiating missense mutations from polymorphisms is a with more than two affected individuals, who have been referred to major problem . In order to provide a reference, we have sequenced GRC (Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and the coding regions and exon-intron boundaries of ENG and ACVRL1 Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran) . All families had previously genes in 100 patients with HHT and 100 control individuals . We tested negative to DFNB1 locus, were candidate for homozygosity compared the frequency of the polymorphisms in HHT patients with mapping using STRs for DFNB4 locus . Families localize to this region controls . were subjected complete DNA sequencing . We found 11 different sequence variants in the ACVRL1 and 18 Results: Ten out of seventy seven families were mapped to DFNB4 . variants in the ENG gene . There is no difference in the frequency of Sequence analysis of five linked families revealed six mutations the nucleotide changes between the patient and control groups . Thus (T420I, 1197delT, G334Y, R409H, R79X, T721M, R79X) that T420I , none of these sequence variants suggest association with disease . G334V and R79X were novel mutations . Mutations detection for the Furthermore, knowing the polymorphisms in these genes will be useful other families is performing . in counseling the patients who have novel missense mutations . conclusion: We have been all to localize total 10 families (13%) to DFNB4 locus . Five families had thyroid dysfunction( pendred P0947. mutations of the RET gene in isolated and syndromic syndrome) and in two families we couldn‘t find any symptoms of Hirschsprung disease disclose major and modifier alleles at a thyroid impairment, for the rest of families thyroid function testing being single locus investigated . Our result demonstrate that SLC26A4 gene mutation L. de Pontual1, A. Pelet1, D. Trochet1, F. Jaubert2, Y. Espinosa-Parrilla1, A. Mun- is the second most prevalent cause of HHL in Iran . This result is in nich1, J. Brunet3, C. Goridis3, J. Feingold1, S. Lyonnet1, J. Amiel1; accordance with most of the other reports from other countries which 1Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 2Service d’Anatomopathologie, Hô- have been studied . pital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3CNRS UMR 8542, Département de Biologie, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France. P0945. Genes PmP22 duplication screening in patients with Hirschsprung disease (HSCR, MIM 164761) stands as a model in the hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy from Bashkortostan study of diseases with a complex mode of inheritance . A multiplicative E. G. Latypova1, N. Krupina2, R. Magzhanov2, E. Khusnutdinova1, I. Khidiya- oligogenic model with 3 loci has been proposed with RET proto- tova1; oncogene being the key player . Indeed, almost all HSCR patients 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir harbor either a heterozygous mutation of the coding sequence or, State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. more frequently, a hypomorphic allele located in a conserved non gene Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) is genetically sequence in intron 1 . In roughly 30% of the cases however, HSCR heterogeneous disorder of peripheral nervous system, characterized is associated to other malformations . Hitherto, the disease causing by progressive weakness, atrophy of the peroneal muscles and distal gene is known in 4 syndromic HSCR forms with mendelien inheritance muscles of arms . The frequency of the disease varies from 10 to 40 among which CCHS (MIM209880, PHOX2B mutation) and Mowat- cases per 100000 in different populations (Skre, 1974) . The HMSN Wilson (MIM235730, ZFHX1B mutation) . The penetrance of the HSCR frequency in Bashkortostan Republic is 10,3:100000 . The most phenotype is estimated about 20% for PHOX2B gene mutation and frequent cause of the disease is 1,5 Mb duplication in chromosome 60% for ZFHX1B mutation . To test whether RET could be regarded as 17p11 .2-12, comprising peripheral myelin protein (PMP22) . The a modifier gene for the enteric phenotype in these 2 syndromes, we mutation frequency varies in different populations . genotyped the RET locus in patients for which the disease-causing The examined group of patients consisted of 136 HMSN patients from mutation had been identified previously for CCHS (N=143) or MWS 96 families, living in Bashkortostan . 60 patients analyzed (62,5%) were (N=30) . Splitting patients into 2 groups (with or without HSCR) for each clinically diagnosed as HMSN type I, 9 patients (9,38%) - HMSN type syndrome showed a statistically significant over representation of the II, 1 patient (1%) - HMSN type IV and 1 patients (1%) - HMSN type V . RET hypomorphic allele in CCHS patients only (χ2=11.52; p<0.001). HMSN type confirmation was required in 25 families. Gene PMP22 Therefore RET acts as a modifier gene for the enteric phenotype to duplication analysis was performed using PCR-analysis of micro- and occur in patients with a PHOX2B gene mutation . These data illustrate minisatellite DNA-loci in all patients without differentiation diagnoses the concept of a developmental gene being either a major disease- for HMSN types . Gene PMP22 duplication was revealed in 38 patients causing gene or a modifier gene. Finally, we also suggest the possibility from 30 unrelated families . The duplication frequency in unrelated of RET dependent and RET independent HSCR cases . patients was 31,25% for all types of HMSN and 50,85% - for HMSN type I , that appeared to be lower than in Western Europe countries, P0948. HLA match test by Real time PcR in buccal cheek swabs where the duplication frequency is 75-80% (Latour et al ., 2001) . In increase the feasibility for reaching higher number of donors. one examined family PMP22 duplication and HMSN, caused by this F. Taylan1,2, S. Yüksel1, E. Altıok1,2; mutation, was found only in one family member, so, the detected 1Acibadem Genetic Diagnosis Center, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Boğaziçi University, mutation appeared to be mutation de novo . Dept. Molecular Biology &Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey. We have previously described a rapid HLA match test procedure that uses real time fluorescent PCR and melting curve analysis for common HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-DRB1 alleles in DNA obtained from blood or from buccal cheek swabs . We have now applied the Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 0 protocols to screen 48 individuals among relatives of 5 allogeneic performed through a conditional logistic regression, and homogeneity transplant recipients . Buccal cheek swabs have been used by the of these OR with those of the 100 first trio families previously published donors at rural areas without the help of a health professional and was tested . sent at room temperature by courier mails to our laboratory . HLA-A, Results . The S and S alleles were significantly overtransmitted. The 2 3P HLA-B and HLA-DRB1 alleles have been tested by Real Time PCR undertransmitted S, S and X alleles were grouped as L alleles, as 1 3D using hybridization probes followed by melting curve analysis . The previoulsy. Under this 3 alleles classification, the risk hierarchy of the 6 samples have been studied in parallel by commercial SSP PCR kits . resulting genotypes was, by decreasing OR: S/S , S/S, S /S , S/L 2 3P 2 2 3P 3P 2 The total turnaround time for HLA-A, HLA-B and DRB1 match test was and S /L, the reference genotype being L/L . Those results validated 3P 3 hours . Compared to the high costs, sample requirements and long the proposed classification. Following an homogeneity test, we pooled turnover times of the HLA SSP typing tests, real time PCR dramatically the two samples and improved estimates from the highest (S/S ) to 2 3P reduced the costs while minimizing the required DNA amount thus the lowest (S /L) risk genotype . 3P enabling the use of buccal swabs for HLA match tests . Buccal swabs Conclusion . Using an independent sample, we validated the were easily used and sent to our laboratory by family members living classification previously described and provided estimates for the at rural areas . This has expanded the availability of potential donors . resulting genotypes . Analysis of buccal cheek swabs by real time PCR using hybridization probes increase the feasibility for accessing to a higher number of HLA P0951. HPFH and δβ-thalassemia in Iranian patients with β- compatible donors . thalassemia F. Esteghamat1,2, H. Imanian1, A. Azarkeivan1, N. Almadani1, H. Najmabadi1,2; P0949. Unexpectedly low prevalence of HLA-B27 in Romanian 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi pathology and genetic center, Tehran, Islamic Republic ankylosing spondylitis patients of Iran, 2Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilita- O. Popa1, L. Popa2, R. Sfrent-Cornateanu1, M. Bojinca3,4, C. Bara1, N. Coman5; tion Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1”Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Immunol- Backgrounds: Hereditary Persistence of Fetal Hemoglobin (HPFH) ogy and Physiopathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Grigore Antipa” National and δβ-thalassemia are heterogeneous disorders, characterized by Museum of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania, 3”I. Cantacuzino” Hospital, increased level of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) in adult life . A considerable Bucharest, Romania, 4”Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, number of deletions of variable size and position that involve the β- Bucharest, Romania, 5”Babes-Boliay” University, Department of Experimental globin gene cluster on chromosome 11 are associated with the clinical Medicine, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. entities of HPFH and δβ-thalassemia. Here, we studied the most eight The association between ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and HLA-B27 common deletions involved in HPFH and δβ-thalassemia in Iranian locus is documented for some 30 years . However, the prevalence of patients . HLA-B27 in different ethnic populations is not the same, both for the Materials and Methods: We included 17 patients who have referred general population and ankylosing spondylitis patients . In this study we to our private genetic center since last 3 years with elevated levels tested 40 AS patients and 50 healthy individuals from the Romanian of HbF, and low MCV . After obtaining the informed consent, DNA population for the presence/absence of the HLA-B27 . The testing was was extracted from whole blood by salting-out method . Detection of conducted by duplex PCR, with one primer pair amplifying a 135 bp 8 deletions including HPFH-1, HPFH-3, Spanish, Sicilian, Chinese, fragment from the exon 3 of the B27 gene (in positive individuals), while Asian-Indian inversion-deletion Gγ(Aγ δβ)0, and the Turkish form of another primer pair amplified a 357 bp fragment from the exon 4 of inversion-deletion (δβ)0 thalassemia, Turkish (Inv-Del) was based on CD62E gene and functioned as an internal control of amplification. All PCR method described previously by Craig et al . the samples were amplified at least three different times, and consistent Results: We found Sicillian, Hb lepore and Asian-Indian inversion- results were obtained in all cases . The prevalence of HLA-B27 in AS deletion Gγ(Aγ δβ)0 deletions causing δβ-thalassemia in 9(53%), patients was 77 .5% (31/40) and in healthy control population 14% 3(17.6%) and 4(23.5%) of patients, respectively. We could not find (7/50) . A chi-squared test was conducted (alpha=0 .05) with expected none of eight deletions in one of the patients . values taken from the literature, respectively 90% for the prevalence Conclusion: Taken together, this is the first study of deletions involved of HLA-B27 in AS patients, and 8% for the prevalence of HLA-B27 in in HPFH and δβ-thalassemia in Iranian patients with β-thalassemia Caucasoid population. The test showed no significant difference for that highlight the heterogeneity of the genetic background of Iranian the prevalence of the investigated locus in the general population, but population and importance of screening this deletions in prenatal significant deviation from the expected values was found for the AS diagnosis . patients . This study revealed an unexpectedly low prevalence of HLA- B27 in AS patients from Romania . P0952. Familial presentation of Hereditary spastic paraplegia A. Yazdi, T. Majidi zadeh, S. Saber, M. Rostami, B. Hooshiar kashani, M. P0950. Validation of the reshaped shared Epitope HLA-DRB1 Houshmand; Classification in Rheumatoid Arthritis National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- L. Michou1, P. Croiseau2, E. Petit-Teixeira3, S. Tezenas du Montcel4, I. Le- lamic Republic of Iran. maire5, C. Pierlot3, J. Osorio3, W. Frigui3, S. Lasbleiz6, P. Quillet5, T. Bardin1, B. Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a clinically and genetically Prum7, F. Clerget-Darpoux8, F. Cornélis9,3; heterogeneous group of inherited disorders characterized by insidiously 1Fédération de rhumatologie, Paris, France, 2INSERM U535, Villejuif, France, progressive, often severe, lower extremity weakness and spasticity . 3Laboratoire GenHotel, Evry, France, 4Service de biostatistiques, hôpital Pitié- Symptom severity, age of onset and rate of disease progression may Salpétrière, Paris, France, 5Laboratoire de biologie, Corbeil-Essonnes, France, vary widely among patients . Estimated prevalence is 5 in 1000000 . 6Unité de génétique clinique, hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, 7Laboratoire The most common pattern of HSP’s inheritance is autosomal statistiques et génome, Evry, France, 8INSERM U 535, Villejuif, France, 9Unité dominant . de génétique clinique, Paris, France. Twenty-one loci have been linked to various forms of HSP; 10 loci Objective. We proposed a classification of HLA-DRB1 alleles, reshaping have been mapped for autosomal dominant forms of HSP, seven loci the shared epitope hypothesis in rheumatoid arthritis (RA): RA was for autosomal recessive forms and three loci for X-linked forms . Six associated with the RAA shared epitope sequence (72-74 positions) genes associated with HSP have been identified: SPG3A (atlastin), and the association was modulated by the amino acids at positions SPG4 (spastin), SPG7 (paraplegin), SPG20 (spartin), L1CAM (L1 cell 70 and 71, resulting in 6 genotypes with different RA risks . Here, we adhesion molecule) and PLP (proteolipid protein) . tested this classification for validation in an independent sample. SPG4 gene is the most common gene associated with HSP and we Methods . A new sample of 100 French Caucasian families with one RA cheked it in our patients . patient and both parents was genotyped for the HLA-DRB1 gene . The 37 years old woman with foot paresthesia and paraplegia referred alleles were grouped as previously: S alleles for the sequences A-RAA to us .Her illness began when she was 21 y . Both feet are affected 1 or E-RAA, S for Q or D-K-RAA, S for D-R-RAA, S for Q or R-R- but the right one is in better conditions . She suffers from back pain 2 3D 3P RAA, and X alleles for no RAA sequence . Over or undertransmission while walking too . Examination revealed increased muscle tone and of alleles was investigated . Genotypes odds ratio (OR) calculation was proximal motor deficit in the lower limbs. Hyperreflexia in lower and Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 0 upper limbs, and Babanski signs are seen distal atrophy of food and for this genetic defect . Based on this hypothesis, we performed a prominent Lordosis and slight impaired vibration sense in ankles are genome-wide linkage analysis in the five families using the GeneChip seen . Human Mapping 10K Array SNP genotyping . The results demonstrate Mother was normal, father suffered from spinal canal stenosis (first the presence of significant linkage peaks with maximal LOD of 2.28 cousins) . Her older brother and 22 years old son has similar complain . assuming the smallest genetic distance between the five families, One of cousins has unknown paraplegia . on the long arm of chromosome 12 . All affected individuals shared Neuroimaging,Electrophysiologic and genetics molecular diagnosis the same haplotype in this locus. This finding suggests that a gene were done . involved in melanin distribution is located on chromosome 12 . (http:// www.icp.ucl.ac.be/vikkula) (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be) P0953. Association of obesity in psychiatric patients using antipsychotics with a HtR2c sNP genotype in the 3’UtR region P0955. An audit of a diagnostic service for Hypertrophic is stronger than with promoter polymorphism genotypes cardiomyopathy and Dilated cardiomyopathy. H. Scheffer1, H. Mulder2, B. Franke1, A. van der Aart-van der Beek3, J. Arends4, K. L. Thomson1,2, E. Blair3,2, H. Watkins4,2, A. Seller1,2; F. W. Wilmink4, A. C. G. Egberts5; 1Oxford Genetics Laboratories, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Oxford Genetics 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen- Knowledge Park, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Clinical Genetics, Oxford, United tre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Wilhelmina Kingdom, 4Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom. Hospital, Assen, The Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Martini Since April 2004 the Oxford Genetics Knowledge Park, UK, has funded Hospital, Groningen, The Netherlands, 4Psychiatric Hospital GGZ Drenthe, a molecular genetic service for Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) Assen, The Netherlands, 5Department of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharma- and Dilated Cardiomyopathy (DCM) . Mutation screening by dHPLC and cotherapy, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht, The Nether- sequencing is available for the MYH7, MYBPC3, and TNNT2 genes . lands. To date, we have identified pathogenic variants in 38/76 HCM and 5/13 The use of antipsychotic drugs is associated with obesity, and therefore DCM patients . Mutation testing has been undertaken in 78 relatives, an increased risk of cardiovascular mortality . As association of obesity of whom 61% were found to have the familial mutation . An audit of the in an unaffected and untreated Asian population with genotypes of analysis performed and the mutations and polymorphisms identified SNPs within the promoter region of the HTR2C gene coding for the will be presented . Implementation of new strategies to increase serotonine-2C receptor has been reported previously, but subsequent detection rate will be considered as will the need for high throughput reports on the (lack of) association between antipsychotic-induced technologies for the delivery of an effective cardiomyopathy service . obesity and HTR2C genotype are conflicting. In this cross-sectional study the association of obesity (body mass index over 30 kg/m2) P0956. SLCA1 mutations of renal hypouricemia in Japanese in 127 psychiatric patients using antipsychotics with the HTR2C K. Ichida1, M. Hosoyamada2, I. Hisatome3, T. Shibasaki2, T. Hosoya1; promoter region polymorphisms rs3813929:C>T (-759 C/T), rs518147: 1Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 2Kyoritsu University of Phar- G>C (-697 G/C), rs3813929:C>T (-759 C/T), rs3813928:G>A (-997 macy, Tokyo, Japan, 3Tottori University, Yonago, Japan. G/A), rs1414334:C>G and HTR2C: c .1-142948(GT)), and a SNP Renal hypouricemia is an inherited and heterogeneous disorder n (rs1414334:C>G) in HTR2C intron 5 close to the 3’ UTR was evaluated . characterized by increased urate clearance . We established that urate Association with obesity (evaluated with logistic regression and was reabsorbed via URAT1 on the apical membrane in the proximal expressed as adjusted odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals tubules, and that mutations in SLC22A12 encoding URAT1 cause (95%CI)) was observed in carriers of the variant alleles rs1414334: renal hypouricemia . In 2004, we reported the characteristics including C (OR2 .80 (95%CI:1 .03-7 .62)) and HTR2C:c .1-142948(GT):Z-6 (OR serum urate levels, urate clearances and mutations in the 32 unrelated n 2 .30 (95%CI:0 .92-5 .78)) . The haplotype carrying the variant alleles patients with idiopathic renal hypouricemia (J Am Soc Nephrol 15, 164, HTR2C:c .1-142948(GT):Z-6, the wild type allele rs3813929:C, the 2004) . In this conference, we elucidate SLC22A12 mutations of 86 n variant allele rs518147:C, and the variant allele rs1414334:C was patients with idiopathic renal hypouricemia in 71 families . associated with an increased risk of obesity (OR 3 .71 (95%CI:1 .24- Seventy-three patients either came to Jikei University Hospital or 11 .12)) . In conclusion, some HTR2C polymorphisms are associated their doctors consulted with the hospital between January 1, 1998 with obesity in patients taking antipsychotics, and the association and December 31, 2005 . Thirteen patients came to Tottori University appears to be stronger with a particular haplotype including the intronic Hospital between January 1, 1998 and December 31, 2005 . SNP . Possibly, HTR2C promoter activity does not entirely determine Seventy-seven patients in 64 families had SLC22A12 mutations, 33 this association, but it may well be that a more downstream alteration homozygotes, 23 compound heterozygotes, and 21 heterozygotes . We affecting HTR2C stability, expression, or even function is equally or identified fourteen mutations. Nonsense mutation G774A dominated more important . SLC22A12 mutations (82 .7 % of 133 affected SLC22A12 alleles) . G269A, G412A, Del1639-1643 and IVS2+1G→A were also identified P0954. Genome wide linkage analysis of a novel hereditary in 12, 3, 3 and 3 of the alleles, respectively . progressive hyperpigmentation disorder Our findings indicate that SLC22A12 is responsible for most renal T. Vogt1, M. Amyere2, M. Vikkula2; hypouricemia and high frequency of G774A mutation should result 1Department of Dermatology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, in a number of the patients with renal hypouricemia in Japanese, 2Human Molecular Genetics dept., Université catholique de Louvain & Christian comparing to the number of patients with renal hypouricemia in other de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium. countries . Familial progressive hypermelanosis is a new variant of a hereditary pigmentation disorders without associated symptoms . This phenotype P0957. Photosensitivity as an endophenotype to dissect has so far been observed only in five families, all living in close common idiopathic generalized epilepsies: follow-up studies of proximity in a small town in south-east of Germany (Zanardo et al ., the susceptibility 7q32 and 16p13 regions 2004) . The phenotype, with an autosomal dominant inheritance D. Pinto1, D. G. A. Kasteleijn-Nolst Trenité1, B. Westland1, G. de Haan2, D. with reduced penetrance, consists of progressive diffuse, partly Lindhout1, B. P. C. Koeleman1; blotchy hyperpigmentation, multiple café-au-lait spots, intermingled 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Stichting Epilep- with scattered hypopigmented appearing maculae, and lentigenes . sie Instellingen Nederland, Heemstede, The Netherlands. Histological and ultrastructural section from the hyperpigmented Common idiopathic generalized epilepsies (IGEs) occur frequently in spots display strong basal hyperpigmentation of the epidermis with the general population, representing a significant impact on human numerous melanophages containing large amounts of pigment . In health . Progress towards understanding their genetic basis has contrast, the hypopigmented appearing macula show a slight basal been slow because of the complex inheritance patterns and genetic hyperpigmentation of epidermis, but virtually no melanophages in the heterogeneity within phenotype definitions. Mapping susceptibility upper dermis . genes for clearly identifiable neurophysiological endophenotypes, The restricted area of occurrence of the disease and the extreme rarity such as variation in abnormal EEG responses to intermittent photic of the phenotype suggest a common origin and thus a founder effect stimulation, also called photosensitivity or photoparoxysmal response Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 0 (PPR), may provide the means to dissect the genetic basis of IGEs . the 20-30% of the HCV population . Here, we verify the potential role Recently, we mapped two susceptibility loci for PPR at 7q32 and of cytokines in inflammatory damage of CHC and in IFN therapy 16p13 in 16 PPR-multiplex families with prominent myoclonic epilepsy resistance. So, polymorphisms in IL-10 and TNF-α (-1082 G/A and background (MS-related PPR) . Here we present the follow-up studies -308 G/A, respectively) were analyzed in: 156 CHC subjects; 45 with performed on these regions . The inheritance model for these two loci cirrhosis; 34 CHC responder (CHC R) and 46 CHC non responder was explored, showing that the 16p13 locus may have a recessive (CHC NR); 22 PNAL patients. TNF-α 308 GG homozygous individuals inheritance . A two-locus linkage analysis was also performed to test were classified as “low-TNF producers”; TNF-α 308 A carrier individuals for different interaction models and higher evidence for linkage under as “high-TNF producers”; IL-10 -1082 A carrier individuals as “low-IL- a multiplicative model (P= 0 .001) was found, suggesting that both loci 10 producers”; IL-10 -1082 GG homozygous individuals as “high-IL- are necessary, but each alone is not sufficient, to predispose to MS- 10 producers”. A significant decrease of the low-TNF-α /high-IL-10 related PPR . Finally, sequence analysis of four plausible functional producer genotype vs all the other genotypes was observed in Cirrhotic genes localized in the two loci regions, three neurotransmitter G- group as compared with CHC subjects (P=0 .011) . In CHC NR patients protein-coupled receptors (SSTR5, CHRM2 and GRM8) and one the high-TNF-α/high-IL-10 producer genotype vs the other genotypes voltage-gated ion channel (CACNA1H), was performed in two patients increased significantly as compared with CHC R patients (P =0.048). from each family and in Dutch controls . Novel variants not reported Finally, the arranged genotype distribution did not significantly differ in the NCBI dbSNP and several known variants were found and between PNAL and CHC groups. Conversely, the frequency of TNF-α are currently being evaluated for familial segregation and putative A allele (high producer) is significantly increased (P=0.048) in PNAL biological meaning. The identification of susceptibility genes for PPR subjects . Our results suggest that: PNAL patients seem characterized would advance our understanding of epileptogenesis . by TNF-α high producer; the TNF-α high producer/IL-10 low producer seems characterizing cirrothic patients; the TNF-α high producer/IL- P0958. Different HLA class ii subtypes seems to be associated 10 high producer seems influencing the negative response to antiviral with immunoserological and clinical features of adult-onset treatment . idiopathic inflammatory myositis in Hungarian patients: results of a preliminary study P0960. interleukin 12B and interleukin 18 gene polymorphisms A. Ponyi1,2, T. Constantin1, A. Kapitány2, M. Aleksza2, G. Lakos2, Z. Varga2, I. in women with recurrent spontaneous abortion Moldoványi1,2, M. Garami1, J. Németh3, K. Dankó2; M. Volk1, S. Ostojić2, H. Meden-Vrtovec1, B. Peterlin1; 12nd Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, 1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Budapest, Hungary, 2Division of Clinical Immunology, 3rd Department of In- Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, School of ternal Medicine, Medical and Health Science Center, University of Debrecen, Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia. Debrecen, Hungary, 3Immundiagnostic Laboratory, National Medical Center, According to Th1/Th2/Th3 immune responses, Th1 related cytokines Budapest, Hungary. have been associated with pregnancies resulting in miscarriage, Objectives Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIM) are a while the production of Th2/Th3 type cytokines has been associated heterogenous group of rare diseases characterized by muscular with successful pregnancies . We conducted a case-controlled weakness . The autoimmune process may be induced by environmental study to determine the association between the Th1 cytokine gene factors in genetically susceptible individuals . Our aim is to investigate polymorphisms, such as interleukin 12B (IL-12B) promoter and HLA class II associations with myositis-specific and -associated interleukin 18 (IL-18) promoter, and the risk of recurrent spontaneous autoantibodies and clinical features in IIMs . abortion (RSA) . Patients and methods DNA and serum samples were obtained The study group consisted of 100 Caucasian Slovenian women with a from 33 polymyositis, dermatomyositis or overlap myositis patients, history of three or more consecutive spontaneous abortions before the who were followed-up by a single center . Subjects were genotyped 20th week of gestation, of unexplained aetiology . The karyotypes were for HLA-DRB1, DQA1 and DQB1 by polymerase chain reaction with normal, at a 500 level band of resolution, in all women and their male sequence specific primers technique. The presence of myositis- partners . The control group comprised 100 age and ethnicity matched specific autoantibodies (anti-tRNA synthetases: Jo-1, PL-7, PL-12; women with at least two live births and no history of pregnancy loss . anti-Mi-2) and myositis-associated autoantibodies (anti-PM-Scl and Polymerase chain reactions were performed to analyze polymorphisms anti-Ku) were also examined . in the promoter regions of IL-18 (positions -607 and -137) and IL-12B Results Twelve patients were positive for MSAs or MAAs . We found (4bp insertion) . 3 patients with anti-Jo-1, 3 with anti-PL-7, while none of them were When following the dominant model, the risk of recurrent spontaneous positive for anti-PL-12 . Anti-Mi-2 were detected in 3, anti-PM-Scl in abortion was higher in carriers of IL-12B allele 2 as compared to IL- one, and anti-Ku in 4 cases, respectively . All of the anti-Jo-1 positive 12B 4bp insertion allele 1 (p=0.018). No significant differences in patients carried the DRB1*03, DQA1*05 and DQB1*02 alleles and frequencies of tested IL-18 promoter polymorphism genotypes and the clinical features were typical to anti-synthethase syndrome . The HLA occurrence of RSA were observed . class II subtypes and clinical features differed among anti-PL-7 positive Our findings suggest that IL-12B allele 2 promoter polymorphisms patients . The anti-Mi-2 were found in 2 dermatomyositis patients and might be a risk factor for RSA . Further studies comprising of larger in a polymyositis patient . One of the anti-Mi-2 positive DM patients numbers of women with RSA are needed to confirm our findings. carried DB1*07, DQA1*02 and DQB1*02 alleles . conclusion Haplotype associations may influence immunoserological P0961. Inflammatory Genes and Cardiovascular Morbidity status as well as phenotypic features common to the major forms M. P. S. Sie1, A. G. Uitterlinden1, F. A. Sayed-Tabatabaei2, M. J. Bos3, P. P. Arp4, of IIMs . Our further goal to examine possible associations among P. J. Koudstaal5, M. M. B. Breteler2, H. A. P. Pols1, A. Hofman2, J. C. M. Witte- immunogenetic, immunoserological and clinical features and find man2, C. M. van Duijn2; prognostic factors which may predict therapeutic responses . 1Erasmus MC - University Medical Center Rotterdam, Dep. of Epidemiology & Biostatistics / Internal Medicine, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC P0959. TNF-α and IL-10 genetic polymoriphisms influence the - University Medical Center Rotterdam, Dep. of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, natural history and the response to antiviral therapy in HcV Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Erasmus MC - University Medical Center Rot- related chronic hepatitis terdam, Dep. of Epidemiology & Biostatistics / Neurology, Rotterdam, The Neth- M. Capasso1, M. Persico2, R. Russo1, M. Masarone2, E. Persico2, R. Svelto2, A. erlands, 4Erasmus MC - University Medical Center Rotterdam, Dep. of Internal Iolascon1; Medicine, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 5Erasmus MC - University Medical 1Ceinge Advanced Biotecnology, University Federico II, Naples, Italy, 2Internal Center Rotterdam, Dep. of Neurology, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Medicine, SUN, Naples, Italy. Inflammation plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of cardio- and Chronic hepatitis C (CH-C) develops in 33-84% of patients with acute cerebrovascular disease . We studied genetic variations in genes of hepatitis . About one-third of patients develop liver cirrhosis within cytokines, which play a pivotal role in the inflammatory cascade and 15-25 years with an annual risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in 1-4% . influence the vascular wall: interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-4 (IL-4), HCV positive patients with persistent normal ALT (PNAL) represent transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1), and tumour necrosis factor Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 10 α (TNF-α). way to quickly and reliably screen case and control samples in a cost- The study is part of the Rotterdam Study (n=7983) . Multiple effective manner by significantly reducing the quantity of DNA used, polymorphisms were genotyped in each subject . Various phenotypes number of reactions and processing time . The aim of this study was were studied including clinical end-points such as myocardial infarction to design and validate DNA pools of stroke cases and healthy controls (MI), coronary heart disease (CHD), stroke, and early pathology such as from Scotland, which could be used to screen for association with atherosclerosis (intima-media thickness and aortic calcifications) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using DNA chips . arterial stiffness (pulse wave velocity and distensibility coefficient), and Methods: Using TOAST criteria, 373 stroke cases were sub-divided in addition inflammatory markers such as IL-6 and C-reactive protein into large and small vessel disease pools . Equimolar amounts of DNA (CRP) . The associations between genotypes and phenotypes were from each sample were combined to form 3 pools of over 100 samples investigated using Cox proportional hazards analyses and analyses each . DNA from 566 control patients was grouped in a similar way of variance . All analyses were adjusted for age, sex and common into 3 pools . Each had approximately equal proportions of males and cardiovascular risk factors . females . Allele frequencies at 5 SNP loci were determined for each Genotype and allele proportions were in Hardy Weinberg equilibrium . individual and pool using dynamic allele-specific hybridisation (DASH) Only IL-6 and TGF-β showed evidence for a relation with vascular and Pyrosequencing . phenotypes. TGF-β1 polymorphisms -509 C/T (p=0.01) and codon Results: Allele frequency estimates between pool replicates were 10 Leu/Pro (p=0 .02) were associated with risk of stroke, and with consistent for each SNP (average r2=0 .950), and correlated well with arterial stiffness (-509 C/T, p=0 .04), but not with MI . IL-6 -174 G/C was allele frequencies determined by individual genotyping (r2=0 .950) . associated with arterial stiffness (p=0 .03) and levels of CRP (p<0 .01), Further, alleles were detectable at a frequency as low as 2 .5% . These however, it was not associated with MI or CHD . results indicate the validity of these pools as an effective means by Of the genes studied only TGF-β1 polymorphisms showed a consistent which to screen our samples for associations between SNP marker association with stroke and arterial stiffness . Also the IL-6 polymorphism and disease status . was associated with early pathology (arterial stiffness) . P0964. Localization of candidate regions for a novel gene for P0962. FVIII Gene Mutation Profile of High Responder Kartagener syndrome Hemophilia A Patients in turkey I. Gutierrez-Roelens1, T. Sluymans2, M. Jorissen3, M. Amyere1, M. Vikkula1; I. D. Fidancı1, K. Kavaklı2, C. Uçar3, Ç. Timur4, A. Meral5, Y. Kılınç6, H. 1Human Molecular Genetics dept., Université catholique de Louvain & Christian Sayılan7, E. Kazancı8, B. Atabey9, A. Küpesiz10, Y. Pekçelen11, G. İrken12, S. H. de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 2Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiology, Çağlayan1; Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Dept. of He- Belgium, 3Medical Genetics dept., Universitaire Ziekenhuizen of Leuven, Leu- matology, Ege Univ. Medical Sch, İzmir, Turkey, 3Dept. of Hematology, Selçuk ven, Belgium. Univ. Medical Sch., Konya, Turkey, 4Dept. of Hematology, State Hospital, Asymmetric positioning of internal organs is a characteristic of Göztepe, İstanbul, Turkey, 5Dept. of Hemotology, Uludağ Univ., Medical Sch.,, vertebrates . The normal left-right anatomic positioning, situs solitus, Bursa, Turkey, 6Dept. of Hematology, Çukurova Univ., Medical Sch, Adana, Tur- sometimes does not occur normaly, leading to laterality defects . Studies key, 7Dept. of Hematology, State Hospital, Bakırköy, İstanbul, Turkey, 8Dept. of in animal models have shown that laterality decisions are mediated by Hematology, Dr. Behçet Uz State Hospital, İzmir, Turkey, 9Dept. of Hematology, a cascade of genes that lead to the asymmetric expression of Nodal, State Hospital, Tepecik, İzmir, Turkey, 10Dept. of Hematology, Akdeniz Univ., LEFTA, LEFTB and PITX2 in the lateral plate mesoderm . Search for Medical Sch., Antalya, Turkey, 11Dept. of Hematology, Istanbul Univ., Medical mutations in genes implicated in left-right patterning in animal models Sch, İstanbul, Turkey, 12Dokuz Eylül Univ., Medical Sch, İzmir, Turkey. allowed to identify genes associated with heterotaxia defects in FactorVIII (FVIII) replacement therapy is ineffective in hemophilia A humans . However, these genes explain only a small percentage of patients who develop inhibitors against FVIII . The type of FVIII gene human situs defects suggesting that other genes must play a role . mutation, genes in the Major Histocompatibility Complex loci and also In this study, we report a consanguineous family of Turkish origin, other proteins participating in the presentation of antigens are the major composed of two unaffected parents and three children, two of whom predisposing factors for inhibitor formation . A national collaborative presented Kartagener syndrome . On the basis of the family history, effort was undertaken to identify the FVIII gene mutations in high we hypothesize autosomal recessive mode of inheritance . Genotype responder inhibitor patients . Twenty-six severely affected patients with analysis with polymorphic markers did not show linkage with any known known inhibitor levels of >5 Bethesda U/ml were included . Initially the genes or loci causing laterality disorders . Array CGH did not detect a samples were screened for intron 22 inversions by Southern blotting and duplication or microdeletion greater than 1 Mb as a possible cause then for intron 1 inversions by PCR . The exonic regions corresponding either . Genome wide screening using 10K Affymetrix SNP chips was to A2, C2, and A3 domains that include functional binding sites of the performed, allowing the identification of two regions of autozygosity, one ligands of the FVIII protein were then sequenced in inversion negative in chromosome 1 and the other on chromosome 7 . In the chromosome patients . Complete sequencing of the FVIII gene was performed in 1 locus, a strong candidate gene, encoding the kinesin associated those patients without a change in the former exonic regions . About protein 3 (KIF3AP), was not mutated based on SSCP/heteroduplex 54% of patients had inversion mutations mostly involving intron 22, analysis and direct sequencing . These data provide a basis for the and 26% had point mutations that involved 3 single nucleotide and identification of a novel gene implicated in Kartagener syndrome. 2 dinucleotide deletions, and 3 transitions in exons corresponding to (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be) (http://www.icp.ucl.ac.be/vikkula) A2, C2 and A3 domains leading to either nonsense or frameshift and termination mutations, all resulting in protein truncations . One patient P0965. the keratosis linearis with ichthyosis congenita had a nucleotide change resulting in a splicing error . Five patients and sclerosing keratoderma (KLicK) disease gene maps to had large deletions of variable length . In conclusion, large genomic chromosome 13q rearrangements and termination mutations all leading to a defiency of J. Dahlqvist1, J. Klar1, M. Pigg1, T. Pujol2, R. P. Vallverdu2, M. van Steensel3, A. the FVIII protein were the prominent cause of the inhibitor development Vahlqvist4, N. Dahl1; in this group of high responder hemophilia A patients . 1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Dermatology Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Dermatol- P0963. Design and validation of DNA pools in an ischaemic ogy, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala, stroke population Sweden. H. Ross-Adams, A. Pasdar, D. St Clair, M. Macleod; The erythrokeratodermas is a heterogeneous group of inherited University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom. disorders characterized by well-demarcated erythematous lesions and Background and Aim: Stroke is a complex, multifactorial disease hyperkeratotic plaques . Keratosis linearis with ichthyosis congenita thought to involve multiple genes of small effect . To identify these, and sclerosing keratoderma (KLICK [MIM 601952]) syndrome is a large-scale association studies involving the systematic screening rare autosomal recessive keratinizing (keratinisation?) disorder . The of numerous samples at hundreds of markers are required . This is patients feature palmoplanar keratoderma and linear hyperkeratosis expensive, time-consuming and labour intensive . DNA pools provide a of the skin without evidence of Koebner phenomenon . Some of the Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 11 symptoms - massive keratoderma, pseudoainhum and star fish like P0968. Linkage analysis on a highly inbred multi-generational keratotic extensions resembles those of Vohwinkel syndrome without pedigree segregating neurological and psychiatric disorders hearing loss. A deficiency in the formation of keratohyaline granules I. Nikolov1, I. Tournev2, P. Holmans1, G. Kirov1; has been suggested as the cause of KLICK . We have analysed 1College of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Medical five families with KLICK syndrome of which three families are from University, Sofia, Bulgaria. Sweden, one from Spain and one from the Netherlands . A 10k SNP We have collected DNA and genealogy information from 96 individuals array (Affymetrix) was used for autozygosity mapping of the Spanish from a multi-generational, highly inbred pedigree of Gypsy settlers in a and Swedish families to map homozygous regions in affected family rural region of Bulgaria, totaling more than 300 individuals . They come members. A large region defined by 62 consecutive homozygous originally from Turkey and their main occupation has been livestock SNPs on chromosome 13q was found in one family . The KLICK dealers . The genealogy could be traced back up to six generations candidate region was further delineated when combining results from and the pedigree has been developing with a high degree of SNP array analysis and highly polymorphic microsatellite markers in interbreeding . A rare Mendelian disorder (spastic paraplegia), as well all five families A minimal shared homozygous region of 1.3 Mb was as major psychiatric disorders (Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders) identified as associated with KLICK and a search for candidate genes segregate in this family . We designed a linkage study using Illumina within this region is in progress . Linkage IV SNP genotyping platform, which interrogates over 5,000 SNPs across all chromosomes . Merlin and Simwalk2 software were P0966. the supernumerary X chromsome and phenotypic used for linkage analysis . A high number of inbreeding loops are found variation in Klinefelter‘s syndrome on every genealogical level which poses difficulties when designing the J. N. Painter1, A. Wikstrom2, L. Dunkel3,2, K. Aittomaki2; linkage analysis . So far, analyses have been done on a nuclear family 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Helsinki University Central Hospital, segregating autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia . Surprisingly, Helsinki, Finland, 3Kuopio University Central Hospital, Kuopio, Finland. no conclusive linkage was identified, but suggestive linkage to Chr Klinefelter’s syndrome (KS), one of the most common chromosome 2, 12 and 15, it being followed-up with densely spaced microsatellite aneuploidies, has a well-recognised phenotype including small firm markers . testes, aspermatogenesis, high gonadotropin levels, low normal testosterone levels and possibly behavioural and neurological P0969. sign-dependent sampling variance of the linkage problems . The phenotype is, however, highly variable, and many disequilibrium measure D‘ cases are thought to be undiagnosed . Several features of the X- C. Zapata; chromosome may contribute to this variation, including parental origin Universidad de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. of the supernumerary X, skewed X-inactivation, and the length of a The measurement of the extent of linkage disequilibrium (LD) plays microsatellite repeat in the androgen receptor (AR) gene that negatively a central role in the characterization of multilocus genetic systems at correlates with AR function . We have investigated the effects of these the descriptive and interpretative levels a well as to refine the location features in 14 47XXY boys for whom detailed phenotypic information of disease genes . D’ is one of the most commonly used measures of is available from their pre-pubertal period onwards . The presence of the extent of LD between pairs of diallelic loci . Previous investigations a paternal X chromosome (n = 3) delayed the onset of puberty, as indicate that the asymptotic sampling variance of D´depends on the measured by clinical markers such as increase in serum luteinising sign of deviation from random association . However, sign-dependent hormone concentrations and pubertal acceleration of height growth, sampling variation of D’ under experimental conditions is yet little by 1 .3-1 .9 years . In the 47XMXMY boys, longer AR alleles were known . Sign-dependent sampling variance of D’ was investigated associated with delayed reproductive hormone level increases, but considering a wide range of allele frequencies at the loci, different not with other measures of puberty onset . No phenotypic differences levels of positive and negative LD intensities, and sample sizes were detected between boys with (n=2) and without (n=4) skewed commonly used in experimental studies . Coupling haplotypes were (>80%) X-inactivation . To our knowledge, we have conducted the designated are those carrying the most and the least frequent allele first longitudinal study of X chromosome-associated effects on the variants . Simulations show that empirical sampling variances of D’ KS phenotype . Although our sample size is small, our results clearly are considerably larger for negative than for positive LD when allele show that features of the X chromosome contribute to the delay of frequencies at one or both loci are different from 0 .5 . The present the onset and progression of puberty in KS boys, which has important investigations suggest that the precision in the estimation of the extent implications for the treatment of KS as well as our understanding of of LD by D’ is substantially improved, under experimental conditions, pubertal changes in general . whether only positive deviations from random association are taken into account . P0967. Locus and gene analysis in a novel autosomal recessive leukodystrophy P0970. characteristics of singleton sNPs in the human genome S. A. Ugur1, Z. Yapici2, A. Tolun1; and implications for genome-wide association studies 1Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical X. Ke, M. S. Taylor, L. R. Cardon; School, Department of Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey. Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, We describe a novel autosomal recessive leukodystrophy in a large United Kingdom. Anatolian consanguineous family, displaying neuropathy both in the The human genome is estimated to contain one single nucleotide central and peripheral nervous system . Characteristic clinical features polymorphisms (SNPs) every 300 base pairs . The presence of LD include bilateral cataract at birth, early-onset slow progressive loss between SNP markers can be used to save genotyping cost via of motor abilities and generalized hypotonia more pronounced in appropriate SNP tagging strategies, whereas absence or low level lower extremities and distal muscles . Electron microscopy pointed of LD between markers generally increase genotyping cost . It is out to a sensory-motor demyelinating peripheral neuropathy . Mental not uncommon that a large proportion of tagging SNPs in a tagging examination revealed normal intelligence . A genome-wide scan scheme often turn out to be singleton SNPs, i .e . SNPs that only tag followed by further genotyping in the candidate locus identified linkage themselves rather than contribute power to the rest of a region . If to 7p15 .3-14 .3 . The maximum two-point lod score obtained was 3 .70 at genotyping cost is the primary concern, which may often be the case in locus D7S2496 (MLINK) and the peak for multi-point lod score was 4 .41 the present time for genome-wide association studies, these singleton between the loci D7S2510 and D7S492 (SIMWALK), encompassing a tagging SNPs would be the primary targets to be removed from 9 Mb gene region maximally . Ninety genes map to this region including genotyping . It is important, however, to understand the characteristics 3-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase (HIBADH, GeneID: 11112) . of such SNPs and estimate the impact of removing them in a study . All 8 coding exons and exon-intron junctions of HIBADH have been Using the HapMap genotype data, we assessed the distribution and screened by SSCP and DNA sequencing, since 3-hydroxybutyric acid functional implications of singleton SNPs in the human genome . Our level was found to be elevated in the urine of the proband . results demonstrated that singleton SNPs are not necessarily rare and they potentially can be functionally important (e .g . as nonsynonymous SNPs and SNPs in highly conserved regions) . We further assessed Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 1 whether these singleton SNPs can be tagged using haplotypes of other an affected sibling showing the same rare genotype . non-singleton SNPs in the same regions, and discussed the general Moreover, 12 (2 .7%) sporadic PD patients were heterozygous . The implications on genetic association studies . mutation was absent from the control population . Clinical features of both mutation carriers and non-carriers were similar . P0971. Haplotypes in the apolipoprotein L gene cluster are The LRRK2 gene product is a member of ROCO protein family, associated with plasma lipids with multiple functional domains, colloquially named dardarin . The A. Isaacs1, F. A. Sayed-Tabatabaei1, F. Liu1, S. K. Service2, J. DeYoung3, N. B. Gly2019Ser substitution changes a highly conserved residue of the Freimer2, J. C. M. Witteman1, B. A. Oostra1, C. M. van Duijn1; DYG motif, at the start of kinase activation segment, probably causing 1Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Center for Neurobe- an impairment of catalytic activity . To understand this pathological havioral Genetics, Neuropsychiatric Institute, Los Angeles, CA, United States, mechanism could help for individuation of new therapeutic strategies . 3Southern California Genotyping Consortium, Los Angeles, CA, United States. We confirm that LRRK2 Gly2019Ser is, at the date, the most frequent The recently characterized apolipoprotein L (apoL) gene cluster on causative mutation in Italian PD patients, likewise in other populations . chromosome twenty-two spans approximately 619 kb and contains six A reduced penetrance might account for the presence of the mutation genes (apoL-I to apoL-VI) . To date, despite the potential to elucidate in apparently sporadic PD patients . Moreover, the age-at-onset mechanisms affecting plasma lipid levels, this cluster has not been heterogeneity of mutation carriers suggests that different factors explored on a genetic level in humans . In this study, 200 unrelated contribute to disease evolution . spouses from the Erasmus Rucphen Family (ERF) study were genotyped for 31 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning P0974. Atypical presentations of hereditary lymphedema type i the ApoL cluster (approximate average inter-marker spacing of associated with mutations in VEGFR3 20kb) . Fasting plasma lipids were determined by spectrophotometric A. Ghalamkarpour1, S. Morlot2, A. Raas-Rothschild3, A. Utkus4, L. M. Boon5, chemical analysis . Individual SNPs were analysed with ANOVA . M. Vikkula1; Linkage disequilibrium blocks (n = 6) were estimated with HaploView; 1Human Molecular Genetics dept., Université catholique de Louvain & Christian haplotypes were inferred and analysed utilizing haplo .stats . Marginal de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 2Praxis für Humangenetik, Hannover, associations were observed (0 .05 < p < 0 .10) for several individual Germany, 3Department of Human Genetics, Hadassah Hebrew University Hos- SNPs . Haplotypes in block one and two were associated with total pital, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius cholesterol (TC)/high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL) ratio (p University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 5Plastic Surgery dept., Cliniques universitaires = 0 .03 for both) . Block four haplotypes were associated with low- St-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. density lipoprotein cholesterol (p = 0.02). Variation in block five was Genetic studies have identified mutations in the vascular endothelial significantly associated with HDL levels (p = 0.01). Haplotypic variation growth factor receptor 3 gene, VEGFR3/FLT4, in some families in block six was associated with hypercholesterolemia (p = 0 .03) . These with hereditary lymphedema type I (Milroy disease; MIM 153100). results suggest that the genes in the ApoL cluster play an important Individuals carrying a VEGFR3 mutation exhibit congenital edema role in determining circulating lipid levels, particularly HDL and those in lower limbs, usually bilaterally and below the knees, sometimes measures dependent on it (TC/HDL ratio and affection) . Further study associated with cellulitis, prominent veins, papillomatosis, upturned of this comparatively unknown genomic region is warranted, particularly toenails, and hydrocele (in men) . In this study, we report atypical with larger sample sizes and denser genotyping . presentations of hereditary lymphedema type I in four families in which we identified a VEGFR3 mutation. The clinical findings in two families P0972. An audit of a diagnostic service for LongQt syndrome. included spontaneous resorption of lymphedema and elephantiasis . K. J. Livesey1,2, K. L. Thomson1,2, E. Blair3,2, A. Seller1,2; In the third family, the index case presented prenatally with bilateral 1Oxford Genetics Laboratories, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Oxford Genetics leg edema, bilateral hydrothorax and lung hypoplasia at 22 weeks’ Knowledge Park, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Clinical Genetics, Oxford, United gestation . In the fourth family, the proband was a sporadic case of Kingdom. congenital lymphedema carrying a de novo VEGFR3 mutation . This is Since June 2003 the Oxford Genetics Knowledge Park, UK, has the first report of a de novo mutation in VEGFR3. funded a molecular genetic service for LongQT Syndrome . Mutation We conclude that mutations in VEGFR3 can cause more generalized screening by dHLPC and sequencing is available for the KCNQ1, lymphatic dysfunction, or when limited, can undergo spontaneous KCNH2, KCNE1, KCNE2 and SCN5A genes . Since 2003 we have resorption . Genetic counseling, as well as serial antenatal follow-up, identified pathogenic variants in 57/92 patients referred with a is necessary in families with hereditary lymphedema type I . Moreover, suspected diagnosis of LongQT Syndrome . In 6 probands, more than de novo mutations may be present in patients without family history of one potential disease-causing variant was identified; family studies congenital lymphedema. (http://www.icp.ucl.ac.be/vikkula) (vikkula@ were initiated to investigate pathogenicity . SCN5A gene screening has bchm .ucl .ac .be) been performed in 6 patients referred with a suspected diagnosis of Brugada Syndrome; no pathogenic mutations were identified. P0975. Haplotype-segregation analysis using three polymorphic Mutation testing has been undertaken in 196 relatives, of whom 54% markers in FBN1 gene in patients with marfan syndrome were found to have the familial mutation . R. Valiev, R. Khusainova, E. Khusnutdinova; A audit of the analysis performed and the mutations and polymorphisms Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. identified will be presented. Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant disorder of connective tissue characterized by caused by mutations in fibrillin-1 P0973. LRRK2 Gly2019ser mutation and Parkinson’s disease in gene (FBN1) in more than 90% of cases . Widespread use of direct italian population mutation analysis for presymptomatic diagnosis of MFS is challenged D. Civitelli, P. Tarantino, I. C. Cirò Candiano, F. Annesi, E. V. De Marco, S. because of large gene size and low rate of mutation detection . The Carrideo, F. E. Rocca, P. Spadafora, G. Provenzano, G. Nicoletti, G. Annesi; alternative is to use haplotype-segregation analysis in family screening National Research Council, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone, Italy. which allows determining haplotypes co-segregating with disease The Gly2019Ser mutation of the leucine-rich kinase2 (LRRK2) in each relative . In our work we used three previously described represents the commonest known cause of genetic parkinsonism . It intragenic microsatellite polymorphic markers MTS-1, MTS-2 and was founded both in families with PARK8-linked autosomal dominant MTS-4 . We analyzed 29 families with MFS and 50 unrelated unaffected parkinsonism (5-6%) and in sporadic patients (2%) suffering from control subjects from different ethnic groups . 24% of families has been Parkinson’s disease (PD), in different populations . defined as sporadic cases since did not have an autosomal dominant We screened for Gly2019Ser 38 unrelated Italian familial PD patients inheritance. We haven’t found any significant differences in haplotype with autosomal dominant transmission and 450 sporadic PD patients . frequency distribution between different ethnic groups as in patients Age at onset was 30-78 years . Moreover, we genotyped 180 unrelated so in unaffected individuals . 51 distinct haplotypes were observed on healty subjects . chromosomes of healthy donors . The most common haplotype was Two familial Pd patients (5 .2%) carried Gly2019Ser substitution . One 138-145-116 (numbers are given according to allele sizes) which of them was heterozygous, the second one was homozygous and had was predominant on normal chromosomes of affected individuals . Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 1 19 haplotypes have been determined on mutant chromosomes, 15 donia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolic Disorders, of them haven’t been found on normal chromosomes . Haplotype Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. frequency distribution on normal and mutant chromosomes were Complete deletions of AZFc region in the distal Yq are the most significantly different (χ2=32 .53, df=21, p=0 .027) . Haplotype 138-163- frequent genetic cause of male infertility . Partial deletions within the 116 was observed in 18% of cases on mutant chromosomes and in AZFc region have also been described, but their contribution to male 4% of cases on normal chromosomes (χ2=6.34; df=1, p=0.012). These infertility is still unclear . Our objective was to study the occurrence of data demonstrate possibility and application of haplotype-segregation partial AZFc deletions among men from the Republic of Macedonia . analysis with use of these intragenic markers for diagnostic purposes We studied 200 infertile/subfertile males with different spermatogenic in affected families by Marfan’s syndrome . phenotype and 241 fertile controls (proven fathers) using AZFc specific sequence tagged site (STS) markers and DAZ and CDY1 specific P0976. the association analysis of SLS6A, HTRA and HTR1B single nucleotide variants (SNV). We identified 18 men with partial genes in major depressive disorder AZFc deletion; 11 in the group of infertile/subfertile patients (11/200; T. G. Noskova1, A. Zainullina1, D. Gaysina1, A. Asadullin2, E. Khusnutdinova1; 5.5%) and 7 among fertile controls (7/241; 2.9%). Based on the 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Department STS analysis, we found two types of partial AZFc deletions; 14 gr/gr of Psychiatry, Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. and 4 b2/b3 deletions . Both types were found in men with different Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a severe psychiatric disorder with spermatogenic failure and in fertile controls . The frequencies of a lifetime prevalence of about 15% . The importance of the genetic deletions that lack DAZ1/2 and DAZ3/4 genes were similar in infertile/ component is well accepted, but the mode of inheritance is complex subfertile men and fertile controls . Loss of CDY1b SNV was found and non-Mendelian . A line of evidence suggests the involvement of only in men with partial AZFc deletion . The frequency of deletions serotonin and dopamine neurotransmitters in the pathophysiology of with loss of CDY1b was significantly higher in the infertile/subfertile depression . In the present study 94 MDD patients and 227 healthy group (9/200; 4.5%) in comparison to the fertile controls (2/241; 0.8%) controls from Bashkortostan (Russia) were genotyped for some (p=0.014; OR=5.63; 95% CI: 1.20 to 26.37). Our data suggest that polymorphisms in three serotonergic candidate genes: the serotonin partial AZFc deletions involving loss of CDY1b represent a risk factor transporter, SLC6A4 (Stin2 VNTR and 5HTTLPR polymorphisms), for male infertility among Macedonians . serotonin 2A receptor, HTR2A (A1438G polymorphism) and serotonin 1B receptor, HTR1B (G861C polymorphism, using PCR technique . P0979. the mannose-Binding Lectin Gene Polymorphisms We found significant differences in SLC6A4 genotype frequencies in Patients With chronic Hepatitis B And spontaneously (chi2=7 .42, P=0 .01) between patients and controls . There were increase Recovered :A case-control study of the Stin2*10/*12 genotype (chi2=14 .47, P=0 .001, OR=2 .65) and L. Alidoust1, L. Najafi1, Z. Hajebrahimi2, M. Somi1, M. Zali1; decrease of the Stin2*10/*10 genotype (chi2=5 .69, P=0 .02, OR=0 .34) 1Research Center for Gastroentrology and Liver Disease (RCGLD), Sha- frequencies in depressive group compared to those in control group . heed Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research HTR2A*G/*G genotype (chi2=6 .52, P=0 .01, OR=1 .88) and HTR2A*G Center for Gastroentrology and Liver Disease (RCGLD), Shaheed Beheshti allele (chi2=5 .82, P=0 .02, OR= 1 .55) are associated with increase risk University,Tarbiat Modarress University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of MDD . There were no statistical differences between MDD patients Background: Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) is a constituent of and healthy controls in the genotypic and allelic distribution of the the human innate immune system which may play an important HTR1B polymorphism investigated . role in combating a variety of infectious diseases and thus may be important for determining hepatitis B virus (HBV) persistence . In this P0977. Analysis of AZF microdeletions in infertility males. study, we determined MBL genotypes in chronic hepatitis B subjects, A. A. Islamova1, R. I. Khusainova1, R. P. Akhmetov2, O. S. Shimkov2, A. R. spontaneously recovered subjects and healthy controls . Muslimova2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; methods: In a case-control study, we examined 100 unrelated patients 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Perinatal with Chronic hepatitis B and 100 spontaneously recovered patients Centre of Bashkortostan republic, Ufa, Russian Federation. were referred to Taleghani Hospital and 100 healthy controls which all Males’ infertility in 10-15% of cases is determined genetically and had been matched by sex and age . MBL gene polymorphisms were caused by spermatogenesis disturbances . The frequency of AZF loci determined by PCR-RFLP methods . microdeletions of Y- chromosome is approximately 1:1000-1500 males . Results: The MBL genotype distributions in the three groups are We examined 76 patients with infertility, registered in Reproduction shown in Table. Our finding have shown that the frequency of -550C, and Genetic Consulting Center of Bashkortostan Republic . All patients -221G, +4T, +52T, +54A and +57A alleles were 0 .57, 0 .76, 0 .135, 0 .22, were divided into 3 groups, based on the semen parameters. The first 0.22 and 0.05 in chronic HBV patients; 0.57, 0.80, 0.175, 0.37, 0.3 group included 37 patients with azoospermia, the second - 35 males and 0 .05 in spontaneous recovered subjects, respectively . Our results with severe oligozoospermia (with a sperm count < 5x10(6) million/ml), show that there is no association between each polymorphisms of the the third - 4 patients with asthenoteratozoospermia . The control group MBL gene with persistent HBV infection in Iranian population excepting consisted of 150 fertile males with normal semen parameters . Multiplex codon +52 (p=0 .0) . PCR-analysis, offered by Simoni et al ., 1999, was used for detection conclusion: Heterozygous for codon 52 mutant allele (C/T) may be of deletions . Deletions of AZF regions were revealed in 8 patients associated with recovery from acute hepatitis B . (10 .5%) with males’ infertility . The frequency of microdeletions was table .Distribution of MBL genotypes in the studied population 10 .8% in patients with azoospermia, 11 .4% - in patients with severe Chronic HBV patients spontaneous recovered HBV Healthy controls oligozoospermia . 6 .58% of all patients had AZFc region deletions, Polymorphisms N (%) N (%) N (%) 1 .32% - AZFb and AZFc regions deletions, 2 .63% - microdeletions of -550 G/G 18 15 23 all the three regions . Microdeletions of AZFa+b+c loci were detected -550G/C 50 54 37 in patients with oligozoospermia, that conflict with the results of other -550C/C 32 31 40 scientists that can be explained by either semen analysis inaccuracy -221C/C 4 5 12 or gonadal mosaicism existence . Y chromosome microdeletions in -221C/G 40 29 27 control group of fertile males were not found . The results showed that -221G/G 56 66 61 +4 C/C 74 68 75 deletions frequency was higher than average frequency in other world +4 C/T 25 29 24 populations, where it is approximately 7 .5% . +4 T/T 1 3 1 +52C/C 67 27 39 P0978. Partial AZFc deletions with loss of cDY1b represent a +52C/T 22 71 57 risk factor for male infertility among macedonians +52T/T 11 2 4 +54G/G 63 52 48 D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, T. Plaseski2, P. Noveski1, C. Dimitrovski2, B. Kocev- +54G/A 29 36 40 ska2, G. D. Efremov1; +54A/A 8 12 12 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic En- +57G/G 99 99 90 gineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Mace- +57G/A 1 1 9 +57A/A 0 0 1Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 1 P0980. A protocol for semiautomatic detection of mutations variability among the MEN 2 families, even though when the disease associated with thoracic aortic aneurysms/dissections and is caused by the same RET mutation, suggesting a role for genetic marfan syndrome modifiers, such as polymorphisms/haplotypes. S. Waldmueller1, M. Mueller1, P. Binner1, J. Froemke2, P. Gehle3, J. Ennker3, G. We have sought to determine the frequency and position of RET Walterbusch2,1, T. Scheffold1; germline mutations in a cohort of 114 Spanish probands with any sign 1Heart & Circulation Research Institute, Witten Herdecke, Germany, 2St.-Jo- of MEN 2, and to search for putative modifier loci. With this aim, the hannes Hospital, Dortmund, Germany, 3Heart Center Lahr/Baden, Lahr, Ger- distribution of 8 RET polymorphisms and the haplotypes comprising many. them, were subsequently studied in the context of the families OBJECTIVE Mutations in the Fibrillin-1 gene (FBN1) are the major positive for RET mutational screening . The relationship between cause of Marfan Syndrome (MfS) and are also associated with isolated RET mutation type and presence of a polymorphism/haplotype was aneurysms/dissections . The objective of this study is to establish a analyzed . It was also studied the relationship between the presence of semiautomatic protocol for rapid sequencing of both Marfan genes, pheochromocytoma (PC) and/or hiperparathyroidism (HPT) in carriers FBN1 and TGFBR2 . of the same RET mutation, and the genotype for the specific variants. METHODS Main features of the protocol are: i) successive analysis of The results derived from those analyses revealed no associations individual patient samples ii) optimized design of primer pairs allowing of any variant/haplotype to a specific mutation or to the clinical uniform conditions for both PCR amplification and sequencing iii) presentation . Nevertheless, these observations do not permit us to implementation of a liquid handling robot to achieve semiautomatic exclude the possible role of other variants in RET or another related performance of all pre- and post-PCR steps . genes, in the final presentation of the disease. Supported by Fondo RESULTS The protocol was validated by testing 25 consecutive de Investigación Sanitaria, Spain (PI040266 and Red de Centros patients refered to hospital for ectomy of an aneurysm/dissection of INERGEN C03/05) . the ascending aorta . 15 patients (60%) also showed other signs of MfS. A mutation in FBN1 could be identified in 12/25 patients (48%). P0983. A meniere’s disease gene linked to chromosome 12p12.3 9/12 mutations were novel (75%) . 67% of the patients with suspected J. Klar1, C. Frykholm2, U. Friberg2, N. Dahl1; MfS showed a FBN1 mutation, while only 20% of the patients with 1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of no further signs of MfS carried a FBN1-mutation . No alteration in the Surgical Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden. FBN1 coding sequence could be found in 13 out of 25 patients (52%), Meniere’s disease (MD) is characterised by spontaneous attacks two of which were later found to harbor a mutation in TGFBR2 (8%) . of vertigo, fluctuating sensorineural hearing loss, tinnitus and aural CONCLUSION The novel protocol enables rapid detection of the fullness . The majority of patients with MD appear sporadic but 5-13% disease causing mutation in the index patient . This may in turn pave of the cases have a family history for the disease . The cause of both the way for timely identification of pre-symptomatic relatives who the sporadic and inherited forms of MD remains unclear despite a should then be monitored closely . number of candidate genes defined from their association with hearing loss . P0981. identifying the gene responsible for medullary cystic We have performed a genome wide linkage scan on a large Swedish kidney disease type 1 family segregating MD in five generations. Two additional families with C. T. Charalambous1, V. Neocleous2, C. Voskarides1, G. Hadjiyianni1, C. Stav- autosomal dominant MD were analysed for linkage and a cumulative rou3, C. Deltas1,2; Zmax of 3 .46 was obtained for a single region on chromosome 12p . In 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Ge- two of the three families, a shared haplotype was found to extend over netics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Artemis Medical Centre, Paphos, Cyprus. 1 .7 Mb suggesting a common ancestral origin . Medullary cystic kidney disease (MCKD) is an autosomal dominant chronic tubulointerstitial nephropathy . It is similar to nephronophthisis, P0984. Analysis of Alu insertion polymorphisms in the DscAm, the main difference being the mode of inheritance and the later age LAmA2 genes in children with mental retardation in Volgo-Ural of onset of MCKD . The disease is characterized by thickening of the region of Russia renal tubular basement membrane, renal fibrosis and hypertension D. Islamgulov1,2, A. Karunas1, R. Valinurov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; however there is great clinical heterogeneity . At least three loci have 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Republican been linked to MCKD: 1q21 with MCKD1, 16p12 with MCKD2 and a psychiatric hospital, Ufa, Russian Federation. third unknown locus with MCKD3 . The gene responsible for MCKD2 Mental retardation (MR) is a developmental disability, characterized by has been found to be Uromodulin whereas the gene responsible for a global deficiency in cognitive abilities, an inability to cope with every MCKD1 is still unknown . The purpose of this study is to identify and day life and an onset during childhood . Down syndrome cell adhesion characterize the gene involved in MCKD1 . The initial critical interval molecule, encoded by the DSCAM gene located on chromosome containing the responsible gene, spanned a gene-rich 8cM region . 21q22 .2, is a novel member of Ig superfamily of cell adhesion molecules Further linkage analysis using more kindreds have reduced the and play central role in the development and plasticity of the human critical region . Recently a comparison of haplotype blocks of affected central and peripheral nervous systems . The LAMA2 gene located individuals from several kindreds of different geographic origin (Wolf et on chromosome 6q22-q23, coding for the Laminin, a heterotrimeric al, Kidney Inter . 2003, 64(3):788-92) reduced the area to 650kbp . We extracellular matrix protein, is involved in the developing brain . used a bionformatics approach to select some good candidate genes This study reports the results of Alu insertions analysis of the DSCAM, to analyse . Direct exon sequencing of protein inhibitor of activated LAMA2 genes in male patients of 3 to 18 years with non-specific MR STAT protein 3 (PIAS3), interleukin receptor 6 (IL6R), apolipoprotein 1 (n=214) and healthy donors (n=217) from different ethnic groups of (APOAIBP), carbonic anhydrase XIV (CA XIV) and kidney predominant Volgo-Ural region of Russia . We analysed the distribution of I/D alleles protein (NCU-G1) have revealed no causative mutations . Finally, after of these DNA-loci and found statistically significant differences between the identification of several recombinants we are using microsatellite MR patients and healthy donors in the DSCAM and LAMA2 genes . marker analysis to further reduce the critical region . The Alu-insertion Yb8106 in the DSCAM gene was associated with an increased risk of MR in Russans (OR=1 .79, CI% 1 .05-3 .03) . There P0982. RET variants and haplotypes in the context of multiple were essential distinctions in the distribution of allele and genotype Endocrine Neoplasia type 2. frequencies between MR patients with different level of MR . There R. M. Fernandez1, M. Ruiz-Ferrer1, G. Antiñolo1, E. Navarro2, S. Borrego1; was evidence of association between the Alu-insertion Ya5491 in the 1Unidad Clinica de Genetica y Reproduccion, HHUU Virgen del Rocio, Seville, LAMA2 gene and MR in Bashkirs (OR=1 .34, CI% 1 .03-1 .89) . Spain, 2Unidad Clinica de Endocrinología, HHUU Virgen del Rocio, Seville, This study suggested that the Alu insertion polymorphisms in the Spain. DSCAM, LAMA2 genes could be valuable for assessment of MR risk . Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) is an autosomal dominant cancer syndrome, which is divided into three subtypes: MEN 2A, MEN 2B and familial medullary thyroid cancer (FMTC) . Approximately 92% of MEN 2 cases are caused by mutations in exons 10,11,13-16 of the RET proto-oncogene . There exists inter- and intra-familial phenotypic Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 1 P0985. BDNF Val66met and Psychiatric Disorders: meta-Analysis patients controls of Case-Control Studies confirm association to substance- related disorders and eating disorders BMI<25kg/m2 BMI≥25kg/m2 BMI≥30kg/m2 Σ (%) M. Gratacòs1, J. R. González1, J. M. Mercader1, R. de Cid1, M. Urretavizcaya2, (%) (%) (%) X. Estivill1; 375 1Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 2Ciutat Sanitària i Univer- WW 30 (90,9) 75 (78,1) 140 (90,9) sitària de Bellvitge (CSUB), Barcelona, Spain. (82,4) There is an increasing recognition that the pathophysiology of mental WR 3 (9,1) 21 (21,9) 14 (9,1) 80 (17,6) disorders could be the result of a local deregulation of synaptic plasticity, and a possible explanation would be an altered synthesis and/or W 0,95 0,89 0,95 0,91 release of neurotrophins . The Val66Met SNP, located in the pro-BDNF R 0,05 0,11 0,05 0,07 sequence has been extensively studied through linkage and association approaches in several psychiatric disorders . The purpose of our study was to test if genetically driven variation of BDNF may significantly be P0987. Genetic polymorphisms in methylenetetrahydrofolate involved in a non illness-specific susceptibility to mental disorders or, reductase and risk of chromosome 21 non-disjunction alternatively, a certain group of disorders may be strongly related to this A. Y. Belyaeva, I. N. Lebedev, L. P. Nazarenko, S. A. Nazarenko; gene but others can result from spurious association studies . To test State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. this hypothesis, we performed a meta-analysis restricted to individual Aneuploidy is the most commonly identified chromosome abnormality case-control studies in different categories of mental disorders . This in human . Our knowledge about the mechanisms underlying meta-analysis includes data from 30 case-control studies and five chromosomal non-disjunction is, however, surprisingly poor . The origin psychiatric phenotypes: eating disorders, substance-related disorders, of the extra 21 chromosome is maternal in 95% of cases and due to mood disorders and schizophrenia . We have found an overall gene failure of normal chromosomal segregation during meiosis I . Advanced effect on psychiatric disorders as a single group. From the stratified maternal age is the only fully accepted risk factor for trisomy 21 . Other analysis according to diagnostic categories, we have found that in the risk factors are not well known . The relationship between chromosomal case of mood disorders (both in a global analysis and in another one non-disjunction leading to aneuploidy and folate metabolism has only considering bipolar patients) and schizophrenia, the Val66Met drawn attention in the recent years . In this study, we examined the polymorphism in BDNF is not a risk factor . Subtype analyses also two polymorphisms in genes encoding the folate metabolizing enzyme indicate that the association of the Val66Met polymorphism in BDNF methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) among 39 mothers of is confined to two particular diagnostics: substance-related disorders children with Down syndrome and 90 age-matched control mothers and eating disorders . Our results are suggestive of a protective effect from West Siberia (Russia) . The frequencies of MTHFR C677T of Met allele of BDNF for substance-related disorders and a risk factor genotypes (CC, CT, and TT) were 51%, 36% and 13%, respectively, for eating disorders . in the case group and 49%, 41% and 10%, respectively, in the control group. No significant differences were found in the genotypes P0986. Beta3-adrenoreceptor gene W64R polymorphism in distribution for MTHFR C677T variant between the two groups (P = metabolic syndrome patients with type ii diabetes. 0 .81) . The frequencies of MTHFR A1298C genotypes (AA, AC, and A. N. Voitovich1, A. A. Bystrova2, M. A. Bogdanova1, O. S. Romashkina1, E. I. CC) among case mothers were 31%, 56% and 13%, respectively . The Krasilnikova2, V. I. Larionova1; corresponding frequencies among controls were 48%, 43% and 9%, 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian respectively. No significant differences between the two groups were Federation, 2St. Petersburg Pavlov State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, found also (P = 0 .28) . Our results do not support the link between the Russian Federation. C677T and A1298C polymorphisms of MTHFR and risk of chromosome Beta3-adrenergic receptor gene W64R heterozygosity has been 21 non-disjunction in maternal meiosis I . This research was supported reported to associate with obesity and other features of the metabolic by Grant of President of Russian Federation (MK-1969 .2005 .4) . syndrome (MS) in several ethnic populations . In our study we determined the frequency of WR genotype in MS patients with type II P0988. Association of the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A) diabetes and in healthy children and adolescents, randomly sampled with migraine with aura in spanish patients from Saint-Petersburg population . MS patients with type II diabetes E. Cuenca-Leon1, R. Corominas1, M. Ribasés1,2, B. Narberhaus3, M. del Toro1, (208 women, 75 men, mean age 59±9), 33 of them (12%) with normal B. Cormand2, A. Macaya1; weight (BMI<25 kg/m2), 96 (34%) overweight (BMI≥25 kg/m2) and 154 1Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat de Barce- (54%) obese subjects (BMI≥30 kg/m2), and healthy children (232 girls, lona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Manresa, Spain. 223 boys, mean age 12±3) were genotyped with PCR-RFLP method . Migraine is a complex neurological disorder affecting 8% of men and Results were analyzed using Chi-square test. We did not find any sex- about 18% of women . Several studies suggest that serotonin-related dependent differences in genotype and allele frequencies distribution genes participate in its pathogenesis . Involvement of the serotonin between the patients and the controls (p=0 .16) . At the same time transporter gene (SLC6A4) in migraine has been studied in different there was a statistically significant difference in genotype and allele populations with discordant results . To evaluate the association of frequencies distribution between the patients with BMI≥30 and the SLC6A4 polymorphisms with migraine in the Spanish population patients with BMI≥25 (p=0.01); between the patients with BMI≥30 and we performed a case-control study considering 91 migraineurs (34 the controls (p=0 .02) . Thus, we found the frequency of heterozygotes migraine without aura (MO) and 57 migraine with aura (MA) -19 of was lower in the group of MS patients with type II diabetes and BMI≥30 which were hemiplegic -) and 109 healthy controls . We selected three than in the controls . polymorphisms distributed along the SLC6A4 gene: 5HTTLPR (a deletion/insertion in the transcriptional regulatory region), 5HTTVNTR patients controls in intron 3 and the rs2066713 tag SNP in intron 2. No significant differences were observed for the 5HTTVNTR and rs2066713 men (%)women (%) Σ (%) boys (%) girls (%) Σ (%) polymorphisms . However, the genotype distribution of the 5HTTLPR polymorphism was significantly different between the MA and control groups (p=0 .007) . Individuals carrying the L allele presented 4-times WW65 (86,7) 180 (86,5) 245 (86,6)182 (81,6)193 (83,2)375 (82,4) increased risk of suffering MA than non-carriers (p=0 .003) . This association remained significant in patients with non-hemiplegic aura (p=0 .008 OR=4 .7) . Interestingly, although these results support the WR 10 (13,3) 28 (13,5) 38 (13,4) 41 (18,4) 39 (16,8) 80 (17,6) implication of SLC6A4 in MA, we observed that our group of patients showed an overrepresentation of the 5HTTLPR-L allele instead of the W 0,93 0,93 0,93 0,91 0,92 0,91 5HTTLPR-S variant that has been associated with migraine in most of the previously studied populations . This observation, together with R 0,07 0,07 0,07 0,09 0,08 0,07Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 16 the fact that linkage disequilibrium patterns differ among populations, P0991. Genotype distribution and allele frequencies of the suggests that the 5HTTLPR polymorphism may not confer susceptibility methylentetrahydrofolate reductase gene polymorphism (c677t, to migraine, but is in linkage disequilibrium with another variant directly A1298c) in women with coronary heart disease (cAD) in st. involved in this complex phenotype . Petersburg, Russia. M. A. Bogdanova, A. N. Voitovich, O. S. Romashkina, A. Y. Anisencova, Y. R. P0989. contribution of syntaxin 1A to the genetic susceptibility Kovalev, V. I. Larionova; to migraine: a case-control association study in the spanish State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. population The methylentetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) plays a key role R. Corominas1, M. Ribasés1,2, E. Cuenca-León1, B. Narberhaus3, M. Roig1, A. in metabolism of plasma homocysteine . The C677T MTHFR gene Macaya1, B. Cormand2; polymorphism is accompanied by reduction of enzyme activity and 1Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat de Barce- increased homocysteine level .The A1298C polymorphism in exon 7 of lona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Manresa, Spain. the MTHFR gene ads to aglutamate-to-alanine exchange, this variant Migraine is a common neurological disorder with a complex also decreases MTHFR enzyme activity . The association of the inheritance pattern . However, mutations in the CACNA1A gene, coronary artery disease (CAD) risk in young men group with MTHFR encoding the α1A subunit of the Cav2.1 neuronal calcium channel, gene polymorphisms was found in many studies . have been identified in rare autosomal dominant forms of the disease. In 79 angiographicaly diagnosed CAD women and in 145 unrelated This finding suggests that ion channels or related proteins might be controls genotypes of MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphism also involved in the common forms . Thus, we focused on the genes were determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment for syntaxin 1A (STX1A) and SNAP-25 (components of the SNARE length polymorphism analysis . The genotype distribution was in complex, which regulates the Cav2 .1 channel activity) and performed Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for all variants. Statistical significance of a population-based association study . We selected two tag SNPs of differences between groups was assessed with χ2 tests. STX1A -rs941298 and rs4363087- and three tag SNPs of SNAP-25 Genotype distribution and allele frequencies in the controls and the -rs362990, rs362987 and rs4813925-, and genotyped 91 migraineurs group of patients (p<0 .05) . (34 migraine without aura (MO) and 57 with aura (MA)) and 109 We found no significant differences in genotypes and alleles frequency healthy controls. We found no significant association between SNAP- distribution between patients and population control. Our findings 25 and migraine. However, we observed significant differences in neither support nor exclude possible associations between genetic both allele frequencies (p=0 .003 OR=1 .9) and genotype distributions variations in the MTHFR gene and the presence of cardio-vascular (p=0 .01) between migraineurs and controls when the rs941298 SNP disease states . of the STX1A gene was considered . Once we subdivided patients Genotype distribution and alleles freqencies in the con- into MO and MA, evidence of association for markers rs941298 and rs4363087 was detected in the MO subgroup, with an increased trols and the group of patients number of patients carrying the rs941898T and rs4363087G alleles Genotype Allele Controls n (%) Patients n (%) P-value (p=0 .010 OR=2 .9 and p=0 .016 OR=2 .9) . We also observed a strong association between the T-G haplotype (rs941298-rs4363087) of 677 C C 93 (62 .84) 41 (51 .9) STX1A and migraine (p=0.007 OR=1.9), still significant when patients 677 C T 47 (37 .76) 32 (40 .5) 0 .276 were subdivided into MO and MA . Neither epistatic phenomena nor sex influence were detected. Our data suggest a contribution of the 677 T T 8 (5 .4) 6 (7 .6) STX1A gene to the genetic susceptibility to migraine . T 63 (21 .28) 44 (27 .85) P0990. study of an sNP in POLG1 gene in patients with 1298 A A 68 (49 .3) 29 (40 .84) hypertension 1298 A C 47 (34 .0) 26 (36 .62) 0 .434 S. V. Buikin1,2, M. V. Golubenko1, V. V. Pogrebenkova1, K. V. Puzyrev3, V. P. 1298 C C 23 (16 .7) 16 (22 .54) Puzyrev1,2; 1Research Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian C 93 (37 .7) 58 (40 .85) State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Research Institute for Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Energy balance play important role in the process of cardiovascular P0992. the c.1298A>c polymorphism in the system function . Proteins that participate in energy production methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (mtHFR) gene is risk are encoded by either mitochondrial genome or nucleus . One of factor for Rheumatoid Arthritis chromosomal genes which ensures mitochondrial DNA replication M. Rubini1, M. Padovan2, S. M. Bosi2, O. R. Baricordi1, S. Carturan1, A. Caval- is POLG1 encoding for mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma . laro1, M. Bellini1, A. Gallini1, A. Fabiano1, M. Fotinidi2, A. Massara2, M. Govoni2, To investigate association of an SNP in this gene (rs2238296) with F. Trotta2; endophenotypes of cardiovascular system, a group of hypertensive 1Sez. Genetica Medica, Ferrara, Italy, 2Sez. Reumatologia, Ferrara, Italy. patients has been investigated (92 individuals, 59 males and 33 Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common autoimmune disease females) . The mean age in the sample was 47 .1 years . All the patients characterized by chronic inflammation that causes joint deformity, were subjected to echocardiographic examination and daily blood pain, functional limitations and psychological distress leading to work pressure monitoring . Allele C frequency in the sample was 42% and disability and consequent relevant social and individual costs . RA is a did not differ from population data . By comparing characteristics of complex disease that results from the interplay between genetic and blood pressure and ultrasound examination in different genotypes environmental factors. Identification of the genetic factors involved carriers (TT, TC, CC), we found the following associations . In females, in the pathogenesis of RA could be crucial for early diagnosis and the SNP was associated with end diastolic size of the left ventricle and development of treatment strategies directed at the cause of the with systolic blood pressure (p<0 .05) . In males, there was association disease . However, still little is known susceptibility genes for RA . of homozygous CC genotype with higher levels of maximal blood Although HLA-DRB1 is the main RA gene, it accounts for only part pressure during veloergometry (p=0 .022) . Thus, a polymorphism of the genetic risk for RA . Association studies suggested that other in POLG1 might be associated with quantitative characteristics genes, including TNFR2, PADI4, SLC22A4, RUNX1, and PTPN22 play of cardiovascular system in hypertensive patients . This intronic a role in the etiology of the disease . polymorphism can be in linkage disequilibrium with functional variants . Metotrexate (MTX) is the first line treatment for RA and its efficacy The study was supported by RFBR grant 04-04-48532 . has been reported to be dependent on gene variant in the Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (MTHFR) gene . To assess the possible role of MTHFR polymorphisms in the etiology of RA, we genotyped the c .677C>T and the c .1298A>C variant in MTHFR gene in a group of 217 Italian RA patients and in a matched group of healthy Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 1 controls. While no significant difference of c.677C>T genotypes in multiple sclerosis (MS), which were previously published to play a between cases and controls was found, a clear increase of c .1298CC role in the evolution of MS, were in part due to the common functional genotype was observed among RA patients (OR=2.59; p=0.0093). Our genetic polymorphism in the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI- results suggest that MTHFR c .1298CC genotype may be considered 1) promoter 4G/5G . Previously reported data showed defective a low-penetrance susceptibility factor for RA and point out a possible fibrinolysis in MS with PAI-1 being one of the major enzymes included. role of folate metabolism in the etiology of the disease . The effects of fibrinolytic system are mediated by plasmin, the protease generated by the action of plasminogen activators (PA) on the inactive P0993. Association of the apolipoprotein E genetic precursor plasminogen . The major inhibitor of tissue PA is PAI-1 . The polymorphism and multiple sclerosis risk in Bashkortostan genetic polymorphism 4G/5G modulates the expression of PAI-1 gene A. M. Mikhailova1, O. E. Mustafina1, K. Z. Bahtyarova2, A. N. Aglyamova1, R. V. and individuals with the 4G/4G genotype have increased plasma PAI- Magjanov2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; 1 concentrations . PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism was evaluated in the 1Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkirian State group of 313 patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and 376 healthy Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. controls from Slovenia and Croatia. The significance of the difference Allelic variants of apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene influence the course of of observed alleles and genotypes were determined using the χ2 test. many neurological diseases . We investigated whether a polymorphism Relationship of the genotypes and the disease progression and the in the APOE gene is associated with both susceptibility to and clinical age of onset of the disease was tested by one-way ANOVA test and characteristics of Multiple Sclerosis (MS) . We evaluated APOE gene logistic regression analysis. Our results showed statistically significant polymorphism in unrelated 120 Tatar and 132 Russian patients differences in the distribution of PAI 4G/5G genotypes with respect to of MS from Bashkortostan and 238 Tatar and 217 Russian healthy progression of the disease: ANOVA (P<0 .01) and logistic regression subjects from this area. No significant differences were observed in (P<0 .02) analysis . Namely, genotype 5G5G was associated with the allelic frequencies of the APOE gene between patients with MS lower progression index PI, which was calculated as a ratio EDSS/ and healthy control subjects in Russian and Tatar cohort . But in Tatar disease duration in years . Our results suggest that reduced capacity the frequencies E2/E4 genotype and E4 allele was higher in patient for proteinase inhibition may be involved in the slower progression of MS with coordination disorder in debut then controls (E2/E4 7 .69% vs . MS . 0.84%; P=0.009; OR=9.83, CI=1.49-79.75 and E4 23.07% vs. 12.81%; P=0.012; OR=2.04, CI=0.16-3.57). In this group the frequency of E3 P0996. PRKcA shows association to multiple sclerosis in two allele in patient was significantly lower than in control: 69.23% vs. populations 80.88% (P=0.013; OR=0.53, CI=0.32-0.87). These results suggest J. Saarela1,2, S. P. Kallio1,2, D. Chen3, A. Montpetit4, E. Choi3, R. Asselta1, D. that APOE gene polymorphism is specifically associated with clinical Bronnikov3, M. R. Lincoln5, A. Palotie2,6, G. C. Ebers5, T. J. Hudson4, L. Pel- characteristics of current disease . tonen1,6; 1Dept of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, P0994. mutation analysis of the 5,10 methylenetetrahydrofolate 2Research Program in Molecular Medicine at Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, reductase (mtHFR) gene in multiple sclerosis Finland, 3Dept of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, M. Hallendorff1, C. van der Walt1, S. Janse van Rensburg2, M. G. Zaahl1; Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4McGill University and Genome Quebec In- 1Department of Genetics, University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch, South Af- novation Centre, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 5Dept of Clinical Neurology, Radcliffe rica, 2Department of Chemical Pathology, National Health Laboratory Services, Infirmary, Univ of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Dept of Medical Genetics, Tygerberg Hospital, Tygerberg, South Africa. University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a disease that causes demyelinisation on Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the CNS. portions of the axons in the brain . During this process transmission Both unknown environmental factors and genetic predisposition are along these axons is impeded . Even though MS is such a prevalent required to generate MS . disease, affecting 1 in 1000 individuals, the cause(s) of this complex A set of 63 Finnish MS families, originating from a high-risk region of the condition is not yet fully understood . Nitrous oxide has been implicated country, was used to identify a susceptibility gene within the previously in the onset of MS because of its action in the inhibition of the folate established 3 .4 Mb region on 17q24 . Initial SNP-based association and homocysteine metabolic cycles . 5,10 Methylenetetrahydrofolate implicated PRKCA gene, and this association was replicated in an reductase (MTHFR) is one of the enzymes that plays a role in the independent set of 148 Finnish MS families (p=0 .0004) . Further, folate cycle . The current investigation tested the possible involvement 211 SNPs covering the PRKCA gene and the flanking regions was of the MTHFR gene in the aetiology of the disease . This case-control analyzed in 211 Finnish and 554 Canadian MS families . study included MS patients, some of whom developed the disorder SNP haplotype and genotype combination analyses revealed two following exposure to nitrous oxide, and healthy control individuals . allelic variants of PRKCA to be over-represented either in Finnish Mutation analysis of the MTHFR gene was performed using polymerase (Odds Ratio: 1 .34, 95th CI 1 .07-1 .68) or in Canadian (Odds Ratio: chain reaction (PCR), heteroduplex single strand conformational 1 .64 95th CI 1 .39-1 .94) MS cases . The expression level of PRKCA, polymorphism (HEX-SSCP) detection and semi-automated DNA in CD4 negative mononuclear cells of five Finnish multiplex families sequencing techniques . These procedures were applied to identify and in lymphoblast cell lines of 11 CEPH individuals of Europen origin, any known and/or novel variations in the MTHFR gene that may be correlates with the copy number of the these PRKCA risk alleles . associated with a predisposition to nitrous oxide-induced MS . Two Linkage, association and the preliminary functional study of PRKCA novel polymorphisms, 1056C/T and 1782G/C, and one previously gene imply it’s involvement in the etiology ot the MS . described mutation, 1286A/C, were identified. A statistically significant difference in genotypic frequency was noted between patients and P0997. HLA class ii polymorphism in myasthenia Gravis patients control cohorts, and when comparing patients exposed to NO with from Bashkortostan, Russia 2 patients not exposed to NO, for the 1782G/C polymorphism (p = A. Ishmukhametova1, I. Khidiyatova1, R. Magzhanov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; 2 0 .03), implicating a possible role for MTHFR in developing MS . 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Acad- emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, P0995. Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAi-1) genetic Ufa, Russian Federation. polymorphism and its role in the progression of multiple The genetics of the autoimmune response in Myasthenia Gravis (MG) sclerosis. is not well understood, but evidence suggests that human leukocyte L. Lovrecic1, S. Ristic2, N. Starcevic-Cizmarevic2, S. Sega Jazbec3, J. Sepcic4, antigens (HLA) genes within the major histocompatibility complex may B. Brajenovic-Milic2, M. Kapovic2, B. Peterlin1; play a role in the development of the diseases . The association of MG 1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, with the distinct HLA haplotypes varies between ethnic populations . UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, HLA-DRB1 gene polymorphism was analyzed in 40 (Russian and School of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia, 3Department of Neurology, UMC, Ljubljana, Tatar) patients with the generalized form and early onset of myasthenia Slovenia, 4Postgraduate studies, School of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia. without thymoma and 106 healthy ethnically matched controls from Our aim was to test the hypothesis that impaired proteolytic mechanisms Bashkortostan, Russia .Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 1 The specificities frequencies of HLA-DRB1 polymorphism differed Pakistan, India and Turkey ( Thirty families from Pakistan, six from India significantly between patient and controls (χ²=55,2505, p<0,0001) and two from Turkey) . We report eighteen novel recessive mutations and found to be 32,50% and 8,49% for DRB1*17 (χ²=24,3199, of MYO15A segregating in twenty-two of the thirty-eight families . p=0,0005) and 10,0% and 1,42% for DRB1*16 (χ²=9,5592, p=0,0029), Two homozygous truncating alleles of MYO15A are associated with correspondingly . Consequently, oligotyping has revealed positive moderate to severe hearing loss and are located in exon 2 indicating associations of HLA-DRB1*17 (OR=5,19, 95%CI 2,52-10,74), and for the first time, the necessity of this sequence for the function of DRB1*16 (OR=7,74, 95%CI 1,80-37,94,) with the disease based myosin XVA in normal hearing . on case-control study . The frequency of DRB1*07, which had been considered protective in Russian population, were 7,5% in our patients P1000. Genotype - phenotype correlation in myotonic dystrophy and 15,57% in controls but differences were not significant (χ²=2,6061, N. Moradin1, B. Shojasaffar1, A. Cobo2, S. Nafisi3, A. Vojdani1, M. Azimian1, S. p=0,1066) . M. E. Mousavi1, K. Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1; These findings indicate that the immunogenetic backgrounds in our 1Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Unidad de Ge- MG patients are heterogeneous and apparently different from those netica, Hospital Donostia, San Sebastian, Spain, 3Shariati Hospital, Neurology in Caucasian and Asian patients . Comparisons among disease- department, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. susceptible HLA class II alleles and clinical manifestations of MG in Myotonic dystrophy type I- the most common form of muscular dystrophy different ethnic groups would be helpful in determining the pathogenesis in adults , affecting 1/8000 individuals .DM is associated with the of the disease . expansion and instability of a CTG repeat in the 3’ untranslated region of the myotonic dystrophy protein kinase gene located on chromosome P0998. mYH mutations in Belgian polyposis families. 19q13 .3 The aim of this study was genotype-phenotype correlation in . M. Spaepen1, B. Biesmans1, B. Vankeirsbilck1, S. Tejpar2, G. Matthijs1; Iranian population . We analyzed a small group of these patients for 1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital of Leuven, Belgium, 2Depart- determination of clinical and genetic characteristic of DM1 . ment of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of Leuven, Belgium. PCR , Southern blot were used to clarify equivocal clinical diagnoses Individuals with homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations and confirm clinical findings. Diagnosis was based on clinical and in the base excision repair gene MYH are predisposed to develop Electromyographic . 82 patients registered with DM were reviewed . In multiple colorectal carcinomas and classic adenomatous polyposis . To 58 patients(70/73 %), we detected one band and 24 patients have no evaluate the contribution of the MYH-mutations in Belgian polyposis expansion of the repeat (two bands) .We studied 25 DM - families, a families, mutation analysis has been performed by DHPLC on 179 total of 36 patients who were single band (23 Male, 13 female, mean unrelated patients in whom no mutations were identified in the APC- and age 37 .4 ± 13 .3), of whom 21 were diagnosed with a CTG expansion MMR-genes or from whom the tumors were microsatellite stable . Six and the rest of them are in progress . patients were found with biallelic mutations of the MYH gene: p .Y165C/ The mean of normal CTG expansion was (8 .6 ± 3) . Twenty patients had p .Y165C, p .G382D/c .1249-1263del15bp, p .Y90X/p .P391L and, in CTG repeat expansion between 130 and 800, and one of the patients three patients, p .Y165C/p .P391L . It is remarkable that four of these six had 97 CTG repeat expansion . We found relation with Muscular patients were compound heterozygous for the p .P391L mutation what Disability Rating Scales and a Sum of Symptoms Score, age of onset suggests a founder mutation . This missense mutation has previously and the number of expansion . also been found in 14% of the patients with biallelic mutations in the Our results proved correlation of the expansion size and muscular Netherlands (1) . The c .1249-1263del15bp mutation has not been disability except for one case with no signs of myotonia . There is no reported before . Further, seven patients were heterozygous carriers correlation of cataract and endocrine dysfunction and the expansion of only one pathogenic MYH mutation. This observation fits with the size in DM1 patients . emerging evidence that monoallelic MYH mutation confer a potentially low-penetrant risk of colorectal cancer (2) . Finally, the presence of four P1001. Mutational analysis in Neurofibromatosis type 1 patients: novel missense mutations (p .A208V, p .A226S, p .R295C, p .A359V) in Identification of 19 novel mutations a heterozygous state in the patient group and their complete absence F. Joncourt, S. Gallati; in 200 healthy controls may also add to this feature . Human Genetics, Berne, Switzerland. In conclusion: 10 % of the FAP/AFAP phenotypes (6/58) were Mutations in the NF1 gene are the cause of neurofibromatosis type1, characterized as MAP (MYH Associated Polyposis) from which more the most common tumor-predisposing disorder in humans . Mutation than half were (compound) heterozygous for p .P391L, a potential analysis in the NF1 gene is complicated for several reasons, among Belgian/Dutch founder mutation . which are the large size of the gene and the diversity of pathogenic (1) Nielsen M et al., J Med Gen 2005;42:e54 mutations found . There is no single assay which can detect all NF1- (2) Croitoru ME et al., J Natl Cancer Inst 2004;96:1631-4 mutations . The majority of NF1 cases, however, are caused by base changes, small deletions and duplications/insertions. As a first step P0999. spectrum of mutations of MYO1A associated with in our strategy for mutation detection we have therefore used a hearing loss gives insight into the function of myosin XVA sensitive SSCP assay. In 40 patients with clinically confirmed NF1 N. Nal1, R. Morell2, E. Erkal3, Z. Ahmed2, S. Riazuddin4, S. Riazuddin2, O. all coding sequences of NF1 including the exon/intron boundaries Alper1, G. Luleci1, O. Dinc3, T. Friedman2; were screened and variants subject to sequence analysis . 7 known 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Deparment of Medical Biology and and 19 novel mutations considered to be pathogenic were identified Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Section on Human Genetics, Laboratory of Molecu- in addition to a number of known polymorphisms . Among the 19 novel lar Genetics, National Institute of Deafness and Other Communication Disor- mutations the entire spectrum of different types was found: 6 missense ders, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Rockville, MD, United States, 3Akdeniz mutations (c .480G>T, c .581T>C, c,3646G>T, c .3764A>G, c .5407A>G, University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Antalya, c .5486T>A), 3 nonsense mutations (c .503C>A, c .706C>T, c .1603C>T), Turkey, 4National Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology, Punjab University, 7 small deletions (c.499_502delTGTT, c.1745G>C;c.1746_1783del, Lahore, Pakistan. c .2974_2976delATG, c .3186delA, c .3482_3483delTC, c .3459_ MYO15A is located on chromosome 17p11 .2 and encodes 3462delCAAT, c .4805delTGAT), 2 insertions (c .637dupA, c .4960_ unconventional myosin XVA, which is necessary for transduction of 4988dup) and 1 splice site mutation (c .3496+1G>A) . With a mutation sound by inner ear hair cells . Mutations of MYO15A are associated with detection rate of 65% in this selected group of patients, which is within nonsyndromic, autosomal recessive hearing loss DFNB3 in humans the expected range, our method proved to be an efficient tool for and deafness and circling behaviour in the shaker 2 mouse . There detection of known and new point mutations in the NF1 gene . Currently, are two classes of alternative splice variants of MYO15A, with and in order to improve overall mutation detection rate, as a second step without exon 2, which encodes 1220 residues that preceeds the motor patients without identifiable point mutation are being screened for large domain, and hitherto without a known function in the auditory system . deletions and the results will be presented . We ascertained over 600 families segregating hereditary hearing loss . Among this cohort, there was evidence of linkage of markers for DFNB3 to hearing loss in thirty-eight of these families who were from Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 1 P1002. Psychometrics and genetics of nicotine dependence Mental retardation (MR) affects approximately 1-3% of the general P. Bauer1, C. Bajinski2, S. Collins2, I. Mäckle-Jentsch1, C. Bauer1, F. Wernz2, O. population. A defining feature of MR is an intelligence quotient (IQ) of less Riess1, A. Batra2; than 70 . The aetiologies of MR are diverse and include chromosomal 1Department of Medical Genetics, Tübingen, Germany, 2Department of Psy- anomalies, recognisable malformation syndromes, monogenic chiatry and Psychotherapy, Tübingen, Germany. syndromes, structural brain abnormalities, and environmental factors . Nicotine dependence is a complex behaviour for which a substantial Genetic aetiologies are found in approximately two thirds of cases . genetic contribution is assumed . Several candidate genes for this Mental retardation that affects individuals without major physical genetic contribution have been suggested involving neuroreceptors stigmata, chromosomal anomalies, or fragile X syndrome is called and metabolic enzymes of nicotine degradation . In order to elucidate non-syndromic or non-specific mental retardation (NSMR). their impact in correlation with anamnestic data (Fagerström Score, Searching for the genes responsible for NSMR is difficult owing to number of cigarettes per day, sociodemographic data) and abstinence heterogeneity and the absence of clinical criteria for grouping the rates, we recruited 202 healthy volunteers who wanted to join a NSMR families for linkage analysis . We evaluated a large Tunisian supervised abstinence program . family with four consanguinous branches including 14 affected and 22 Using psychometric scales, we identified four subgroups of regular non affected individuals They had severe mental retardation (IQ<50), smokers - depressive, hyperactive, highly dependent and “nonclinical” epilepsy, absence of speech . Investigation revealed normal caryotype smokers with sample proportions of 16%, 21%, 34%, and 29%, and FMR1 gene . Brain scan and MRI of 2 affected individuals were respectively. Cluster membership significantly predicted smoking normal. Twelve microsatellite markers on chromosomes 3p25 ; 4q24- outcomes 6 and 12 months following a combined pharmocological and q25 and 19p13.12-p13.2 were amplified by polymerase chain reaction behavioural intervention for smoking cessation . (PCR) . For genetic analyses, this study group has been extended to 272 Linkage analysis was performed using the program linkage (version samples and genotyped for several informative single nucleotide 5 .0) . The results of two point linkage analysis with these markers show polymorphisms (SNPs) in “nicotine”-related pathways such as (a) the no linkage to the 3 known loci 3p25-pter, 4q24-q25 and 19p13 .12- dopaminergic system (ANKK1, DRD3, DRD4, MAOA, COMT, SLC6A3), p13.2 and confirm exclusion to those loci. (b) the serotoninergic system (SLC6A4, HTR2A), (c) the nicotinergic A genome scan is started for mapping a new gene for non specific and the cytochrome system (CHRNA4, CHRNA7 . CHRNB2, CYP2A6, autosomal recessive mental retardation . CYP2D6) . Genotyping systems have been implemented onto the new Roche LightCycler480 instrument using the 384-well format and the P1005. Prevalence of GJB2, GJB6 and A1555G mutations in the HybProbe format . italian population Although univariate association analyses did not harvest an isolated P. Paterini1, D. Bastia1, M. Seri2, D. Turchetti2, C. Graziano2, C. Bergonzoni3, M. genetic determinant of heavy nicotine dependence, we predicted Montaguti3, V. Mantovani1,2, G. Romeo2; the number of cigarettes per day based upon genotypes for ANKK1, 1CRBA Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 2U.O. Genetica Medica DRD3, and COMT (categorical regression analysis) . A multivariate Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 3U.O. Otorinolaringoiatria Poli- analysis aiming to identify possible links between the psychometric clinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. groups and the genotype data is under way . Mutations in the connexin 26 encoding gene (GJB2) have been described as major cause of non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) . P1003. Evidence of exclusion of NKX2-5 gene for atrial septal Deletions involving connexin 30 (GJB6) were also associated with defect in a consanguineous tunisian family NSHL; A1555G mutation in mitochondrial (mt)DNA has been shown to S. I. Nouira1, I. Kamoun2, W. Smath3, S. Kachboura2, C. Charfedine1, S. Abdel- predispose to aminoglycoside ototoxicity . hak1; Aim of our study was to evaluate the prevalence of these molecular 1Unité de Recherche 26/04 ‘Exploration Moléculaire des Maladies Orphelines defects in the Italian population . 133 patients with mild to profound, d’Origine Génétique’, Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Service de car- familiar or apparently sporadic NSHL were studied . 513 unaffected diologie de l’Hôpital Abderhman Mami, Ariana, Tunisia, 3Service de cardiologie controls were also screened to evaluate the carrier frequency . de l’Hôpital Abderhman Mami, Tunis, Tunisia. Mutation screening by DHPLC and sequencing for GJB2, multiplex Atrial septal defect (ASD) is an autosomal dominant disease PCR for 309kb and 232kb deletions in GJB6 and restriction analysis characterized by left-to-right shunting and increased right ventricular for A1555G mutation were performed . output . Approximately 5-10% of congenital heart diseases (CHD) are 38 patients (28,6%) showed molecular variants of GJB2 . In addition to due to ASD which is one of the most frequent CHD found in human known mutations two novel defects (G109W and 153delT) were found adults . in compound heterozygotes with 35delG . Six novel variants (G>C - The gene responsible for ASD has been mapped to chromosome 3277, IVS1-6T>C, IVS1-2A>C, Y158Y, K221N, N62N) were also 5q35 by genetic analysis in large pedigrees . This gene encodes the detected . One patient (0 .8%) carried the 309kb GJB6 deletion and one transcription factor NKX2-5 important for regulation of septation during showed homoplasmic A1555G mtDNA mutation . cardiac morphogenesis . Nkx2.5, was among the first evidence of a 61 controls (12%) showed molecular variants of GJB2; 25 (1:20) were genetic cause for congenital heart disease and mutations were initially carriers of disease-causing mutations . Four novel variants (IVS1- found in pedigrees with autosomal dominant transmission of atrial 6T>C, IVS1-2A>C, A/G at -8, D159N) were also detected . septal defect . In conclusion, GJB2 mutations resulted responsible for almost one We report here clinical and molecular investigation of a Tunisian third of the NSHL in our patients and a high prevalence of mutation consanguineous family with 4 affected members: the clinical features carriers was shown in our population . The low frequency of GJB6 of 2 patients among the 4 affected individual are characterized by ASD deletions and A1555G mtDNA mutation suggests that the occurrence with prolonged PR interval whereas the 2 others presented only a of these defects is restricted to specific populations. prolonged PR interval . Pedigree analysis is consist with an autosomal dominant inheritance of the disease .Genotyping of the ASD family with P1006. mutational analysis of the PTPN11 gene in 12 patients 2 microsatellite markers D5S394 and D5S2439 flanking Nkx2.5 gene with Noonan or Noonan-like phenotype and Linkage analysis showed exclusion of linkage between the gene F. J. Ramos1,2, I. Bueno2, M. Ribate1, M. Arnedo1, B. Puisac1, J. Pie1, J. L. Oli- responsible for ASD in this family and Nkx2.5 gene, thus confirming vares1,2; genetic heterogeneity of this phenotype . 1Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Hospital Clínico Universitario, Zaragoza, Spain. P1004. Large family with autosomal recessive mental retardation Noonan syndrome (NS) (OMIM #163950) is an autosomal dominant not linked to 3 known loci. disorder consisting in Turner-like phenotype (triangular face, l. Abaied1, M. Kharrat1, F. Maazoul2, N. Bayou1, L. Ben Jemaa1, M. Chaabouni1, downslanting palpebral fissures, ptosis and short stature), congenital R. M’rad1, H. Chaabouni1,3; heart disease (most commonly pulmonary stenosis) and skeletal 1department of human genetic, tunis, Tunisia, 2Charles Nicolle hospital, tunis, anomalies . Mild mental retardation or developmental delay is common . Tunisia, 3Charles Nicolle hospital, Tunis, Tunisia. Its incidence ranges from 1/1000 to 1/2500 live births . Penetrance is Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 0 incomplete and more than 1/3 of the cases are sporadic . In 2001, genetic analyses . Heritability estimates were calculated and variance mutations of the PTPN 11 gene in chromosome 12q24 were found in components linkage analysis made using MERLIN program . Score of patients with NS . Subsequent studies reported that mutations in this right identifications was not found to be heritable, but when odours gene account for approximately 50% of the cases . were analyzed separately, several traits showed moderate heritability . We present the results of the molecular analysis of the PTPN11 Pleasantness of cinnamon odour (104 subjects were phenotyped for gene in 12 spanish patients with clinical criteria of Noonan syndrome this trait) had the highest heritability of studied traits (h2 = 61 %) and or Noonan-like phenotype. Clinical findings were classified and a significant linkage was found between it and chromosome 4q32.3 evaluated following the scoring system proposed by van der Burgt in (multipoint LOD score 3 .01) . 1984 . Methodologically we performed the PCR-based analysis and In addition, moderate heritability (h2 = 31) and suggestive linkage to sequencing reported by Tartaglia et al . in 2002 for exons 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, chromosome 2p14 (multipoint LOD score 2 .55) were found for intensity 12 and 13, the ones that more likely host mutations . of paint thinner . The results suggest that the way in which some odours Two missense mutations were found in two non-related patients with are perceived is genetically modified. typical NS phenotype. The first one was a T184G (Y62D) in exon 3 in a 10 moth old male with pulmonic stenosis and scalp defects, the second P1009. Association of intronic polymorphisms in the ER-a gene was a G1507C (G503R) in exon 13 in a 11-year old girl without heart with knee osteoartjritis (KOA) defect . No mutation was found in any of the 10 remaining patients, A. Morou1, M. Kaliakatsos1, M. Tzetis1, E. Kanavakis1, K. Malizos2, A. Tsezou3; although we are analyzing the remaining exons in the patients with the 1Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2University of Thessaly, Dept of Orthope- more striking phenotypes . dics, Larissa, Greece, 3University of Thessaly, Laboratory of Cytogenetics & Medical Genetics, Larissa, Greece. P1007. Norrie disease Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most prevalent joint disease especially over G. Modabber, M. Hoshmand, M. H. Sanati; age 60 . Estrogens affect articular cartilage metabolism directly via National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Thehran, Islamic estrogen receptors (ER) in chondrocytes. The ER-α gene is located Republic of Iran. on chromosome 6q25-27 consisting of eight exons . To elucidate Norrie disease is a rare X-inked recessive ( Xp11 .2-11 .3 ) condition the possible role of the PvuII (P/p) and XbaI (X/x) polymorphisms in characterized by congenital blindness in males due to degenerative intron 1 of the gene on KOA, a case-control study of a homogeneous and proliferative processes in the neuroretina . Retinal dysgenesis Greek population was set up . These two polymorphisms have been occurs early during embryogenesis and is often associated with associated with bone mineral density (BMD) and osteoporosis in microphthalmia . The most prominent feature at birth is an intra-ocular different populations . The osteoarthritic group consisted of 158 mass which can be misdiagnosed for retinoblastoma and ultimately patients, 138 women (mean age 68.1 ± 8.2; range 48-92 years) and leads to shrinkage of the eye globe . The main histopathological 20 men (mean age 72.4 ± 5.8; range 62-85 years). All of them suffered findings are rosettes of immature retinal cells embedded in a vascular from severe KOA, defined by a Kellgren-Lawrence score ≥ 2. The connective tissue of hyperplastic primary vitreous . Norrie disease is a control population consisted of 193 subjects, 137 women (mean age rare disorder, its exact incidence is unknown . It is not associated with 68 ±10.9; range 44-87 years) and 56 men (mean age 70.2 ± 9; range any specific racial or ethnic group. 46-88 years), who had undergone treatment for injuries and fractures . Mutations in the NDP cause Norrie disease . In affected males, A significant difference was observed in the frequency distribution of mutations in the NDP gene are associated with a spectrum of ER-α-XbaI (P<0.0001) between OA patients and controls with allele x retinal findings ranging from Norrie disease (ND) to X-linked familial exerting a protective role and Xx genotype conferring increased risk exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR), including some cases of compared to xx (OR 0.33; 95%CI 0.13-0.84; P>0.02). A significantly persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV), Coats disease, and increased odds ratio for KOA was also observed in individuals having advanced retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) .These phenotypes appear haplotype PX (double the risk for knee OA) compared to px (OR to be a continuum of retinal findings with considerable overlap.The 1.86; 95% CI 1.21-2.87; P>0.005) while haplotype pX conferred a ocular findings that permit a presumptive diagnosis of an NDP-related six times increased risk compared to px (OR 6.03; 95% CI 1.64-24.2; retinopathy include the following: P>0 .007) . Bilateral, often symmetric, involvement of the eyes Normal-sized eyes, with normal anterior chambers and clear lenses P1010. A genome-wide linkage scan for low bone mineral at birth (usually) density at the lumbar spine in a single extended family provides Vitreous abnormalities (hemorrhage, membranes, detachment, and/or suggestive linkage to 1p36.3. vitreoretinal attachments) A. Willaert1, I. Van Pottelbergh2, H. Zmierczak2, S. Goemaere2, K. Toye2, G. Presence of fibrous and vascular retinal changes at birth with Mortier1, J. Kaufman2, A. De Paepe1, P. Coucke1; progressive changes through childhood or adolescence . 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Endocrinol- ogy and Unit for Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Diseases, Ghent, Belgium. P1008. Genetic background of perceiving odours: a genome- Peak bone mineral density (BMD), which is under strong genetic control, wide screen with Finnish families is a major determinant of risk for osteoporosis . Because of a high degree A. Knaapila1,2, K. Keskitalo1,2, M. Kallela3, S. Sammalisto2, M. Wessman4,5, A. of genetic heterogeneity, multiple genes influence susceptibility to low Palotie4, L. Peltonen-Palotie2,6, H. Tuorila1, M. Perola2,6; peak BMD . Yet, it is believed that single major genes play a crucial 1Department of Food Technology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2De- role in familial inheritance of low BMD . To search for a genetic locus partment of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Fin- that explains a major part of the variation in susceptibility of low peak land, 3Department of Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, BMD we performed a genome-wide screen using 380 microsatellite Finland, 4Finnish Genome Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, markers in a single extended family (n=31) with high prevalence of 5Folkhälsan Research Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Medical Ge- low spinal BMD (Z(BMD)≤-2) and characterised by a young onset. The netics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. pattern of inheritance of the low BMD trait in this family is suggestive We studied the genetic component of perceiving odours in a novel way for autosomal dominance . A two-point linkage analysis was performed by utilizing psychophysical smell testing of human subjects combined making use of quantitative-trait and affected/unaffected-trait parametric with genetic linkage analysis . A total of 146 Finns (100 females, 46 models . Next to this a non-parametric linkage analysis (NPL analysis) males, aged 18-78 years, mean 49 ± 15 years) from 26 extended was carried out . families were genome-scanned (using 360 microsatellite markers) and The highest LOD-score (2 .83) obtained in two-point analysis, when the sense of smell was tested using The Brief Smell Identification Test™ an affected/unaffected-trait model was used, was at 1p36 .3 (D1S468) . which contained identification (multiple-choice with 4 alternatives) of The chromosomal region at 1p36 has been previously implicated in 12 odours (cinnamon, turpentine, lemon, smoke, chocolate, rose, paint several other linkage studies of BMD . Additional microsatellite analysis thinner, banana, pineapple, gasoline, soap, onion) . Ratings of intensity revealed critical recombination events restricting the candidate region and pleasantness of each odour (5-point category scales) were added to 1 .6 Mb and about 19 genes . Sequencing analysis of the coding to the test for this study, and the data were standardized before region of one of the candidate genes, WDR8, shown to be expressed Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 1 during endochondrial ossification, revealed no mutations or disease- P1013. A locus for an autosomal dominant paroxysmal associated polymorphisms . Mutation screening for other candidate abdominal pain maps to 8q12.3-13.3 genes is in progress. In conclusion, our results are confirming earlier N. G. Pineda-Trujillo1, B. Kremeyer1, F. Lopera2, G. Bedoya2, A. Ruíz-Linares1,2; findings that there may be genetic determinants for BMD on 1p36. 1The Galton Laboratory, London, United Kingdom, 2Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia. P1011. Linkage of a Familial Form of Osteoporosis to We identified an extended family in Antioquia (Colombia) with multiple chromosome 5q34 individuals presenting abrupt crises of severe abdominal pain . These C. Vidal1, R. Galea2, M. Brincat2, A. Xuereb-Anastasi1,3; episodes occur from infancy and are characterized by very intense 1Department of Pathology, University of Malta, Medical School, G’Mangia, spasmodic pain, predominantly in the abdomen but occasionally Malta, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Malta, Medical generalised . Episodes are associated with stiffness of abdominal wall, School, G’Mangia, Malta, 3Institute of Health Care, University of Malta, Malta. profuse sweating but not loss of consciousness . One episode can A number of chromosomal loci have been identified and confirmed to last for 30 to 60 min, the pain gradually becoming more severe as a quantitative trait locus (QTL) such as bone mineral density (BMD) by the crisis progresses . We carried out a whole genome linkage scan whole genome scans and by scanning candidate regions . In this study using ~550 microsatellite markers (deCode Genetics Genotyping a genomewide linkage scan was performed in an extended family with Service) with an average spacing of 6cM . Parametric linkage analysis a familial form of osteoporosis . was carried out using a model of autosomal dominant inheritance 400 microsatellite markers spread across the 22 autosomes and X with high penetrance (0.985). Two-point LOD scores ≥ 2, suggesting chromosome were analysed in 9 family members, eight females and genetic linkage, were found on chromosomes 2p, 3p, 8q, 9q, and one male. The phenotype was defined by lumbar and femoral z- 13q. A single two-point LOD score ≥ 3 was obtained on chromosome scores calculated after measurement of bone mineral density (BMD) 8q12.3, for marker D8S512 (Z=4.18 at θ=0). Multipoint LOD score by DEXA . Multipoint parametric and non-parametric linkage analyses analysis of chromosome 8 yielded a maximum LOD score of Z = 4 .42 were performed by EasyLinkage v4 .0 using GENEHUNTER v2 .1, in the interval D8S512-D8S279, notably in the same region that had assuming dominant and recessive modes of inheritance with variable also shown the most significant LOD score in the two-point analysis. penetrance . We therefore conclude that we identified a region on chromosome Evidence of linkage was observed to a marker at 5q34 where a non- 8q12 .3-13 .3 that harbours a predisposing gene for familial paroxysmal parametric LOD score (NPL) of 7 .17 was observed . A parametric LOD abdominal pain . Fine-mapping and sequencing of candidate genes in score of 2.78 (p=0.0005; info=0.90) for this region was obtained for the the region is underway . recessive mode of inheritance with 80% penetrance and a phenocopy rate of 1% . The disease allele frequency was assumed to be 0 .001 P1014. High frequency of sDHB mutations in a series of head (0 .10%) . Suggestive linkage (LOD scores >1 .5 and/or p<0 .01) was and neck paraganglioma from Belgium observed at a number of other chromosomal loci including 6q22, 9q21, A. Persu1, V. Grégoire2, P. Garin3, H. Reychler4, G. Mortier5, J. De Plaen1, M. 11p13, 13q33 and 17q23 . Hamoir6, M. Vikkula7; These results suggest that a major gene might be involved in the 1Nephrology dept., Cliniques universitaires St-Luc (UCL), Brussels, Belgium, onset of this familial form of osteoporosis . It is also evident that other 2Radiotherapy dept., Cliniques universitaires St-Luc (UCL), Brussels, Belgium, genes might also be involved. Identification of these genes and their 3Otolaryngology dept., Cliniques universitaires Mont-Godinne (UCL), Yvoir, roles played in the pathophysiology of disease is important for both Belgium, 4Oral and maxillofacial surgery dept., Cliniques universitaires St- prevention and treatment of osteoporosis . Luc (UCL), Brussels, Belgium, 5Center for Medical Genetics, Gent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 6Otolaryngology dept., Cliniques universitaires St-Luc P1012. Association study of haplotype H2 of P2RY12 gene with (UCL), Brussels, Belgium, 7Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Université coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction catholique de Louvain & Christian de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium. U. Cavallari1, E. Trabetti1, M. Biscuola1, G. Malerba1, D. Girelli2, O. Olivieri2, N. Mutations of SDH genes encoding subunits of complex II of the Martinelli2, R. Corrocher2, P. F. Pignatti1; mitochondrial respiratory chain are involved in the pathogenesis of 1Department of Mother and Child and of Biology-Genetics, Section of Biology paraganglioma (PG) and pheochromocytoma . While SDHD is more and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Department of Clinical and frequently involved in the pathogenesis of head and neck PG, SDHB Experimental Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. mutations are mainly associated with malignant and/or extra-adrenal BACKGROUND: Platelet activation and aggregation are key elements pheochromocytoma . In the aim to looking for the nature and frequency in coronary atherosclerosis . Platelet receptor P2Y12 stimulated by of SDH mutations as well as for possible genotype-phenotype adenosin diphopsaphate (ADP) modulates affinity of glycoprotein correlations in head and neck PG from Belgium, we recruited all patients IIb/IIIa for fibrinogen, resulting in fibrinogen binding and platelet with head and neck PG seen in the main Academic Centers in Belgium aggregation . from May 2003 to December 2005 . Screening of the coding parts of A haplotype of the P2RY12 gene (H2 haplotype) was found to be SDHD and SDHB was performed by SSCP and heteroduplex analysis, associated with maximal aggregation response to ADP in the general followed by sequencing whenever a shift was observed . Six different population and to increase risk of peripheral arterial disease . SDHD mutations were found in 7 different patients including 5 familial Aim of this study was to test the association of the H2 haplotype with cases and 2 apparently sporadic cases . Four of the mutations were coronary atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction . not described previously . Furthermore, 2 different SDHB mutations METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied 1422 unrelated consecutive were found in 4 unrelated patients with apparently sporadic PG . One Italian patients of both sexes . They were diagnosed by coronary of them, found in 3 of the 4 subjects, had been already described in a angiography as affected by coronary artery disease (CAD or cases, family with malignant pheochromocytoma. (Young et al., JCEM 2002; n=1033) or not (CAD-free controls, n=389) . In the CAD group 616 87: 4101-4105) . Surprisingly, in this Belgian series, SDHB mutations patients had a history of myocardial infarction (MI) . All patients were were almost twice as frequent as SDHD mutations (13 vs . 7%) in genotyped for the H1/H2 haplotype tag SNP of the P2RY12 gene by sporadic head and neck PG without evidence of dissemination, mainly melting curve analysis of fluorescent real time PCR. due to a single mutation previously associated with familial metastatic We observed a significant difference in genotype distribution between pheochromocytoma (alexandre.persu@nefr.ucl.ac.be). CAD and CAD-free groups (p=0 .024) . H2 haplotype carriers were more frequent in the CAD group than in the CAD-free group (p=0 .041, P1015. cOmt and mtHFR genes analysis in patients with OR=1.35, CI=1.00-1.83). No significant difference in H2 haplotype Parkinson‘s disease from Bashkortostan frequency was observed between MI and MI-free groups within CAD I. Gilyazova1, I. Khidiyatova1, R. Magzhanov2, A. Baitimerov2, E. Khusnutdi- population . nova1; CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest an association of the H2 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics,Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian haplotype of the P2RY12 gene with coronary artery disease . No Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. significant association was observed between the H2 haplotype and The etiology of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (PD) is considered history of myocardial infarction in the studied population . to be multifactorial with both genetic and environmental factors Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  modifying the disease expression . Recent studies suggest that University, Rome, Italy, 6Department of Human Genetics and Department of polymorphism in cotechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and Biological Psychology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research VU methylentetrahidrofolatreductase (MTHFR) might influence the risk University, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. of PD . The aim of the study was to evaluate effects of Val158Met We studied patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (PD) from and C677T genetic polymorphisms on different forms and severity an isolated population in the Netherlands aiming to map gene(s) of PD . Allele and genotype frequencies distribution didn’t show involved in PD susceptibility . A total of 109 parkinsonism patients significant differences between PD patients and healthy individuals were independently ascertained, of whom 62 presented late-onset, both in common sample of patients and controls (χ2=0.58; P=0.74) idiopathic PD . Genealogical research showed that 45 index cases and in ethnically differing groups . After dividing PD patients into with idiopathic PD were linked to a common ancestor, indicating groups, taking into consideration the disease forms, we revealed that familiar clustering among the patients . This strong familial clustering genotype L/H was the genetic marker of decreased risk in patients was highly significant (p=0 .005) when compared to random controls with akinetico-rigid-trembling form of PD (χ2=3.81; P=0.05; OR=0.59; from the same population . We performed a genome wide scan using CI=0 .34-1 .00), whereas L/L genotype was the genetic marker of 382 polymorphic markers in 44 distantly related PD patients plus 112 the increased risk for patients with akinetico-trembling-rigid form unaffected first-degree relatives and spouses. (χ2=5.23; P<0.05; OR=5.30; CI=1.20-22.20). After dividing patients Our genome wide association analysis (DISLAMB) revealed evidence of into groups, based on the disease manifestation, we detected that L/L association at a nominal p-value <0 .01 for markers D2S2333, D4S405, genotype was a risk factor in patient with the disease onset from 40 D9S158, D13S153 . Other regions on chromosomes 3p, 4q, 14q, 17p till 60 years old (χ2=5.23; P<0.05; OR=2.59; CI=1.12-5.96), while L/ and 17q were found at a significance level of p<0.05. In a follow-up H genotype was the genetic marker of the decreased risk marker for study we investigated all the positive regions using a denser marker the same group (χ2=4.12; P<0.05; OR=0.56; CI=0.32-0.98). MTHFR set and a larger sample (total of 630 individuals including all late-onset C677T polymorphism revealed no statistically significant differences PD patients) . The strongest evidence for association remained for between common sample of patients and controls as well as in the 9q and 14q region. A significant association was found for marker subdivided group of patients taking into account their ethnic origin, D9S1838 (OR=2 .0, 95% CI 1 .1-3 .5, p=0 .014), D9S312 (OR=2 .0 95% PD forms, disease manifestation . So, our results didn’t support the CI 1 .0-4 .2, p=0 .047) and D14S65 (OR=3 .2, 95% CI 1 .7-6 .1, p<0 .001), hypothesis of pathogenic role of homocysteine in Parkinson’s disease D14S265 (OR=2 .2, 95% CI 1 .2-3 .9, p=0 .006) . Moreover, a common development . haplotype with excess of sharing among late-onset PD cases was observed on both regions . Our results suggest the existence of two P1016. screening for DJ-1 mutations in early onset Parkinson’s loci influencing PD susceptibility on chromosome 9q and 14q. disease (PD) P. Tarantino, F. Annesi, F. E. Rocca, I. C. Cirò Candiano, S. Carrideo, D. Civi- P1018. screening for PiNK1 mutations in patients with early- and telli, E. V. De Marco, G. Provenzano, M. Salsone, G. Annesi; late-onset Parkinson’s disease Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone I. C. Cirò Candiano, F. E. Rocca, P. Tarantino, F. Annesi, S. Carrideo, D. Civi- (Cosenza), Italy. telli, E. V. De Marco, G. Provenzano, M. Salsone, G. Annesi; Mutations in DJ-1 gene cause an autosomal recessive juvenile onset Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy. form of PD . In this study we analysed the DJ-1 gene in 40 sporadic Mutations in the PTEN-induced kinase (PINK1) gene located within patients with early onset PD (≤45 years) and 100 appropriate controls, the PARK6 locus on chromosome 1p35-p36 were recently identified in originated from Southern Italy . These patients were negative for Parkin patients with recessive early-onset Parkinson’s disease . In this study, and PINK1 mutations . we performed a mutational analysis of PINK1 in 12 families, 4 with DNA was extracted from peripheral blood using standard protocols early-onset and 8 with late-onset parkinsonism, and in 23 sporadic and each exon was amplified and sequenced. Absolute quantification patients with early-onset (age of onset ≤ 45 years of age) Parkinson’s was performed by real time PCR 7900 HT-SDS, using TaqMan probes disease . The patients originated from Southern Italy . Mutations in for exons 2,3 and 7 . For exons 1,4,5 and 6 we set up a Sybr Green parkin and DJ-1 were excluded previously in all patients . assay . DNA was extracted from peripheral blood according to standard In a patient we detected an heterozygous nucleotide change (C→G) in protocols . The 8 exons of the gene with their exon-intron boundaries intron 1 (nucleotide 10703, ref . AL034417) and a single heterozygous were amplified using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Obtained insertion mutation (IVS4+3insA) in intron 4 splice site . These novel fragments were sequenced on ABI3100 automated DNA sequencer variants were not found in 100 control subjects . In the same patient (Perkin Elmer- Applied Biosystems) . genomic rearrangements were excluded by absolute quantification in A novel homozygous deletion (889delG) was detected in the affected real time PCR . members of a consanguineous family with early-onset parkinsonism The relevant effect of DJ-1 is its putative role in neuroprotection . and was absent in 100 normal chromosomes. We also identified Cells lacking DJ-1 have been shown to be more sensitive to cellular several exonic and intronic polymorphic variants, most of whom stressors . already described . The IVS4+3insA mutation lies in a conserved sequence of the invariant Sequence analysis of the PINK1 gene led to the identification of a AG splice acceptor site of intron 4 . We hypothesized that this variant homozygous deletion in exon 4 in two sibs from a consanguineous could have consequences on DJ-1 RNA, leading to an aberrant family with early-onset parkinsonism . The deletion produces a transcript . Moreover, the detected intronic change is potentially premature stop codon and a protein lacking in most of the kinase functional because it is localized 159 bp after the transcriptional catalytic domain . The screening of the remaining patients revealed activation site and approximately 42 bp downstream of an SP1 binding presence of several polymorphic variants. These findings confirm site . Synergic action of both heterozygous variants could account for that recessive mutations in PINK1 cause early-onset parkinsonism, clinical features of the examined patient . although PARK6 is not a common locus for PD in our population . P1017. Evidence for novel loci for late-onset Parkinson‘s disease P1019. Association of glutathione-s-transferase genes in a genetic isolate from the Netherlands polymorphisms with placental insufficiency A. M. Bertoli-Avella1,2, M. C. J. Dekker2, Y. S. Aulchenko2, J. J. Houwing-Du- T. Ivashchenko, O. Bespalova, O. Tarasenko, O. Malisheva, V. Baranov; istermaat3, E. Simons2, L. Testers2, L. M. Pardo2, T. A. M. Rademaker2, P. J. L. Ott’s institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. M. Snijders2, J. C. van Swieten4, V. Bonifati1,5, P. Heutink6, C. M. van Duijn2, B. Placental insufficiency (PLI) is a key problem of modern obstetrics. Its A. Oostra1,2; etiology is variable and mostly unclear . Interactions between noxious 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The environmental factors and unfavorable genetic background are Netherlands, 2Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, suspected to play a decisive role in PLI origin . Personal susceptibility to The Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical adverse effects of environmental factors, including chemical exposure, Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical mainly depends on individual peculiarities of genetic polymorphism . Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 5Department of Neurology, “La Sapienza” Glutathione-S-transferase genes are responsible for xenobiotics conjugating enzymes of Phase II detoxification system and have Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  been implicated as risk factors for PLI . The genetic polymorphisms P1022. Polymorphisms in the Endothelial cell protein c receptor of three genes GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTT1 were studied by PCR/ (EPcR) gene as potential risk factors for pregnancy loss in the RFLP analysis in placentas with and without PLI . The frequency of israeli population GSTM1 0/0 genotype in placentas with intrauterine growth restriction D. Bercovich1,2, D. Levi1, G. Sarig3, C. Shochat1, S. Korem1, G. Tennenbaum3, (IUGR) was significantly higher if compared with this one in the control B. Brenner3,4; group (61 .6 % and 35 .3 % respectively, p<0 .05) . The frequency of D/-- 1Migal - Galilee Bio-Technology Center, Kiryat-Shmona, Israel, 2Tel Hai Aca- genotype (D= B or C alleles) of the GSTP1 gene was 3 times higher in demic College, Galilee, Israel, 3Thrombosis and Hemostasis Unit, Rambam group with IUGR, than in group without PLI (p<0 .01) . It was shown that Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 4Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion smoking in family in a combination of functionally weakened genotype Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. of GSTP1 gene in placenta could be a risk factor of developing IUGR . The endothelial cell protein C receptor (EPCR) and its soluble form Concordance of GSTT1 0/0, GSTT1 + and GSTP1 D/-- genotypes was (sEPCR) play a role in venous thromboembolism . To identify new found in 31% in group with IUGR in comparison with controls (8 .7%) thrombophilic risk factors of unexplained pregnancy loss (PL), we (OR 4 .6, CI: 1 .16-18 .1) . Thus the polymorphism of glutathione-S- studied the EPCR coding gene sequences, known single nucleotide transferase genes might be a risk factor of developing IUGR . polymorphisms (SNPs) and sEPCR levels in women with PL . Three SNPs in the EPCR gene were evaluated in 249 Israeli women with PL P1020. Association of some vascular genetic markers with and 254 women without pregnancy complications . The C allele of SNP preeclampsia 1651 C>G in the 5’ untranslated region (5’UTR) was more common I. A. Zainullin1,2, V. A. Kulavsky2, A. G. Zainullina1, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; in women with PL compared with controls (51% vs . 38%, OR=1 .72, 1Institute of Biochemistry & Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State P=0 .0003) . Genotype 1651 CC was more frequently observed in Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. women with PL compared with controls only among Arabs (41% vs . Preeclampsia (PE) is a hypertensive disorder specific to pregnancy 20%, OR=2 .74, P=0 .02) but not in Jews (P=0 .1) . Genotype 7014 CG and is a major cause of maternal and neonatal death and morbidity (at the 3’UTR) was more common in controls than in women with PL worldwide . (52% vs . 42%, P=0 .02) in both ethnicities, and genotype 7014 GG The methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), endothelial nitric prevailed in Arab PL women compared with controls (53% vs . 35%, oxide synthase (eNOS) and tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) genes OR=2 .08, P=0 .02) . Haplotypes C-A-G and C-A-C (SNPs: 1653, 6936 may also play a role in the pathogenesis of PE . These loci are located & 7014 respectively) were more frequent in the PL group (OR=1 .95, on different chromosomes and encode products involved into various P=0 .005 and OR=1 .96, P=0 .022, respectively) . Genotypes 6936 AG metabolic pathways leading to PE. The specific genes involved may and 1651 GC were associated with high levels of sEPCR both in depend, at least in part, on the characteristics of the population being women with PL and in controls, however, no differences were found in studied (ethnicity, severity of the disease, maternal age, or gestational prevalence of these genotypes and plasmatic sEPCR levels between age at onset) . PL and controls . We studied the eNOS VNTR polymorphism in 4 intron, TPA Alu repeat I/ Conclusion: Genotypes 1651 CC, 7014 CG and GG in the EPCR gene D polymorphism in 8 intron and MTHFR C677T polymorphism in women may serve as new thrombophilic risk factors of PL in certain ethnic with PE from Bashkortostan (Russia) . populations . DNA from 132 preeclamptic pregnant women and 172 healthy control pregnant women were genotyped for polymorphisms using PCR P1023. the human X chromosome in the etiology of Premature technique and subsequent enzyme digestion .The frequency distributions Ovarian Failure (POF) of the genotypes of these three polymorphic marker loci of genes were S. Bione1,2, F. Rizzolio1, C. Sala1, V. Causarano1, S. Alboresi1, M. Goegan1, R. similar in the case and control groups . We found no differences in the Ricotti2, A. Marozzi3, O. Zuffardi4, F. Torricelli5, D. Toniolo1; prevalence of genetic risk factors with PE compared with controls . These 1DIBIT San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 2Institute of Molecular polymorphisms are unlikely to be risk factors for PE in our sample . Genetics-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 3Dept of Biology and Medical Sciences-University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4Dept. of Pathology and Medical Genetics, University P1021. Genetic polymorphism of the HLA-G gene in severe of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 5Cytogenetics and Genetics Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera preeclampsia Careggi, Firenze, Italy. G. S. Demin1,2, T. E. Ivashchenko1, E. V. Mozgovaia1, V. S. Baranov1; Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is a disorder characterized by lack 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, of ovulation and elevated gonadotropin level before 40 years of age . 2Saint-Petersburg State University, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation. POF has a frequency of about 1% among females and has become a Preeclampsia is a multifactorial disease of pregnancy . The large number relevant cause of female infertility . A genetic component of the disorder of epidemiologic studies supports its heritable nature . Immunological is demonstrated by numerous familial cases and by the frequent maladaptation theory is one of the leading hypotheses of preeclampsia observation of X chromosome rearrangements that led to the definition origin . According to it the maternal immune system does not adequately of a POF critical region in Xq . adapt to the semi-allogenic fetus . Polymorphism in the 3’-UTR of the Characterization of the POF critical region by analysis of a large panel HLA-G gene has been found to be associated with differences in HLA- of X chromosome rearrangements showed that most of the breakpoints G expression and it might be involved in preeclampsia pathogenesis . mapped to a 16 Mb gene poor region corresponding to Xq21 . In this The patients with severe preeclampsia (n=47), women without any region only 3 genes resulted interrupted by the POF associated gynecologic complications and background disorders (controls, n=46) breakpoints but their role in the pathogenesis remains unclear as and unrelated individuals from North-West region of Russia (population, extensive mutation analysis on a cohort of italian POF patients failed to n=109) were included in this study . A -14bp/+14bp polymorphism in 3’- demonstrate any causative variants . Recent results from association UTR region of the HLA-G gene was studied by PCR assay . studies suggested however that one of these genes may contribute to The distribution of HLA-G genotypes was in accordance with the POF as a susceptibility factor . Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (p>0 .05) . Accordingly, expression analysis of genes surrounding X;autosome Although the frequency of +14/+14 genotype was 2-fold higher in balanced translocation breakpoints in Xq did not reveal ovary-specific patients (20 .9%) compared to the control group (10 .9%), the difference genes while analysis of the autosomal regions in all instances showed was not statistically significant (p>0.05). However, the frequency genes with specific expression in mouse ovaries, thus making them of +14/+14 genotype of the HLA-G gene was significantly higher candidate genes for POF . Investigation of the effect of the breakpoints (28 .6%, p<0 .05) in patients with pure form of severe preeclampsia on chromatin organization of X chromosome and autosomal regions, (without background disorders, n=28) and controls .In conclusion we showed specific alterations of chromatin modifications only at the should point out that despite of rather small samples, the carriers of promoters of autosomal genes translocated to the X and indicated a +14/+14 genotype of the HLA-G gene have significantly higher risk role of the critical region on ovarian gene expression . of preeclampsia as compared to women, with one or two -14 alleles . Thus there is already substantial evidence supporting a role for HLA-G polymorphism in preeclampsia .Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  P1024. the analysis of association of polymorphisms in HLA- 1Paris 5 Descartes University, Rheumatology A Department, Cochin hospital, c, HcR and mtHFR genes with development of psoriasis in AP-HP, Paris, France, 2INSERM U383, Necker hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, Bashkortostan 3Paris 7 University, Rheumatology Department, Bichat hospital, AP-HP, Paris, E. S. Galimova1, V. L. Akhmetova1, O. M. Kapulyar2, F. K. Kamilov2, E. K. Khus- France, 4Paris 5 Descartes University, Internal Medicine Department, Cochin nutdinova1; hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 5GenHotel-EA3886, Evry-Paris 7 University, 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Scientific Center of RAS, Ufa, Evry-Genopole, France, 6Fédération de Rhumatologie – Centre Viggo Peters- Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federa- en, Lariboisière hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France. tion. The minor allele of the R620W missense single nucleotide polymorphism Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disorder of unknown etiology (SNP) (rs2476601) in the PTPN22 (Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase likely involves multiple genetic and environmental factors, prevalent Non-Receptor 22) gene has been reported to be associated with in many populations at frequencies ranging from 1 to 3% . Although many autoimmune diseases, such as type 1 diabetes, systemic linkage evidence has been identified at several loci of the human lupus erythematous, rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, genome, PSORS1 on chromosome 6p21 .3 was reported as a major autoimmune thyroiditis or vitiligo . Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is regarded locus for psoriasis susceptibility . PSORS1 include the candidate as a tissue connective disease with autoimmune abnormalities . genes HCR (C6orf18), CDSN, PSORS1C1, PSORS1C2 and POU5F1 OBJECTIVE : The aim of our study was to test for association the (OTF3) . At the PSORS1 locus, the HLA-Cw*0602 allele is the most PTPN22*620W allele with SSc in a French Caucasian cohort . susceptible allele for psoriasis in various populations . MATERIAL AND METHODS : A case-control study with 121 SSc We have investigated the allele HLA-Cw*0602 of the HLA-C gene, two patients and 103 controls was conducted . Patients and controls were HCR SNPs (C325T, C477T) and C677T of MTHFR gene for disease genotyped for the PTPN22*R620W SNP . association in 237 patients with psoriasis and 237 control subjects RESULTS : No association was found between PTPN22*620W allele from Bashkortostan . and SSc (7% vs 9 .2%, P = 0 .39) . The frequency of the genotypes The Cw*0602 allele was associated significantly with psoriasis (OR = carrying at least one 620W allele was similar in both groups (13% vs 3.34; 95% CI 2.45-4.56, p = 0.0005). The HCR-325*T allele frequency 17%, P = 0 .38) . The PTPN22*620W+ genotype was not associated was significantly different between the patients with psoriasis and the with autoantibody patterns . control subjects (45.6% and 24.1%, respectively, OR = 2.64; 95% CONCLUSION : PTPN22*R620W polymorphism is not a susceptibility CI 1 .98-3 .52, p = 0 .0005) . The frequency of the HCR-477*T allele in genetic factor of the SSc in this French Caucasian cohort . subjects with psoriasis and controls was 7 .8% and 1 .2%, respectively (OR = 0.62; 95% CI 0.39-0.97, p = 0.039). The analysis of C677T of P1027. Protein tyrosine Phosphatase (PTPN) Gene in a large the MTHFR gene didn’t confirm the association of it with psoriasis: tunisian Family affected with Autoimmune thyroid Diseases the MTHFR-677*T allele occurred with equal frequency 25% in the G. Chabchoub1, A. Maalej1, E. Glikmans2, A. Rebai3, M. Mnif4, N. Bougacha1, patients with psoriasis and the control group . M. Abid4, F. Cornelis5, H. Ayadi1; The results suggested that the C325T, C477T polymorphisms in HCR 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, gene and the Cw*0602 allele of the HLA-C gene were associated with TUNISIE., Sfax, Tunisia, 2Genhotel Laboratoire de Recherche Européen pour la development of psoriasis in Bashkortostan . Polyarthrite Rhumatoïde, Université d’Evry-Val d’Essonne, ECRAF-Université Paris 7- , 2 rue Gaston Crémieux, CP 5727 91057, Evry, FRANCE., GENHO- P1025. Whole genome association study for psoriasis using the TEL, France, 3Unité de Bioinformatique, Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Quebec LD map. BP. 3038 Sfax. TUNISIE, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Service d’endocrinologie, CHU Hédi B. Paquin, J. Raelson, P. van Eerdewegh, P. Croteau, Q. Nguyen Huu, R. Chaker de Sfax. TUNISIE, Sfax, Tunisia, 5Genhotel Laboratoire de Recherche Little, J. Segal, B. Stojkovic, H. Fournier, R. Allard, V. Perepetchai, T. V. Nguy- Européen pour la Polyarthrite Rhumatoïde, Université d’Evry-Val d’Essonne, en, N. Laplante, J. M. Vidal, J. Hooper, T. Keith, A. Belouchi; ECRAF-Université Paris 7- , 2 rue Gaston Crémieux, CP 5727 91057, Evry, Genizon Biosciences, St-Laurent, PQ, Canada. FRANCE., EVRY, France. We previously performed a whole genome association study (WGAS) The PTPN22 (protein tyrosine phosphatase N22) gene encodes the for Crohn’s disease using 382 individually genotyped trios from the lymphoid-specific phosphatase which plays a key role as a negative Quebec Founder Population (QFP) and 165,000 SNPs distributed regulator of T-cell activation through its interaction with the negative evenly across the genome at a density of ~1 marker per 17 kb . regulatory kinase C-terminal Scr tyrosine kinase (Csk) . We analysed Utilizing control chromosomes from this study, we determined levels a functional single nucleotide polymorphism in PTPN22 gene (rs of linkage disequilibrium (LD) across the genome and used this 2476601) and its implication in autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) . information to construct the Quebec LD map (QLDM) . The QLDM Our study population concerned a large Tunisian family (Akr family) contains 81,000 markers, with density adjusted according to variation composed of 10 generations of more than 400 members including 76 of LD, resulting in marker spacing of 1 SNP per 10 to 40 kb . This patients affected with AITDs and subdivided into 40 patients affected map was used to perform a WGAS for psoriasis using 500 trios from with graves’ disease (GD), 13 patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (TH) the QFP . We also performed genome-wide conditional analyses and 23 patients with Atrophic thyroïditis . Genotyping of the PTPN22 using the risk and protective haplotypes from the well established gene 1858 C/T polymorphism was performed by PCR-RFLP technique . PSORS1 locus . Regions epistatic to or in genetic heterogeneity with Statistical analysis was performed by Family-Based Association Test PSORS1 were thereby identified. Both the WGAS and the conditional (FBAT). Our analysis gives a significant association with the C allele analyses, identified multiple regions with P-values that met the criteria under the additive model (χ²=4.97; p=0 .025) . Stratifying patients of genome-wide significance. The top candidate regions were further reveals more significant association of C allele in subgroup of patients refined by fine mapping. Following fine-mapping, on average the top who carried at least one HLA-DR11 susceptibility allele (χ²=9.30; 21 regions with p values < 10-5 (including 8 regions from conditional p=0 .002) . These results support the involvement of PTPN22 gene in analyses) spanned approximately 300 kb and contained ~3 genes the genetic susceptibility to AITDs in the studied families . (excluding regions from PSORS1 locus) . Single-gene resolution was obtained for multiple regions . The associated genes are currently P1028. QtL analysis in campora population : a new locus for being analyzed in silico for the construction of GeneMaps which will Bmi on chromosome 1 reveal the underlying genetic etiology of the disease . In addition to our M. Ciullo1, C. Bourgain2, V. Colonna1, C. Bellenguez2, T. Nutile1, M. Astore1, A. psoriasis study we are also conducting gene discovery programs in Calabria1, M. G. Persico1; more than 20 common diseases . 1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati-Traverso, Naples, Italy, 2IN- SERM U535, Villejuif, France. P1026. Lack of association between the auto-immunity Campora is a geographically isolated village of Cilento, South Italy, with susceptibility allele PtPN22 1858t/620W and systemic sclerosis a few founders and inbreeding . Recently, Campora population allowed in the French population. us to identify a new locus strongly linked to hypertension, encouraging J. Wipff1,2, Y. Allanore1,2, A. Kahan1, O. Meyer3, L. Mouthon4, L. Guillevin4, C. the study of this population for the identification of loci involved in other Pierlot5, E. Glikmans5, T. Bardin6,5, C. Boileau2, F. Cornélis5, P. Dieudé3,5; complex traits . A collection of several quantitative traits related to the cardiovascular system have been measured in this population . The Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  present study is the first linkage analysis of a quantitative trait in this polymorphism . The auditory verbal learning test was used to assess population . different components of memory (immediate recall, learning, delayed Body-mass index (BMI), an obesity-related trait and a risk factor for recall, recognition) . The Stroop test (card I, II, III) and Trail Making Test cardiovascular diseases, was calculated for 394 adult individuals (TMT) were used to examine executive function . Regression analysis in the population . These individuals, all related through a 2947- was performed to study the effect of the AGT M235T polymorphism on member pedigree spanning 15 generations, were genotyped for the cognitive tests with adjustment for age, sex, inbreeding, education 1122 microsatellites on the genome (average marker distance: 3 .6 and intelligence. We also evaluated whether hypertension modified cM, heterozygosity 0 .70) . To perform the linkage analysis, we broke the effect of M235T polymorphism . the very complex pedigree into 92 families including 366 phenotyped The 235T allele, which has been related to high angiotensin II levels individuals, with an optimized use of the maximum partitioning approach in plasma in previous studies, was significantly associated with to pedigree breaking proposed by Falchi and collaborators (2004) . reduced selective attention, as measured by the Stroop test (card I; With the regression-based linkage statistic proposed by Sham and p value=0.03, card II; p value=0.06), in the hypertension group only. collaborators (2002), we detect a strong linkage on chromosome 1 This finding might be explained by an increased risk of cardiovascular (position 176 .38, LOD= 4 .47), robust to the various trait transformations complications in the brain of those with hypertension . In contrast, the considered . The linkage is also detected with a variance component 235T allele was associated with a better performance in recognition analysis . Again, the result is robust to trait transformation . This study (p value = 0 .07), in line with recent studies showing that higher levels suggests that linkage study of sub-pedigrees carefully chosen in the of angiotensin II increase performance in memory-related tasks . This Campora population is a powerful strategy to detect new QTL . effect was not modified by hypertension. Thus, genes encoding RAS Falchi et al (2004) Am J Hum Genet 75:1015 components might affect specific cognitive domains through different Sham et al (2002) Am J Hum Genet 71:238 physiological pathways . P1029. A Quantitative trait Locus for Human HDL cholesterol on P1031. A novel method for analysis of 5-methylcytosine in DNA chromosome 18p. by capillary electrophoresis mobility shift S. Sammalisto1, P. Almgren2, H. Parikh2, T. Hiekkalinna1,3, E. Suviolahti1, K. A. E. Karger, V. L. Boyd, K. I. Moody, K. J. Livak, G. Zon, J. W. Burns; Sood1, A. Metzidis1, P. Pajukanta4, H. Lilja1, A. Soro-Paavonen5, T. Tuomi5,6, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. M. Orho-Melander2, M. Sjögren2, M. Taskinen5, L. Peltonen1,4, M. Perola1, L. A simple and completely novel method will be presented for capillary Groop2; electrophoretic resolution of amplicons derived from methylated and 1Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, non-methylated gDNA following bisulfite conversion. Growing interest Finland, 2Department of Endocrinology, Wallenberg Laboratory, University Hos- in the role of methylation of genomic DNA in epigenetics is evidenced pital MAS, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden, 3Finnish Genome Center, Univer- by the increasing number of publications and awarded grants each sity of Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School year . There are a variety of methods available for methylation of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, CA, United States, analyses, most requiring primers and/or probes specific to either the 5Department of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, fully methylated or fully non-methylated sequence, following bisulfite 6Folkhalsan Genetic Institute, Folkhalsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland. conversion. We now report, for the first time, our discovery of a Dyslipidemia defined as high total cholesterol, low HDL cholesterol and/ straightforward analysis of amplicons, following bisulfite-conversion of or elevated triglyceride levels represents one of the main risk factors gDNA, in samples of mixed methylation states . Using a single primer for cardiovascular disease . Although many single-gene mutations have pair for simultaneous amplification of bisulfite-converted methylated been described for rare disorders of lipid metabolism the genetics of and unmethylated gDNA, we found the amplicons can be separated dyslipidemias in the general population remains elusive . Many genome- during denaturating gel electrophoresis. The separation efficiency wide screens have been performed in attempt to localize the genomic is based on the number of T vs . C (or G vs . A) differences in the regions harboring these genes but success has been limited thus far unmethylated and methylated sample, and is predictable based on the possibly caused by limited statistical power due to limited sample nucleotide composition of the amplicons . The amplicons are generated size . To overcome this limitation we combined the primary genotype using standard PCR protocols, and are directly analyzed after PCR on data from four Finnish genome-wide screens ascertained for type 2 an ABI PRISM® 3100 Genetic Analyzer . The minimal number of steps, diabetes, familial combined hyperlipidemia and low HDL cholesterol and oligonucleotide primer and probe syntheses that are required for and performed variance-components linkage analysis implemented in this methylation analysis scheme simplifies the workflow process. The MERLIN on the pooled dataset of 1580 individuals from 291 families same amplicon sample is suitable for additional analyses, such as for lipid traits, fasting serum total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol and bisulfite sequencing, single-base extension, or additional CE analyses. triglycerides . Heritability estimates in our sample were 33% for total We will also present our PCR conditions for robust generation of cholesterol, 49% for HDL cholesterol and 43 % triglycerides using amplicons from bisulfite-converted gDNA. age, sex, BMI, affection status, centre as well as fasting glucose and insulin values as covariates . We observed suggestive multipoint P1032. P53 variants and recurrent spontaneous abortions linkage between total cholesterol and chromosome 11q (LOD 2 .04) as M. Kaare1, J. N. Painter1, V. Ulander2, R. Kaaja2, K. Aittomäki1,3; well as between HDL-C and 18p (LOD 2 .92) . We used gene-dropping 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Obstetrics simulations to determine the empirical significance of our findings. and Gynecology, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki, According to our 100 simulated genome-wide screens only the HDL Finland. cholesterol locus on chromosome 18p remained significant with an Recent studies indicate that p53 may regulate the response of empirical p-value of p = 0 .01 (95% CI 0-0 .05) . This region contains embryonic cells to diverse environmental stresses . Moreover, it several functional candidate genes for HDL cholesterol and warrants appears that maintaining a fine balance of p53 protein levels within further investigation . embryonic cells is important for optimal development as both over- and underexpression can lead to different malformations or embryonic P1030. the role of the m235t polymorphism of the lethality . Because altered levels and activity of the p53 protein may be angiotensinogen gene on cognitive functions. caused by mutations or polymorphisms in both the coding and non- L. M. Pardo, I. de Koning, K. Sleegers, M. Yazdanpanah, P. Sanchez, J. van coding regions of the gene we aimed to investigate if variations in p53 Swieten, Y. S. Aulchenko, B. Oostra, C. M. van Duijn; are associated with susceptibility for recurrent spontaneous abortion Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (RSA) . We screened 86 Finnish patients (40 couples and 6 women) with There is evidence that the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) modulates unexplained RSA and 96 controls using DHPLC and sequencing . The cognitive function, with the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene six intronic and three exonic variations detected have been previously (ACE), being the most extensively studied . We analyzed association reported and are predicted to be common polymorphisms . When of the angiotensinogen gene (AGT) with cognition in a large family- comparing the genotypes and allele frequencies of these variations based cohort from a young genetically isolated population from between patients and controls, the C11992A polymorphism in intron the Netherlands . Participants were genotyped for the AGT M235T 3, located 29 bp upstream of exon 4, was shown to be significantly Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 6 more frequent in the patients than in the controls . Women carrying the P1035. New approach for multifactorial disease candidate gene rarer A allele have a more than two-fold increased risk of miscarriage studies based on re-sequencing (p=0 .0193, OR 2 .333, CI 1 .1305-4 .816), indicating that the A allele S. Garnier1, J. Weissfuss2, G. Gyapay3, L. Michou1,4, C. Pierlot1, E. Petit- is associated with RSA . Further studies are, however, necessary to Teixeira1, A. Decelier1, E. Glikmans1, C. Cruaud3, E. Pateau3, I. Lemaire1,5, R. define whether this polymorphism has functional consequences. If the Manuel1,6, B. Cossoux1,6, S. Lasbleiz1,4, T. Bardin1,4, J. Weissenbach3, B. Prum7, variation has a phenotypic effect, the C11992A variation could be one F. Cornélis1,4; of the of genetic factors increasing susceptibility to RSA . 1GenHotel-EA3886, EVRY, France, 2Center for biotechnology and Biomedicine Universitaet Leipzig Institute for clinical Immunology and transfusion Medicine, P1033. A novel autosomal dominant restless legs syndrome Leipzig, Germany, 3Genoscope - Centre National de Séquençage, EVRY, locus maps to chromosome 20p13 France, 4Unité de Génétique Clinique Adulte, Hôpital Lariboisière-AP-HP, Paris, A. Levchenko1, S. Provost2, J. Montplaisir3, L. Xiong1, J. St-Onge1, P. Thibo- France, 5Service de Biologie, Centre Hospitalier Sud Francilien, Corbeil-Es- deau1, J. Rivière1, A. Desautels4, G. Turecki4, M. Dubé2,5, G. A. Rouleau1,5; sonnes, France, 6CERMA, Evry, France, 7Laboratoire Statistique et Génome, 1Laboratoire d’étude des maladies du cerveau, Centre de recherche du CHUM, EVRY, France. Hôpital Notre-Dame, Montréal, PQ, Canada, 2Centre de recherche, Institut de Current single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) databases focus cardiologie de Montréal, Montréal, PQ, Canada, 3Centre d’étude du sommeil et on alleles that are frequent (>5%) in the general population . In des rythmes biologiques, Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de Montréal, Montréal, PQ, multifactorial diseases, not all susceptibility alleles are expected to Canada, 4Research Center, Douglas Hospital, Verdun, PQ, Canada, 5Départe- be frequent, as shown by CARD15-NOD2 Crohnâ€™s disease allele ment de médecine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, PQ, Canada. frequencies which are all < 4% in most Caucasian populations . Prior Objective: Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS) is a sensory-motor disorder to candidate gene studies, re-sequencing of patients DNA, for which characterized by a circadian pattern with worsening at night . It affects susceptibility allele frequencies are increased, would therefore be mostly the legs and it is described by the patient as an urge to move the useful to identify putative susceptibility SNP that might be missing in legs usually associated with unpleasant sensations, but once movement the current databases . In the course of a candidate gene investigation is initiated, the urge to move and the paresthesia fade substantially . of the multifactorial disease rheumatoid arthritis (RA), our aim was to It affects up to 10% of the general population, and over 60% of the test patient re-sequencing for the identification of new SNPs. diagnosed RLS cases are familial . The objective of the present study For 20 RA candidate genes, we re-sequenced DNA from 24 RA French was to search for genetic factors causing this disorder in the French- Caucasian patients . Exons, intronic junctions and regulatory elements Canadian (FC) population . methods: We performed a 10 cM genome- were sequenced in both directions. SNP identification was performed wide scan using a large FC pedigree . For the two-point parametric with an original bioinformatics tool combined to Polyphred software linkage analysis we used MLINK and for the multipoint parametric and only SNP observed consistently in both directions at least twice in linkage analysis we used SIMEWALK2 . Results: We detected an the sample were selected . autosomal dominant locus for RLS mapping to chromosome 20p13, The analysis of the 9600 sequences yielded 151 SNPs, out of which with a maximum multipoint LOD score of 3 .87 at marker D20S849 . 45 were absent in the public databases . In addition, from the remaining Haplotype analysis revealed a candidate gene interval, flanked by the 106 SNPs, 33 were listed in the databases without any frequency telomeric end of chromosome 20p (above marker D20S1155) and by a information . Altogether, re-sequencing provided useful information for 0 .56 cM interval between markers D20S849 and D20S835, that spans 78 SNPs (52 %) . 5 .2 Mb and contains 84 annotated genes, which are currently under At the current stage of public databases, re-sequencing of patients investigation . conclusions: This is the third reported autosomal- DNA for multifactorial disease candidate gene studies appears to be dominant locus for RLS and also the first autosomal-dominant RLS useful, providing new information for 52% of SNPâ€™s identified in locus in the FC population . The present study supports previous work this study . indicating that a fraction of familial RLS cases are caused by major genes acting in a dominant manner . P1036. Association study of PtPN22 gene with Rheumatoid Arthritis in the tunisian population P1034. Padi4_89*G/A, padi4_90*t/c and padi4_92*G/c sNPs in A. Maalej1, G. Chabchoub1, E. Glikmans2, F. Cornelis2, H. Ayadi1; the gene of the peptidylarginine deiminase citrullinating enzyme 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, type 4 (PADi4) are not associated with rheumatoid arthritis in TUNISIE., Sfax, Tunisia, 2Genhotel Laboratoire de Recherche Européen pour Hungarian patients la Polyarthrite Rhumatoïde, Université d’Evry-Val d’Essonne, ECRAF-Univer- B. Faragó1, G. Talián1, A. Maász1, L. Magyari1, K. Horvatovich1, B. Kovács1, V. sité Paris 7- , 2 rue Gaston Crémieux, CP 5727 91057, Evry, FRANCE, Evry, Cserép1, P. Kisfali1, C. Kiss2, B. Melegh1; France. 1University of Pécs, Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is the most common systemic autoimmune Pécs, Hungary, 2University of Pécs, Department of Immunology and Rheuma- disease affecting 1% of the adult population worldwide . Genetic tology, Pécs, Hungary. and environmental factors have been suggested to play a role in Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common disease with characteristic the development of RA . Besides the role of the lymphoid tyrosine autoimmune inflammatory hallmarks. A special feature is the presence phosphatase, encoded by the protein tyrosine phosphatase 22 of antibodies against anti-citrullinated peptides . The enzyme performing (PTPN22) gene, in the inhibiton of T cell activation, we analysed a citrullination is coded by the PADI4 (Genbank NM_012387) gene . single nucleotide polymorphism (rs 2476601) . Our study population Recent investigations on Japanese population (Suzuki et al, Nature concerned 103 Tunisians patients affected with RA and a control Gen, 2003;34:395) revealed genetic variations of the gene, which has group of 117 healthy individuals belonging to the same geographic been proved to be susceptibility factors to the disease . Since there has area . Genotyping of the PTPN22 gene 1858 C/T polymorphism was been no similar data available for Hungarians, we performed analysis performed by PCR-RFLP technique . Statistical analysis was performed using an available DNA pool collected from 200, well characterized using the χ2 (2X2) test and Fisher’s exact test . Our analysis showed no patients with RA and 193 apparently healthy age and sex matched statistically significant differences in the PTPN22 gene polymorphism controls . The DNA was analysed for three exonic SNPs of the PADI4 (R620W) genotypes or alleles distribution between RA patients and gene (namely, padi4_89*G/A, padi4_90*T/C and padi4_92*G/C SNPs; control individuals (p=0 .29 and p=0 .282) respectively . These results see Nature Gen, rs874881) using PCR/RFLP-methods . In our study, suggest that PTPN22 gene can exert a minor effect in the development the general distribution of the allelic variants in the healthy population of RA . significantly differed from the Japanese population and was similar to that found in the Western European study groups . In our population there was no statistically different accumulation in any of the above SNPs in the patients with RA . These results show that contrary to the Japanese RA patients these SNPs do not mean susceptibility to the development of the disease in the Hungarians .Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  P1037. tNFa, iFNA10, iFNA17, and iFN-gamma gene sNPs in the age of 15 - 74 and 423 control subjects (115 Russians, 168 Tatars sarcoidosis and 140 Bashkirs) were genotyped using PCR - RFLP technique . P. Makrythanasis1, M. Tzetis1, A. Papatheodorou1, P. Latsi2, A. Rapti3, I. Kana- Results: Allelic and genotypic frequencies of M-15 marker did not differ vakis1, M. Poulou1, E. Kanavakis1; (p>0 .05) between patients and control subjects in either ethnic group . 1Athens University, Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 21st Pulmonary Dept, A significant differences were observed in M-23 genotype (χ2=9.14; Athens University, Athens, Greece, 38th Pulmonary Dept, Sotiria Chest Disease p=0.007) and allele (χ2=9.19; p=0.003) frequencies between patients Hospital, Athens, Greece. and control in Tatar origin . The G72*T allele was more frequent in Tatar Sarcoidosis is a chronic granulomatous disease of unknown cause, patients compared with controls (χ2=8.62; p=0.004; df=1; OR=1.75; CI multifactorial etiology characterized by activation of T-lymphocytes and 95% 1 .20-2 .56) . macrophages . To identify genetic factors involved in the pathogenesis conclusions: Our findings suggest that the G72 polymorphisms may of sarcoidosis we investigated SNPs within 4 candidate genes involved be associated with schizophrenia; however, the effect is influenced by in type 1 immune process (TNFa: -1031T>C, -863C>A, -857C>T, - ethnicity . 308G>A, -238G>A; IFNA10: 60T>A; IFNA17: 551T>G; IFN-gamma: 874A>T and 875(CA)n repeats . Our case-control study included 89 P1039. Genetic analysis supports a primary abnormality in patients diagnosed according to international guidelines and 215 oligodendrocyte function in schizophrenia controls, both of Greek ethnic origin. The five TNFa SNPs were L. Georgieva1, J. Wilkinson1, N. Norton1, N. Bray1, L. Jones1, P. Holmans1, V. genotyped using the the NanoChip™ Molecular Biology Workstation Haroutunian2, J. D. Buxbaum2, G. Kirov1, M. Owen1, M. O’Donovan1; (Nanogen www .nanogen .com), the IFNA10 and IFNA17 SNPs using 1Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United King- PCR/RE digestion and the IFN-gamma using ARMS . The CA repeat dom, 2Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, number was determined using an automatic sequencer . All our NY, United States. results are in HW equilibrium . By comparing the genotypes and the Abnormal oligodendrocyte function and myelination have been frequencies of the alleles using chi-square and Fisher’s exact test implicated in schizophrenia by a diverse range of experimental no statistical significance was found. However using the PHASE 2.1 approaches including gene expression analysis, neuropathology, integrated permutation test program in order to get predictions about and neuroimaging but it unclear whether such abnormalities are of the haplotypes, statistical significance was found only for the TNFa primary aetiological relevance to schizophrenia pathogenesis . It is our gene haplotypes . aim to resolve these using genetic approaches . OLIG2 which maps to 21q22 .11 and encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor TNFa predicted haplotypes (PHASE 2 .1) that is critical for oligodendrocyte development and differentiation . Controls: N Sarcoidosis: Statistical Haplotypes Association analysis of olig2 revealed several associated SNPs (freq %) N (freq%) analysis associated with schizophrenia in a large UK case-control sample (n TCCGG 197(45 .5) 65(41 .1) individuals ~1,4000; minimum p = 0.0001). In human brain, OLIG2 expression was significantly correlated with that of CNP and erbB4, TCCAG 4(0 .9) 16(10 .1) two genes of relevance to oligodendrocyte function for which we TCTGG 109(25 .2) 42(26 .6) have previously reported modest evidence for association with CCCGA 0 5(3 .2) schizophrenia . We sought evidence for genetic interaction between P=0 .0019* OLIG2 and the genes showing evidence for correlated expression CCTGG 1(0 .2) 0 additional to any main effects . Interaction analysis provided suggested CACGG 77(17 .8) 29(18 .3) epistatic effects between OLIG2 and each of CNP and erbB4 even TCCAA 33(7 .6) 0 allowing for multiple testing . Our data provide strong support for the CCCGG 11(2 .5) 1(0 .63) hypothesis that oligodendrocyte function is relevant to schizophrenia pathogenesis . INFA10-IFNA17 haplotypes TG 30(8 .2) 16(8 .9) P1040. Association study in the 5q31-32 linkage region for TT 265(72 .4) 121(67 .9) schizophrenia using pooled DNA genotyping and family-based P=0 .15 controls AG 65(17 .8) 32(17 .9) I. Zaharieva1, L. Georgieva2, G. Kirov2, D. Toncheva1; AT 6(1 .8) 9(5 .1) 1Deparment of Medical Genetics, Sofia University, Bulgaria, 2Department of IFN-gamma (CA)n Psychological Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom. 11 3(0 .9) 1(0 .6) Schizophrenia (SZ) is a common, severe and disabling disorder that affects around 1% of the general population worldwide . Family, adoption 12 159(49 .4) 81(46 .5) and twin studies have shown conclusively that a genetic component 13 118(36 .5) 73(41 .9) plays an important role in its aetiology . Chromosome 5q31-32 region P=0 .661 14 29(9 .0) 11(6 .3) has been reported as one of the five most consistent linkage regions in the genome as shown from a recent SZ meta-analysis (Lewis et al, 15 12(3 .7) 8(4 .6) 2002) . The protocadherine genes localized within this region are also 16 1(0 .3) 0 considered to be candidate-genes in the aetiology of schizophrenia due to their role in establishing specific neuronal connections and P1038. Association study of sNPs in the gene G72 with communication . schizophrenia We wanted to establish whether the 5q31-32 chromosomal region A. G. Zainullina, D. A. Gaysina, E. K. Khusnutdinova; harbors genes relevant to the pathogenesis of SZ . We are currently Institute of Biochemistry & Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. saturating the ~30Mb region with microsatellite markers at ~100 kb Objective: The G72 (brain-expressed protein) gene was suggested intervals . We use a database of 27,039 microsatellites validated in a to interact with D-amino-acid oxidase and to exert an effect on the study from Japan on rheumatiod arthritis (Tamiya et al, 2005) . This regulation of D-serine, an agonist for the glycine-binding site of the ensured that nearly all microsatellites we genotype are polymorphic . N-methyl-D-aspartate - type glutamate receptor . Recently, the G72 So far we screened 42 informative microsatellite markers for gene was reported to be associated with schizophrenia in the French association with schizophrenia by genotyping pooled DNA from 297 Canadian and Russian populations (Chumakov et al, 2002) . In this parent-proband trios from Bulgarian origin . Each pooled DNA is study we addressed further the possible role of the G72 gene in the genotyped in triplicate . Our cut-off point for following-up pooling with risk of schizophrenia in population from Bashkortostan (Russia) . individual genotyping is p<0.1. This level of statistical significance has We investigated two SNPs (M-15 and M-23) in G72 gene . been found for seven of the markers, four of which are spanning the methods: DNA from 351 patients (131 Russians, 112 Tatars and 108 protocadherin gene clusters . Individual genotyping of positive markers Bashkirs) with schizophrenia (diagnosed as having ICD-10 (1994) at will be performed after the pooling part of the project .Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  P1041. Identification of an Na 1.1 sodium channel (scN1A) progress . V loss-of-function mutation associated with familial simple Febrile Supported FIRB-MIUR RBNE01XMP4 seizures (Fs) G. Annesi1, M. Mantegazza2, F. Annesi1, A. Gambardella1,3, R. Rusconi2, E. P1043. mutation screening of the SGCE gene in patients with Schiavon4, R. Restano Cassulini4, A. Labate1,3, S. Carrideo1, R. Chifari5, M. P. Obsessive-compulsive Disorder and/or tourette syndrome Canevini5, R. Canger5, S. Franceschetti2, E. Wanke4, A. Quattrone1,3; H. Katerberg1,2, D. Cath3, M. A. J. Tijssen4, E. M. J. Foncke4, Y. van de Leem- 1Insitute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone put5, J. A. den Boer2, P. Heutink1,6, F. Baas5,4; (Cosenza), Italy, 2Department of Neurophysiopathology, Istituto Neurologico 1Department of Human Genetics, Section Medical Genomics, VU University C.Besta, Milano, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Cat- Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of Biological Psy- anzaro, Italy, 4Department of Biotechnologies and Bioscences, University of chiatry, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Gronin- Milano Bicocca, Italy, 5Regional Centre of Epilepsy, San Paolo Hospital, Milano, gen, The Netherlands, 3Department of Psychiatry, VU University, Amsterdam, Italy. The Netherlands, 4Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Center, Am- FS affect 5-12% of infants and children up to 6 years of age . sterdam, The Netherlands, 5Department of Neurogenetics, Academic Medical Epidemiological studies show that FS are associated with subsequent Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 6Center for Neurogenomics and Cogni- afebrile and unprovoked seizures in about 7% of patients . Six loci are tive Research, VU University Medical Center and VU University, Amsterdam, responsible for autosomal dominant familial FS but no genes were The Netherlands. identified: they have been mapped at chromosome 8q13-q21 (FEB1), Mutations in the epsilon sarcoglycan gene (SGCE gene) are associated at 19q (FEB2), at 2q23-24 (FEB3), at 5q14-q15 (FEB4), at 6q22-24 with obsessive-compulsive behavior in some families with Myoclonus- (FEB5) and at 18p11 .2 (FEB6) . FEB5 has been described as a pure Dystonia (M-D) . Therefore, we screened the SGCE gene for mutations FS because most of the members had a long follow-up period and in patients with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) and/or Gilles the development of afebrile seizures was excluded, but pathogenic de la Tourette syndrome (GTS), a genetically related tic-disorder . mutations have not been identified. In the present study we reported We screened the coding region and flanking intronic regions of the a linkage analysis in a southern Italy family, including 23 members SGCE gene for mutations in 88 patients with OCD and/or GTS with a of whom 12 individuals expressed a homogeneous phenotype of positive family history for tics and/or obsessive-compulsive behavior simple FS . Lod score values were negative for FEB1, FEB2, FEB4, and 5 patients with non-familial OCD . No sequence variants were FEB5, FEB6 but showed strong linkage to the FEB3 locus . SCN1A found in the coding region of the SGCE gene and several common gene lies in this locus, but gene mutations causing simple FS have polymorphisms were present in the intronic regions of the SGCE gene . not been found . Flanking intron primers were used to sequence 26 However, we identified three new sequence variants in the 3’UTR of exons of the SCN1A gene . We found a M145T mutation in a well the SGCE gene that were not present in control chromosomes from conserved aminoacid in the first transmembrane segment of domain the general Dutch population . These variants are predicted to be within I, that cosgregated in all affected individuals . Functional studies in putative microRNA binding sites and could have a biological function . mammalian cells demonstrated that the mutation causes a 60% We are currently investigating additional family members in order to reduction of current density and a 10mV positive shift of the activation study co-segregation of these variants with the disease in order to curve . Thus, M145T is a loss of function mutant . These results shows decide if functional follow up studies are warranted . that monogenic FS should also be considered a channelopathy . Supported FIRB-MIUR RBNE01XMP4 P1044. DNA mutation screening of sLc12A3 gene in a set of patients from the czech Republic P1042. mutational analysis of scN2A gene in italian families with M. Urbanová1, J. Reiterová1, J. Štekrová1, R. Ryšavá2; Benign Familial Neonatal-infantile seizures (BFNis) 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Depart- E. Mannarino1,2, F. Annesi1, E. V. De Marco1, S. Carrideo1, F. E. Rocca1, G. ment of Nephrology, General Hospital of 1st Medical Faculty, Prague 2, Czech Provenzano1, P. Tarantino1, M. Salsone1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, D. Civitelli1, G. Republic. Tortorella3, A. Gambardella1,4, G. Annesi1; For almost three years we have been collecting patients from the 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone Czech Republic suffering from either Gitelman or Bartter syndrome (Cosenza), Italy, 2Division of Infantile Neuropsychiatry, Department of Medical - disorders characterized by hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis with and Surgical Pediatrics, University Hospital of Messina,, Messina, Italy, 3Divi- mainly autosomal recessive inheritance . The aim of our study was the sion of Infantile Neuropsychiatry, Department of Medical and Surgical Pedi- characterization of molecular defects; to find causal mutation within atrics, University Hospital of Messina, Messina, Italy, 4Institute of Neurology, selected genes and to look for connection between mutation and University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. severity of disease . Two benign autosomal dominant epilepsy syndromes are well We are presenting here results of mutation screening of SLC12A3 recognized in the first year of life. Benign familial neonatal seizures gene - a causative locus for development of renal defect leading to (BFNS) starts around day 3 and is caused by defects in potassium Gitelman syndrome manifestation . channel genes KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 in many families . Benign familial Among a set of 32 patients, 19 were directly diagnosed as having infantile seizures (BFIS) begins around 6 months of age but no genes Gitelman syndrome for specific levels of ions in blood and urine. 16 have been definitively identified. Linkage to chromosome 19 and 16 patients of this group have at least one causative mutation in SLC12A3 has been reported and a mutation in the ATP1A2 gene was described gene . in one family with both familial hemiplegic migraine and infantile We recorded mainly missense mutations (23) but frameshift (3) and seizures . BFNIS represents an intermediate variant in which seizure splice-site (1) mutations were also found . Novel missense mutation c . onset varied from 2 days to 3 .5 months . Recently, mutations were 790 G>C, p .Gly264Arg was detected . reported in SCN2A, the gene coding for the α2 subunit of the voltage- No correlation was observed between mutation type and clinical gated sodium channel in 3 families with BFNIS, (Canadian, Australian appearance. This result might be influenced by low number of patients and American origins) . diagnosed . In this study we conducted a molecular analysis of SCN2A gene in We will describe a case report of one patient who suffered from severe two BFNIS families from southern Italy (Sicily). The first family with form of arthropathy . It has been shown in history several times that 3 affected individuals over four generations showed seizures onset connection exists between Gitelman syndrome hypomagnesemia around 2 months of age; in the second family with 4 affected individuals and chondrocalcinosis . Mutation screening revealed homozygous over four generations seizures start around day 17 . After informed missense mutation Gly439Ser . consent, DNA was isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes by This project is supported by grants NR 8116-3 and MŠM standard methods, and was analyzed for mutations in the coding 0021620806 . regions of SCN2A (28 exons) by PCR and sequencing . One proband from families was screened . To date, we have not found any variant in the examined exons of the SCN2A gene (first 25 exons) but the molecular analysis are still in Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  P1045. Analysis of smN mutations in iranian smA Patients engineers or laboratory technicians, three biocomputing engineers M. Hasanzad1, N. Khodayari2, Z. Golkar2, R. Karimi-nejad2, N. Almadani2, K. and a laboratory manager . We use three genotyping systems which Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1,2; are based on primer extension technology . The homogeneous FP- 1Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Karimi-Nejad & SBE assay is used for genotyping individual SNP, the GenomeLab Najmabadi Pathology and Genetic Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. SNPstream system from Beckman Coulter is used for 12 or 48-plex Spinal muscular atrophy is one of the most common autosomal SNP analysis and for genotyping of 96 to 1536 SNPs we use the recessive disorders, with a carrier frequency of approximately one in Illumina Golden Gate Assay . During 2006 genome-wide SNP analysis 50.Spinal muscular atrophy can be classified based on age of onset using the Illumina Infinium assay will be available as a service. We and severity .SMA of all types is associated with homozygous mutations have developed a relational MySQL database for handling and storing in the survival of motor neurone gene(SMN) .Because of high rate of information on samples, SNP-assays and produced genotypes, and consanguinity in Iranian population, it seems that the incidence of the for quality assessment of the genotype data . To ensure high quality of disease is very high . management and operation of the SNP platform, we have implemented During the last five years,mutation detection was performed for 168 a quality system according to the European ISO/IEC 17025 standard . families .Among the all of the cases that referred for carrier detection Several million quality controlled genotypes have been delivered to we can found 70 patients with SMAI,11 patients with SMAII and seven over 50 research projects, most of which have been related to human patients with SMAIII . Molecular analysis was performed for detection complex diseases . The projects have varied largely in size from one of SMN1 exon 7 deletion . SNP in 77 samples to 3350 SNPs in 1700 samples . The accuracy Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS) and Amniocentesis were performed of our genotyping is 99 .6-99 .9% (average 99 .86%) and typically the for 33 and 10 fetuses, respectively, of which 6, 12, 25 cases were success rate is 91-99% (average 95 .1%) . normal, affected and carrier, respectively . The most common type of SMA in our patients was SMA type I . 90 P1048. Association of X chromosome located genes of families with 70 affected cases belong to this group . serotonergic system with suicidal behavior The most common clinical findings in patients with SMA typeI was D. Gaysina1, A. Zainullina1, R. Gabdulhakov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; hypotonia with age of onset at birth to 18 month . 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Department In SMA type II we found developmental delay and hypotonia . Also of Anaesthesiology and Reanimathology, Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, seven patients with SMA type III had age of onset 2 .5-30 years were Russian Federation. associated with generalized muscle weakness and wasting , tongue Differences in suicidal behavior are known between men and women: fasciculation and decreased DTR . women attempt suicide four times as often as men, while men complete suicide three times as often as women . Suicidal behavior is P1046. Relationship between scN1A mutations and smEi associated with a serotonin deficit, and clear sex-specific differences S. Carrideo1, F. Annesi1, E. Mannarino1, G. Incorpora2, A. Polizzi2, E. V. De in serotonergic system were demonstrated in a number of studies . Marco1, F. E. Rocca1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, D. Civitelli1, P. Tarantino1, G. Gender specificity in epidemiology and psychopathology of suicidal Provenzano1, M. Salsone1, A. Gambardella1,3, G. Annesi1; behavior suggests an X-linked genetic factor . In the present study we 1Institute of Neurological Sciences - CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of performed analysis of some serotonergic system genes located on Paediatrics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, Univer- the X chromosome, namely the HTR2C, MAOA and MAOB, in suicide sity Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. attempters, separately in men and women . Cases for this study were Mutations in the SCN1A gene are the major cause of GEFS+ which 283 suicide attempts from 94 men and 189 women . The control group most commonly manifests as febrile seizures (FS), or FS plus . It still consisted of 261 healthy volunteers: 133 men and 128 women . Three remains uncertain if severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (SMEI) polymorphisms: the HTR2C Cys23Ser, A/G in intron 13 of the MAOB represents the end of the spectrum within the GEFS+ phenotype, or and EcoRV-RFLP of the MAOA were analyzed using PCR technique . it should be considered a distinct entity . Here we report three novel We computed multivariative logistic regressions to examine the joint SCN1A mutations in three different patients . Two patients had classic effects of several variables in predicting the suicidal group . Sex was a SMEI phenotype with early infantile febrile seizures, atypical absences, significant predictor of suicide group (p<0.001). MAOB*A allele (coding cognitive impairment, ataxia and drug resistance . The third patient high activity enzyme) was associated with suicide both in men (p=0 .024, had a milder phenotype and normal neurological development . He OR=2 .13) and in women (p=0 .016, OR=1 .59) . Allele frequencies of the had early prolonged FS, afebrile motor seizures and absences, which MAOA and HTR2C did not differ significantly between the control and disappeared with antiepileptic therapy . suicide groups, neither in men, nor in women . MAOB (p=0 .003) and The 26 exons of SCN1A gene were individually amplified using primers MAOA (p=0.02) significantly predicted the suicide group independent based on intronic sequences. The purified PCR products were then of the effect of sex. Our findings indicate the contribution of the MAO sequenced and analyzed with an automatic sequencer . genes to susceptibility for suicidal behavior . We identified three novel SCN1A mutations. In the first of the two SMEI patients we found a missense mutation, T1289I . His mother and P1049. A new syndromic X-linked mental retardation with severe brother carried the same mutation, but they never had any seizure . The microcephaly linked to Xp21.1-p11.3 second SMEI patient carried a de novo frame shift mutation, 3840insT, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, M. Moizard2, P. Callier3, M. Cordier4, F. Mugneret3, L. that lead to a premature stop codon in the exon 19 . The third patient Faivre1, A. Toutain5; carried a de novo single nucleotide substitution in the invariant AG 1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2Unité INSERM U619, Tours, France, 3La- splice acceptor site of intron 24 . boratoire de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Le Bocage, CHU, Dijon, France, 4Service The results of our study reinforce the belief that SMEI probably results de Génétique, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France, 5Service de Génétique, from the cumulative effects or interactions of a few or several genes, of Hôpital Bretonneau, CHU, Tours, France. which the reported GEFS+ gene is only one player . X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is classically divided into Supported by FIRB-MIUR, RBNE01XMP4 syndromic (MRXS) and nonsyndromic (MRX) forms . More than 30 genes have been identified in MRXS. We report a large family with P1047. the sNP technology platform at Uppsala University, five affected males in a pedigree suggesting an X-linked recessive sweden mode of inheritance, presenting with severe mental retardation (5/5 T. Axelsson, L. Bäckström, R. Figueroa, D. Fredriksson, M. Jonsson, K. Lars- cases), severe microcephaly (5/5 cases), normal stature and facial son, U. Liljedahl, M. Lindersson, P. Lundmark, C. Pöntinen, A. C. Syvänen; dysmorphism with hypertelorism and large ears . Carrier females Dept of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. appeared normal . Eye examination (3/5 cases) revealed nystagmus The Uppsala WCN SNP technology platform performs SNP genotyping (2/3 cases) or moderate congenital cataract (1/3 case) . Cardiac, renal as a service to academic groups in Sweden, the Nordic countries and and skeletal investigations were normal . Brain CT scan showed cortical as a partner in EU-funded projects . Our services include bioinformatics- atrophy in 2/2 cases . Chromosome analysis with telomeric studies was assisted SNP assay design, SNP assay development, followed normal . Linkage analysis using microsatellite markers spread over the by production scale genotyping. We have a staff of five research whole X chromosome (10 cM interval) identified a 10 Mb region of Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 0 localisation on Xp21 .1-p11 .3 between markers DXS1110 and DXS1367 are sometimes associated with AVMs . with a lodscore of 2 .2 (theta = 0) and a common haplotype between We report a family with cutaneous telangiectasias with an autosomal affected males and obligate carrier females . Mutation screening in dominant pattern of inheritance . The affected individuals develop several genes located in this interval and associated with X-linked large, heteregenous telangiectasias, which are not associated with MR was negative . Microcephaly has already been described in MRXS AVMs . This could be a more extensive variant of HBT . We performed such as MEHMO (Xp22 .13-p21 .1), Renpenning (Xp11 .23), Borjeson- a genome-wide linkage analysis using microsatellite markers and SNP Forssman-Lehmann (Xq26 .3), and Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson (Xq28) genotyping assay with the GeneChip Human Mapping 10K Array . The syndromes . A normal PQBP1 gene analysis ruled out Renpenning analysis excludes the three candidate genes, endoglin, ALK1 and syndrome in the present family . We therefore think that this family RASA1 . This provides evidence for existence of a different causative represents a new MRXS with microcephaly mapping to Xp21 .1-p11 .3 . gene for this type of hereditary telangiectasia . (http://www .icp .ucl . ac.be/vikkula) (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be). P1050. A new multifactorial disease gene definitely confirmed by linkage, PtPN22 in rheumatoid arthritis. P1052. is m129V of the Prion protein gene ( PRNP) associated L. Michou1,2, S. Lasbleiz1, A. Rat1, P. Migliorini3, A. Balsa4, R. Westhovens5, P. with mild temporal lobe epilepsy? Barrera6, H. Alves7, C. Pierlot1, E. Glikmans1, S. Garnier1, E. Petit-Teixeira1, D. I. Manna1, A. Labate1,2, A. Gambardella1,2, A. La Russa1, E. Le Piane3, F. Con- Pascuale-Salcedo4, S. Bombardieri3, L. Van de Putte6, B. Prum8, T. Bardin1,2, P. dino1, R. Cittadella1, U. Aguglia3, A. Quattrone1,2; Dieudé1,9, F. B. Cornélis1,2, f. ECRAF1; 1Institute of Neurological Science, National Research Council,, Mangone (CS), 1GenHotel-EA3886, Evry, France, 2Lariboisière Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, School of Medicine, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Regional 3Pisa University, Pisa, Italy, 4La Paz Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 5Leuven Univer- Epilepsy Centre, Hospital, Reggio Calabria, Italy. sity, Leuven, Belgium, 6Nijmegen University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 7Porto Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most frequent form of partial Hospital, Porto, Portugal, 8Laboratoire Statistique et Genome, Evry, France, epilepsy in adults . The genetic predisposition appears to be an important 9Bichat Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France. causative factor and current evidences suggest that TLE represents The T allele of the tyrosine phosphatase PTPN22 C1858T/R620W a complex phenotype with a polygenic or multifactorial inheritance . single nucleotide polymorphism has been reported to be associated Association studies showed that the prion protein gene (PRNP) is highly with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the most frequent auto-immune prevalent in patients with intractable temporal lobe epilepsy and may disease, in several case-control studies on West European Caucasian influence the surgical outcome. We evaluated the genetic contribution populations . The association was observed in the rheumatoid factor of PRNP gene in mild temporal lobe epileptic patients . We analysed positive (RF+) RA subgroup, showing no interaction with HLA-DRB1, the PRNP M129V polymorphism in 289 patients with mild TLE and the first RA gene. However, the range of allele frequencies in patients compared to a neurologically unaffected age and sex matched control overlaps with the range in controls, resulting in a risk of false positive group (n=272). Statistical analysis revealed a significantly difference in findings. OBJECTIVE : We aimed at confirming the association by the distribution at codon 129 of the PRNP gene between sporadic mild linkage, using the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) . MATERIAL TLE patients and healthy controls (p=0.036; OR=1.30; 95% CI=1.01- AND METHODS : We genotyped 465 West European Caucasian trio 1.68). Although, there was no statistically significant difference in the families (one RA case and both parents), out of which 345 were RF+ . genotype distribution within the study groups (p=0 .0101), interestingly, The TDT was followed by an allelic (AFBAC) and genotypic association we observed that the 129V allele was highly represented only in analysis with odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI). women with TLE compared to control group (p=0.006, OR=1.632; Interaction with HLA-DRB1 was tested using the new modelisation 95%CI=1.15-2.31). These findings further support the hypothesis that that we recently validated . RESULTS : The TDT demonstrated the common methionine/valine polymorphism at codon 129 of the linkage, showing 61% of transmissions for the 1858T allele (P<0 .002), PRNP gene may modify the susceptibility to mild TLE . However, this contributed by RF+ RA families (63%, P<0 .001), with no linkage in novel finding warrants replication. RF- RA families (53%, NS) . In keeping with the litterature, the allele frequency increased from 10% in controls to 16% in RF+ RA (P<0 .001) P1053. tRAPs mutations (tNF Receptor gene tNFRsF1A and the risk genotype (1858T/620W +) from 18% to 28% (P<0.001 ; Associated Periodic syndrome) are frequent in rheumatoid OR=1,8 (CI 1,3-2,6)) . No interaction was observed with HLA-DRB1 . arthritis families but show no evidence for association nor CONCLUSION : This linkage evidence definitely confirms PTPN22 linkage with the disease as the second RA gene, implicated in the RF disease heterogeneity, P. Dieudé1,2, D. Tchernitchko3,4, L. Michou1,5, E. Glikmans1, M. Goossens3,4, F. independently from HLA-DRB1 . Cornélis1,5, f. ECRAF1; 1GenHotel-EA3886, Evry, France, 2Bichat Hospital AP-HP, Paris, France, 3IN- P1051. Exclusion of candidate genes for a hereditary type of SERM U654, Creteil, France, 4Mondor Hospital, AP-HP, Créteil, France, 5Lari- telangiectasia boisière Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France. M. Amyere1, L. M. Boon2,1, J. B. Mulliken3, M. Vikkula1; TNFRSF1A mutations cause TRAPS [OMIM*191190] . A recent study 1Human Molecular Genetics dept., Université catholique de Louvain & Christian suggested that the R92Q mutation was associated with chronic de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 2Centre for Vascular Anomalies, Plastic polyarthritis . OBJECTIVE : We aimed at searching for TNFRSF1A Surgery dept., Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, Université catholique de Lou- mutations in RA, to be tested for linkage . MATERIAL AND METHODS vain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Centre for Vascular Anomalies, Children’s Hospital, : the 386 DNA of 100 trio families (one RA case and both parents) and Harvard Medical School Boston, Boston, MA, United States. 86 index cases of RA affected sib-pair (ASP) families from the French Telangiectases are characterised by an abnormal permanent dilatation Caucasian population were investigated by dHPLC (denatured high- of end vessels, mainly venules but occasionally also capillaries and performance liquid chromatography) for TNFRSF1A mutations in exons arterioles in the subpapillary plexus in the upper dermis . Hereditary 2 to 4 . The test for association compared cases and « virtual controls » haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT or Rendu-Osler-Weber disease) (derived in the trio families from un-transmitted parental chromosomes) . is characterized by epistaxis, mucocutaneous telangiectases and The test for linkage relied on the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) visceral arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) caused by mutations in in trio families and cosegregation in ASP families . RESULTS : Only the Endoglin (ENG) or activin receptor-like kinase-1 (ALK1) . Hereditary R92Q mutation was detected, in 2 of the 100 index cases of trio families benign telangiectasia (HBT) is another, more rare variant . Affected (including one de novo mutation) and 5 (6%) of the index cases of ASP individuals present with cutaneous, punctate, radiating or arborising families, but also 6% of the controls, showing no association with the telangiectases . HBT distinguishes from the more serious hereditary disease . No RA linkage evidence was found : a) out of 7 heterozygous hemorrhagic telangiectasia, by the lack of AVMs and absence of parents in the trio families, only 1 transmission of the mutation was mucosal lesions . These two telangiectasias are inherited as an observed ; b) among the 5 RA sibs of the mutated index cases from autosomal dominant disorder with variable penetrance . Another similar ASP families, only one carried the mutation . CONCLUSION : This hereditary cutaneous phenotype is CM-AVM caused by mutations in TNFRSF1A investigation in RA from the French Caucasian population RASA1 . These patients have more homogeneous, round-to-oval showed only the R92Q mutation, with a frequency of 4%, but no pinkish-red cutaneous lesions, atypical capillary malformations, which evidence for RA association nor linkage to the disease .Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 1 P1054. Anomalous triallelic pattern at FGA locus in pre- P1056. An association of tsPY gene copy number with male transplant sample genotype during chimerism analysis infertility G. Ferri1, C. Bini2, P. Bresciani3, G. Beduschi1, M. Alù1; R. Vrtel1, R. Vodicka1, A. R. Singh1, L. Dusek2, J. Dostal1, A. Sobek3, K. Krizo- 1Integrated Department of Diagnostic and Laboratory Service and Legal va1, V. Svacinova1, E. Krejcirikova1; Medicine, Chair of Legal Medicine University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Re- Modena, Italy, 2Department of Medicine and Public Health, Section of Legal public, 2CBA, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Fertimed, Olomouc, Medicine, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Integrated Department of On- Olomouc, Czech Republic. cology and Hematology, Chair of Hematology, University of Modena and Reg- The human TSPY gene family (30- 60 copies) is situated in the MSY gio Emilia,, Modena, Italy. region on the Y chromosome. Testis specific expression indicates that Anomalous multibanded signals at a short tandem repeat (STR) loci can the gene plays a role in spermatogenesis . So far, the exact determination be due to a variety of artifacts associated with amplification, detection of TSPY copies and the interindividual population variability has not or contamination . These effects are diagnosed easily by performing a been fully described. We applied Refined Quantitative Fluorescent re-analysis, but tri-allelic patterns are sometimes observed at a single PCR to evaluate the relative quantity of specific TSPY PCR products locus in a multiplex STR profile. These extra-peaks are not a result of in comparison to PCR amplicons from single copy AMELY and AMELX a mixture but are reproducible artifacts of the sample . In a two siblings gene in 81 stratified infertile men (azoospermic, ≤ 5million sperms/ bone marrow transplantation (BMT) chimerism analysis, the buccal ml, ≥ 5million sperms/ml and AZF deletion) and 40 controls. Our swab recipient’s genotype exhibits alleles 22, 23, and 27 at the FGA work is supported by IGA MZ CR NR/7821-3 . The differences among locus . This tri-allelic banding pattern was restricted to a single locus particular infertile groups were not statistically significant although within a thirteen-locus profile. Before performing BMT analysis, the the AZF deletion category shows the highest rates . We found higher anomalous profile was studied further and additional tissue samples relative values in infertile men in contrast to controls . We evaluated the were collected to establish the genetic basis of the observed pattern . diagnostic discrimination potential of relative TSPY copies by Receiver Blood, buccal cells, coutaneus biopsy and plucked hairs, that showing Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve analysis . TSPY/AMELY was the same multibanded pattern, were investigated to the relative allele unambiguously found to be more powerful in the diagnostic separation proportions. The three alleles profile observed in several tissues of both the control samples and the infertile men than TSPY/AMELX . excludes the presence of microsatellites instability (MSI) frequently The evaluation of the TSPY copy number could enlarge the diagnostic detected in human neoplasia. A systematic examination of this profile approached in relation to the genetic cause of male infertility . showed the unequal signal intensities of the three-allele in all tissue samples examined, suggesting that these mutational changes are due P1057. Genetic predisposition to tuberculosis in siberian to somatic mosaicism . We concluded that more than one cell lineage populations was affected and that the size differences between two minor alleles A. A. Rudko1, M. B. Freidin1, O. V. Kolokolova2, E. A. Ondar3, V. P. Puzyrev1, A. would reflect the magnitude of the mutational change, depending upon K. Strelis2; the particular stage of tissue development at which the mutational 1Medical Genetics Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2State Medi- event occur . cal University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Multiple-discipline Scientific Labo- ratory of Health Department of Tuva Republic, Kizil, Russian Federation. P1055. TRPV1 315Ile/Ile genotype is associated to inflammatory It is well known that tuberculosis (TB) is a complex disease, and pain in a spanish population. polymorphism of genes predisposing to TB plays significant role in the P. Armero1,2, A. López Bernús3, C. Muriel2,4, J. del Pino3, R. González-Sarmien- disease development . We studied association between polymorphic to1,2; variants of five genes of predisposition to tuberculosis: NRAMP1 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular-Departamento de Medicina, Universidad de (274C/T, 469+14G/C, D543N, 1465-85G/A), VDR (F/f, B/b), IL1B Salamanca, Spain, 2Cátedra Extraordinaria del Dolor-Fundación Grünenthal, (3953A1/A2), IL1RN (VNTR), IL12B (1188A/C) with clinical disease in Universidad de Salamanca, Spain, 3Servicio de Reumatología, Hospital Univer- 304 TB patients and 140 unaffected controls of Russian ethnicity from sitario de Salamanca, Spain, 4Servicio de Anestesia, Hospital Universitario de Tomsk and 238 TB patients and 260 unaffected controls of Tuvinian Salamanca, Spain. ethnicity from Tuva Republic . Pain stimuli are detected by specialized primary afferent neurons In comparison between Tuvinians, Russians and other world called nociceptors . One noxious stimulus capable of activating these populations, significant differences of allele frequencies for all cells is capsaicin which binds to the Transient Receptor Potential studied polymorphisms were found. It confirms the ethnic specificity Vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) on the peripheral terminals of nociceptive neurons . of polymorphism of genes predisposing to TB . The prevalence of The observation that capsaicin elicits burning pain and neurogenic potentially pathological alleles NRAMP1*543N, VDR*b, IL12B*1188C inflammation suggested that this receptor could be relevant to and IL1RN*A2 was significantly higher in Tuvinians as compare nociception . to other populations . However, in this ethnic group there were no The TRPV1 gene has two single nucleotide polymorphisms, located association between these alleles and TB or different clinical forms in codons 315 (Met315Ile) and 585 (Ile585Val) that produce amino of the disease. In Russians, association with TB was detected for five acid substitutions . In an attempt to determine if genotypic variations in of nine polymorphisms investigated (1465-85G/A, 274C/T, 1188A/C, TRPV1 gene could modify the susceptibility to suffer either neuropathic +3953A1/A2, VNTR) . Also, a number of associations of the studied or inflammatory pain we have studied the Met315Ile and Ile585Val polymorphisms with TB clinical signs (blood counts, X-ray data) was TRPV1 polymorphisms in patients with each one of these pathologies found both in Tuvinians and Russians . Thus, in this investigation it and in a group of healthy subjects . was detected that polymorphism of TB susceptibility genes (NRAMP1, A total of 728 subjects, 204 diagnosed as suffering neuropathic pain VDR, IL12B, IL1B and IL1RN) in studied Siberian populations controlled at the Pain Unit of the University Hospital of Salamanca, (Tuvinians, Russians) is characterized by ethnic specificity with respect 228 diagnosed as suffering inflammatory pain controlled at the to association with TB and its clinical signs . Rheumatology Unit of the University Hospital of Salamanca and 296 subjects without a history of pain, matched by age and gender, were P1058. Genetic analysis of polymorphic variants of iL1B, included in the study . Consent was granted from the ethical committee iL1RA, NRAmP1, and VDR genes in patients with pulmonary of the University Hospital of Salamanca and informed consent was tuberculosis in Republic Bashkortostan (Russia). obtained from each subject . M. Imangulova1, A. Karunas1, Z. Garifullin2, E. Khusnutdinova1; Our results show that variations in the TRPV1 gene do not modify 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir individual susceptibility to neuropathic pain, whereas, in our population State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. the TRPV1 Ile315Ile genotype is associated to higher susceptibility to With one third of the world’s population infected with M. tuberculosis, suffer inflammatory pain. tuberculosis is the number one cause of death from infectious disease . Analysis of polymorphisms in IL1B (-511C/T), IL1RA (VNTR), NRAMP1 (1729+55del4, D543N) and VDR (FokI, TaqI) genes was carried out in tuberculosis patients (n=195) and healthy individuals (n=190) from Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  Bashkortostan . P1061. IL-18 and TNF-α promoter polymorphisms and The analysis of the -511C/T polymorphism of IL1B gene demonstrated susceptibility to type 1 diabetes in the Dalmatian population an increase of the frequency of the genotype IL1B*C/T (75,7%) in the V. Boraska1, K. Bečić1, V. Škrabić2, M. Peruzović1, V. Čikeš Čulić3, S. tuberculosis patients compared to the control group (48,9%; P<0.001, Kapitanović4, T. Zemunik1; OR=3 .25) . The investigation of VNTR polymorphism in IL1RA gene 1Department of Medical biology, Split University Medical School, Split, Croatia, has shown that the frequency of homozygous IL1RA*1/1 in patients is 2Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Hospital Split, Split, Croatia, 3Department of significantly higher than in the control (73,3% and 43,3%, respectively, Biochemistry, Split University Medical School, Split, Croatia, 4Division of Mo- P<0 .001, OR=3 .60) . The frequency of heterozygous genotype TGTG/ lecular medicine, Ruđer Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. del of NRAMP1 (1729+55del4) was 3 times higher among patients INTRODUCTION: Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is characterized (12,4% and 4,8%, respectively, P<0.001; OR=2.8). We found no by a chronic progressive inflammatory autoimmune reaction that significant associations with tuberculosis susceptibility in the case causes the selective elimination of pancreatic β cells. Proinflammatory of variations for the NRAMP1 (D543N), VDR (FokI, TaqI) . Obtained cytokines, interleukin-18 (IL-18) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF- results thus suggests that variations in IL1B (-511C/T), IL1RA (VNTR), α), both have been implicated in the pathogenesis of T1DM. Additionally NRAMP1 (1729+55del4) genes probably contributed to development IL-18 plays a role in regulation of TNF-α production. Therefore we of pulmonary tuberculosis in patients of studied region . tested an association of two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in promoter regions of these genes with the susceptibility to T1DM in the P1059. screening of the tsc1 and tsc2 genes for tuberous Dalmation population (South Croatia) . sclerosis patients MATERIALS AND METHODS: 134 T1DM patients and 132 control R. L. Touraine, A. Combes, M. Gilet; subjects were tested for a G-137C change in a promoter region of IL- CHU de Saint Etienne, Saint etienne, France. 18 gene by a sequence specific PCR. TNF-α G-308A promoter variant We did molecular testing of the TSC1 and TSC2 genes in 90 Tuberous was genotyped in a larger group of T1DM patients (206) and controls Sclerosis (TS) families, using MLPA, DHPLC, sequencing and (144) by standard PCR followed with NcoI endonuclease restriction . microsatellite analysis. A mutation has been identified in 51 cases, Data were analysed using chi-square test . analysis is still in progress for 35 cases, and no mutation was found RESULTS: A distribution of IL-18 G-137C and TNF-α G-308A promoter in four cases . variants was equal between the T1DM patients and the controls We designed a strategy to screen novel cases, permitting to find more (p=0 .9448 and p=0 .0655, respectively) . than half of TSC2 mutants and more than 80% of TSC1 mutants in a CONCLUSIONS: The present study provided no evidence of shorter time than previously . association of IL-18 and TNF-α promoter variants with susceptibility Two third of the mutations were de novo . TSC2 was more frequently to T1DM in Dalmatian population . However as genotype frequencies involved than TSC1 (83% versus 17%), specially in those de novo for TNF-α G-308A polymorphism were close to the limit of statistical cases (91% versus 9%) . In familial cases, TSC1 and TSC2 were significance (p=0.0655) further analysis should be conducted. almost equally involved . Only one third of the 51 mutations were previously described . Most of P1062. Polymorphisms of some candidate genes in diabetic the mutations were truncating mutations . Two large deletions of TSC2, nephropathy in Romanian population were found . D. Cimponeriu1, C. Serafinceanu2, P. Apostol1, D. Usurelu1, A. M. Craciun2, C. A better prognosis is ascribed to TSC1 mutations and to familial cases . Panaite2, M. Stavarachi1, M. Toma1, L. Gavrila1, D. Cheta2; In one of our families, all the persons with TS were very mildly affected . 1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2IDNBM N Paulescu, Bucharest, Unfortunately, clinical severity may vary from person to person in a Romania. same family . Nevertheles, half of de novo cases had a favorable Candidate gene studies have indicated that ACE (17q23), TGF-beta outcome . (19q13), VDR (12q13) and IGF2 (11p15) gene polymorphisms may be For cases detected in utero, prognosis was not worse than for cases involve in DN onset or DN progression to ESRD . diagnosed postnataly . We believe it may be better, due to a sharper The aim of the present work was to evaluate the impact of seven follow-up . polymorphisms in these genes on renal failure in type 2 diabetic In summary, even if turn around time can be improved, molecular patients . testing in TS is long and laborious . Therefore, clinical diagnosis of TS Clinical information and biological samples were collected from 99 is still a prerequisite to molecular testing . (56M/43F) unrelated Romanian Caucasian subjects . The subjects were distributed into: H-T2DM (33 T2DM patients on hemodialysis, P1060. Association between type 1 Diabetes and myosin iX B age: 58 .5±7 .8, diabetes duration: 18 .1±10 .7, duration of dialyses: (mYO9B) suggests that intestinal barrier integrity is important in 2 .4±1 .2), T2DM (33 nondialyzed T2DM patients, microalbuminuria < disease susceptibility. 30 mg/day, diabetes duration: 17 .3±9 .6) and C (33 healthy controls, G. L. Valdigem1, B. Z. Alizadeh1, A. Zhernakova1, A. J. Monsuur1, P. Eerligh2, fasting glycemia 93 .2±8 .2 mg/dl, microalbuminuria <30 mg/day) lots . M. C. Wapenaar1, G. J. Bruining3, B. O. Roep2, C. Wijmenga1, B. P. C. Koele- These groups were matched for age, gender and ethnicity . man1; Each patient was genotyped for ACE ID, TGF-beta -800A/G, TGF-beta 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Leiden Univer- -509C/T, VDR Taq, VDR Apa, VDR Fok and IGF2 Apa polymorphisms sity Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Erasmus University Medical by PCR or PCR-RFLP . Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. In contrast with some studies, we observed no difference between We recently identified a strong association between the gene encoding distribution of ACE ID, VDR Taq, VDR Apa, TGF- beta -800, genotypes for myosin IXB (MYO9B) and celiac disease (CD), and since type 1 and alleles in H-T2DM, T2DM and C groups (p>0 .05) . The TGF- diabetes (T1D) and CD share various clinical and epidemiological beta -509CC (OR=2 .4, CI: 0 .8<OR<6 .5), VDR FF (OR=2 .0, 95%CI: features, we have now investigated whether MYO9B is also 0 .6<OR< 6 .7) and IGF2 aa (OR=1 .9, 95%CI: 0 .7<OR< 5 .5) genotypes associated with juvenile T1D . Three SNPs in the MYO9B gene were were more frequent in H-T2D vs . C . From the present study, performed characterized for 288 T1D juvenile patients and 1615 control subjects . in relative small groups, we can conclude that the TGF-beta -509CC, SNP rs2305767 was associated with T1D (p=0.03; OR 1.5, 95% CI VDR FF and IGF2 aa genotypes could predispose to the development 1.21-2.04). This association was confined to carriers of HLA DR-DQ of ESRD in Romanian T2DM patients genotypes (p=0 .01), which predispose a moderate risk to T1D . Given the association of myosin IXB with CD, its implication in the integrity of the mucosal barrier, and the proposed role for dietary factors in the development of T1D, our results suggest the gut immune system plays a role in predisposition to T1D .Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  P1063. Transcript profiles of fat biopsies and two independent P1065. Vitamin D receptor Foki polymorphism is associated with autopsy studies support the role of allelic variants of the USF1- knee strength in older women, not in men gene in cardiovascular disease A. Windelinckx1, G. De Mars1, J. Aerssens2, C. Delecluse1, R. Vlietinck3, G. P. J. Naukkarinen1, K. Komulainen1, M. Gentile1, P. Pajukanta2, J. Saarela1, M. Beunen1, M. Thomis1; Taskinen3, P. Karhunen4, M. Perola1, L. Peltonen1; 1Research Center for Exercise and Health, Dept of Biomedical Kinesiology, 1National Public Health Institute of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 2Dept. of Human Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium, 2Drug Discovery, Johnsen Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United and Johnsen Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Beerse, Belgium, States, 3Dept. of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Fin- 3Department of Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Bel- land, 4School of Medicine, University of Tampere and Research Unit of Labora- gium. tory Center, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. introduction: A start codon polymorphism within the Vitamin D We recently reported association in Finnish families of the USF1 gene receptor gene (VDR, T to C) results in a three amino acids shorter with FCHL, a common dyslipidemia predisposing to cardiovascular VDR protein with increased vitamin D-related transcriptional activity . disease (CVD) . Expression and molecular studies were conducted Gender-specific effects of this polymorphism have not been studied in members of dyslipidemic families to investigate the functional yet . relevance of different USF1 alleles on target genes in adipose tissue . Purpose: To investigate the association between the FokI polymorphism The role of specific USF1 alleles was also addressed by quantitative in VDR and muscle strength in older men and women . analysis of arterial plaques in a human autopsy series . methods: The FokI polymorphism (rs2228570, Sequenom The best associating SNP in the FCHL families is located in a MassARRAY SNP) was genotyped in 99 men (67 .1+/-4 .2yr) and in conserved putative enhancer element in intron 7 that we established 102 women (66 .4+/-4 .5yr) . The peak torque of knee extension and to bind nuclear proteins . In 19 fat biopsies, carriers of the risk allele of flexion was measured at velocities of 0°/s, 60°/s, 180°/s and 240°/s. USF1 presented with transcriptional changes in USF1 target genes Genotype-phenotype associations were tested using AN(C)OVA with APOE, ABCA1 and AGT, all relevant to the pathogenesis of CVD . muscle+bone cross-sectional area of the thigh as covariate . To further establish the role of different USF1 alleles on quantitative Results: FokI genotypes were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in measures of arterial atherosclerosis in humans, we examined two both men and women (p=0 .14 and p=0 .07, respectively) . In men no autopsy series consisting of 700 males from the Helsinki area with significant association was found between FokI and any of the measured sudden death, collected 1981-82 and 1991-92 . The data included strength phenotypes. In women, however, significant association was quantitative classification of atherosclerotic lesions in coronary arteries found with all measurements of knee strength except peak torque and abdominal aorta . flexion at 0°/s and 60°/s. For most of the strength measurements the In the autopsy series, specific USF1 alleles showed association with heterozygous group performed less well in dynamic knee strength size of fibrotic intimal lesions, amount of calcification of the arteries and than both homozygous groups (p<0 .05) . atherosclerosis of the brain (P=0 .04 - <0 .0001), as well as with death conclusion: The VDR FokI polymorphism is associated with knee from ischemic heart disease (OR 5 .00, 95% CI 1 .75-14 .30, P=0 .003) . peak torque in senior women but not in men, confirming the possibility of These results underline the importance of variants of the USF1 gene gender-specific effects. The lack of association in men confirms results as a CVD risk factor at the population level and give more insight into of other research groups. As this is the first study to investigate the the pathogenesis associated with these genetic variants . association between the VDR FokI polymorphism and knee strength in women, further research will be necessary to elucidate these findings. P1064. Prevalence and distribution of exonic mutations in Interferon Regulatory Factor 6 (IRF6) identified in two large P1066. Osteopenia molecular markers in children. cohorts with Van der Woude syndrome M. M. Kostik1, L. V. Tyrtova1, L. A. Sheplyagina2, P. B. Glazkov1, D. N. Ba- R. de Lima1, M. Ghassibé2, N. Rorick3, S. Hoper3, L. Katz3, D. Schipper3, M. ranov1, V. A. Tomashevskaya2, O. S. Romashkina1, M. A. Pachomova1, V. I. Dixon4, U. Hehr5, J. Compton6, M. Vikkula2, A. Richieri-Costa7, D. Moretti-Fer- Larionova1; reira1, J. Murray3, B. Schutte3; 1State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Sci- 1Genetics, UNESP, Botucatu, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Human Molecular Genetics entific Center of Children Health, Moscow, Russian Federation. dept., Université catholique de Louvain & Christian de Duve Institute, Brussels, The aim of our study was to investigate whether molecular markers, Belgium, 3Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 4Univer- such as vitamin D receptor gene and osteocalcin polymorphism are sity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Humangenetik, Regensburg, related to osteopenia in children . Germany, 6GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 7USP, Bauru, Sao Paulo, 370 children (172 girls, 198 boys) with Insulin-depended diabetes Brazil. mellitus, chronic arthritis and asthma were included in our study . The Mutations in IRF6 cause Van der Woude (VWS) and Popliteal Pterygium mean age of patients was 12,43±3,38 years . BsmI, ApaI, TagI vitamin syndromes (PPS), two related orofacial clefting disorders . IRF6 D receptor gene (VDR) and osteocalcin gene HindIII polymorphism, belongs to the IRF family of nine transcription factors . Both VWS and serum levels of osteocalcin, β-CrossLabs, parathyroid hormone, Ca, PPS display an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance with high phosphate, total alkaline phosphatase were tested in all patients . penetrance but variable expressivity . The phenotype of VWS includes Osteopenia (OP) was detected by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry pits in the lower lip, clefts of the lip and/or palate and hypodontia . In in lumbar spine . addition, PPS includes webbing of the lower limbs, syndactyly of the toes Using the data of BMD children were selected in two groups: with OP and digits, ankyloblepheron, oral synechia, and genital abnormalities . (Z score<-1,0 SD) - 67 (18,1%) and without OP (Z score>-1,0 SD) We performed direct sequence analysis on IRF6 exons on samples - 303 children (81,9%) . We detected differences in TagI polymorphic from two large geographically defined cohorts, one from Brazil (113 genotypes (TT-18,2% and 39,9%, Tt - 45,4% and 50,0%, tt - 36,4% and VWS and 1 PPS) and one of mixed origin (197 VWS and 36 PPS) . We 10,1%, p=0,002) and alleles distribution (T-40,9% and 64,7%, t - 59,1% identified mutations in IRF6 exons in 69% of all families with VWS, and and 35,3%, p=0,002) between all girls with and without osteopenia . 97% of families with PPS . The distribution of VWS-causing mutations Also, we detected differences in ApaI polymorphic genotypes (AA- was not random, with exons 3, 4, 7, and 9 accounting for 80% . In total, 57,1% and 23,4%, and Aa+aa-42,9% and 76,6%, p=0,05) and alleles we identified 87 protein truncation mutations, scattered throughout distribution (A-78,6% and 47,7%, a - 21,4% and 52,3%, p=0,03) the gene, and 127 missense mutations that are concentrated in the between girls 14-17 years with and without osteopenia . We revealed DNA-binding and protein-binding domains . With 50% of the samples differences in HindIII polymorphic alleles distribution (H-40,0 % and sequenced from the CEPH diversity panel, none of these mutations 22,8%, h-60,0% and 77,2%, p=0,05) between children before 10 have been observed . In addition, PolyPhen and SIFT analyses of the years, and between girls 11-13 years (H-33,3% and 13,8%, h-66,7% missense mutations suggest that they are more likely to be damaging and 86,2%) with and without osteopenia, consequently . We conclude to gene function than all possible missense mutations (p< .001) . This that these polymorphic molecular markers are suitable for detecting extensive mutation screen will assist clinicians to provide a DNA osteopenia genetic predisposing . diagnosis for patients with orofacial clefts and to identify genotype- phenotype and structure-function relationships .Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  P1067. An investigation of eight candidate gene polymorphisms P1069. Linkage study in four large Dutch families with VUR: in south Asian and caucasian RA patients of the East midlands exclusion of a previously reported locus and (separate) in UK. candidate genes A. Ghelani1, A. Gilmour1, S. S. Mastana1, S. Steer2, B. Lad2, J. I. Robinson3, A. A. M. van Eerde1, B. P. C. Koeleman1, J. M. van de Kamp2, T. P. V. M. de W. Morgan3, L. Goh4, A. Samanta4, J. D. Isaacs5, A. Jones6, D. L. Mattey7; Jong3, C. Wijmenga1, J. C. Giltay1; 1Loughborough University, Loughborough, United Kingdom, 2King’s College 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The London School of Medicine at Guy’s, London, United Kingdom, 3St James’ Netherlands, 2Clinical Genetics, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Nether- University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 4Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leices- lands, 3Department of Pediatric Urology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, ter, United Kingdom, 5University Medical School, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United The Netherlands. Kingdom, 6City Hospital Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 7Stafford- Vesico-ureteral reflux (VUR [MIM 193000]), the retrograde passage shire Rheumatology Centre, Stoke on Trent, United Kingdom. of urine from the bladder, is one of the most commonly detected Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is a chronic musculoskeletal disease of congenital anomalies . It has a prevalence of 1% . VUR is a major cause unknown aetiology . RA is a complex polygenic and multifactorial of urinary tract infections in children and is the cause of 7% of end- disease and has not been analysed comprehensively among South stage renal disease in pediatric patients in the Netherlands . Genetic Asians, specifically in the East Midlands. factors play an important role in the etiology of primary VUR since (1) Two genetic approaches were used; case-control and sib-TDT sibs of affected children have a 32% risk of VUR, and (2) there is 80% analyses . Ten polymorphisms of eight genes (ACE, VDR, A2M, GSTT1 concordance between monozygotic twins . and GSTM1, TNFRII, FcgRIIIA and CRH) were analysed in South A locus on 1p13, previously shown to be linked to vesico-ureteral Asians (134 patients, 66 unaffected sibs, 149 random controls) and reflux (VUR), still awaits replication. To investigate the involvement of Caucasians (137 patients, 83 unaffected sibs, 150 random controls) . this locus and 9 (separate) candidate genes for VUR in four multi- The gender distribution (male:female) was 1:4 in South Asians and 1:3 generation Dutch VUR families, we performed a linkage study using 56 in Caucasians . individuals, including 21 patients . While verifying the physical location Significant genetic associations were observed with VDR Bsm I B-B of the two flanking markers of the 1p13 locus, we noticed that they now genotype (OR = 2 .08, CI 1 .23 - 3 .52, P < 0 .05), A2M 2-2 genotype have different map locations on chromosomes 1q23 and 2q11 . We (OR = 3 .99, CI 1 .19 - 17 .18, P < 0 .05), and GST Tnull genotype were unable to detect linkage with a total of 18 microsatellite markers 1 (OR = 2 .81, CI 1 .40 - 5 .77, P < 0 .002) among South Asian RAs . In markers covering both loci . Hence, we were able to exclude the (1p13 Caucasians, TNFRII R-R (OR = 3 .16, CI 1 .20-9 .26, P < 0 .05), A2M 1-1 to) 1q23 locus and 61% of the 2q11 locus from linkage to VUR . We (OR = 2 .09, CI 1 .21-3 .64, P < 0 .05) and GST Tnull (OR = 1 .97, CI 1 .07 were unable to detect linkage to any of the candidate genes either . 1 - 3 .68, P < 0 .05) genotypes were associated with RA . In the majority Our results imply that neither the adjusted 1p13 locus, nor any of the of cases, recessive and multiplicative modes of inheritance explained candidate genes we tested, plays an important role in Dutch families the observed associations . There were no confounding interactions with VUR . between the genotypes . Overall this study demonstrates that ethnic and genetic variation plays P1070. The influence of vitamin D receptor polymorphisms on a significant role in RA susceptibility. bone mineral density and bone turn over A. Hossein-Nezhad, V. Haghpanah, Z. Maghbooli, S. Shirzad, S. Arami, B. P1068. mutations R67X and W303X of the protein Z-dependent Larijani; protease inhibitor gene are not associated with venous Endocrinology and metabolism Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of thromboembolic disease. Iran. D. Fabbro1, G. Barillari2, F. Alessandra3, G. Damante3; Aims: To determine association of vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene 1Istituto di Genetica - Policlinico Universitario, Udine, Italy, 2Unità malattie emor- polymorphisms with bone mineral density (BMD) and bone turn over . ragiche e trombotiche. Azienda Ospedaliera S. Maria della Misericordia, Udine, Methods:We studied allelic frequencies of the FokI,BsmI, ApaI, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche. Università di Udine, and TaqI restriction fragment length polymorphisms in 38 familial Udine, Italy. osteoporotic patients in comparison with 40 age-matched healthy The protein Z-dependent protease inhibitor (ZPI) is a serpin that inhibits pre and post menopausal women , and correlated their bone mass the activated coagulation factors X and XI . Previous investigations with the VDR genotypes . Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral indicated that no association is present between plasma levels of blood leukocytes according to standard methods . After an overnight protein Z and ZPI and venous thrombosis . However, it has been fast, blood was taken for measurement of serum parathyroid hormone, recently shown that two nonsense mutations (R67X and W303X) of 25-hydroxyvitamin D, alkaline phosphatase, alkaline phosphatase, the ZPI gene are associated with venous thromboembolic disease osteocalcin and cross laps . Bone measurements were performed with (VTE) in New Zealand (1) . the same instrument in two regions . Calcium and vitamin D intake Aim of this study was to investigate the presence of the R67X and estimated from a detailed food recall interview for the previous month . W303X mutations of the ZPI gene in VTE patients and control subjects Results:The most common VDR genotypes were Aa (52 .5 percent), in a population of North-East Italian region . Bb (37 .1 percent), FF(52 .5 percent), and Tt (47 .4percent) . There DNA samples were collected from 183 consecutive VTE patients and were statistical differences in the allelic distribution of FokI and TaqI 113 normal controls . The R67X and W303X mutations were detected between osteoporotic patients and controls . After adjustment for age, by bidirectional allele-specific PCR, according to the method published BMI, calcium and vitamin D intakes, statistical associations were by Van de Water et al . (1) . found between TaqI VDR gene polymorphisms and BMD and were The R67X mutation was not present in any of the VTE patients or control weakly correlated with serum concentrations of osteocalcin, alkaline subjects . The W303X mutation was present in two VTE patients (1,1%) phosphatase . The vitamin D-receptor gene alleles in other three and one control (0,85%). This difference was not statistically significant. genotypic groups were not associated with the serum concentrations Thus, our data support the notion that the R67X and W303X mutations of calcium or other biochemical values, calciotropic hormones, or of the ZPI gene are rare gene variants in European populations and markers of bone turnover . are not associated to VTE, Our findings confirm results of a previous Conclusions: VDR gene alleles predict the bone density and bone turn study made in Spanish subjects (2) . over .Our results showed that a significantly differences in frequency of 1 . van de Water B ., et al . British J . Haematol, 127: 190-194, 2004 . the VDR allelic distribution in comparisons with the Asian population . 2 . Gonzales-Conejero R ., et al . British J . Haematol, 129 : 561, 2005 .Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  P1071. A novel locus for primary familial vesicoureteral reflux region and intron/exon boundaries had failed to identify one or both maps to chromosome 3q mutations . Seventeen of the 40 samples presented an altered SSCP M. L. Conte1,2, A. M. Bertoli-Avella1, B. M. de Graaf1, G. Lama2, A. La Manna2, pattern . Sequencing analysis of these samples is now on course . Until P. F. Rambaldi3, B. A. Oostra1, S. Perrotta2; this moment, one patient has been found to be homozygous for the 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The -525T>C substitution and heterozygous for the -413T>C one . These Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatrics, Second University of Naples, Naples, two single base changes have been identified previously in other Italy, 3Nuclear Medicine Division, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy. studies and considered as probable variants with no clinical effect after Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) is the most common urological disorder detecting them in the normal population . In another patient, we have in children and refers to the retrograde flow of urine from the bladder identified a novel C to G base change in heterozygous state in the -401 into the kidneys . Commonly, VUR occurs as a primary entity [OMIM position . Screening studies of the control population are in progress 193000] and affects 1% to 2% of the Caucasian population . in order to discriminate between a normal variant or a possible In order to identify gene(s) involved in the pathogenesis of primary disease-causing mutation . The common -75A>C substitution and the - VUR, 150 patients were recruited and clinically characterized . 132delGCCGC deletion have been identified in several of our patients, Diagnosis and grading of VUR were done according to the International but we did not consider them as disease-causing mutations since they Grading System using standard techniques . Available family members have been found in the normal population in diverse studies . were ascertained and investigated for the presence of reflux, reflux nephropathy or renal failure . Blood samples were collected and DNA P1074. mutational screening of the RP2 and the RPGR Genes in was isolated following standard procedures . spanish Families with X-Linked Retinitis Pigmentosa A genome wide search was performed in 14 Italian families with M. Garcia-Hoyos1, D. Cantalapiedra1, B. Garcia-Sandoval1, R. Riveiro1, I. 49 index cases with primary VUR, showing a pattern of inheritance Lorda-Sanchez1, M. Trujillo-Tiebas1, M. Rodrguez de Alba1, M. Baiget2, C. Ra- compatible with an autosomal dominant model . The statistical analysis mos1, C. Ayuso1; (Genehunter, non-parametric analysis) highlighted 4 genomic regions 1Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital San Pau, Barcelona, Spain. on different chromosomes (NPL>2 .5, p<0 .015) that might contain Purpose: X-linked form of Retinitis pigmentosa (XLRP) is one of the gene(s) implicated in the etiology of VUR . None of the families was most severe types of RP . Five XLRP loci have been mapped although linked to the chromosome 1p locus reported previously . Interestingly, only two genes, RPGR and RP2, have been cloned . the majority of the families (n=10) support a single novel region on We screened 30 unrelated XLRP Spanish families in order to determine chromosome 3q (max NPL=2 .69, p=0 .006) . Therefore, the region of the molecular cause of their disease . interest was tested in 11 additional families with a total of 78 patients . Methods: We have performed haplotype analysis and, in those families Non-parametric analysis confirmed the presence of a novel VUR locus in which the disease segregates with the RPGR and/or the RP2 locus, on chromosome 3q (NPL=2 .84, p=0 .004) . The best part of the region we carried out mutational screening . We have analyzed the RP2 gene, supported by the linked families spans 3 Mb and contains 15 genes, the first 15 exons of RPGR at cDNA level and the ORF 14 and ORF 15 currently subjected to sequence analysis . exons at genomic DNA level . Results: After haplotype analysis we could rule out the implication in P1072. A 300K Phase i Hapmap tag sNP Panel the disease of RP2and RPGR in 6 and 4 families, respectively . L. M. Galver, P. C. Ng, K. Kuhn, K. L. Gunderson, R. Shen, S. S. Murray; Among the 30 unrelated XLRP, we found 16 mutations in RPGR (7 are Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, United States. novel) and 4 mutations in RP2 (3 are novel) . We have developed a panel of >317,000 SNP loci chosen from the Conclusions: In our cohort of XLRP families RPGR also seems to be Phase I HapMap data (www .hapmap .org) . We use a novel whole the most prevalent form of XLRP . genome genotyping assay to interrogate this large number of SNPs Based in our results we propose a protocol for molecular diagnosis of efficiently and accurately on a single slide. The assay uses a PCR- XLRP families, in four consecutive steps: less single tube whole genome amplification step, array hybridization 1) Haplotype analysis capture, and an array-based primer extension reaction to directly 2) In case that haplotype was not informative, we propose to analyze score the captured SNP targets (Gunderson et al., 2005; Steemers exon ORF-15 of RPGR gene . et al ., 2006) . 3) Later the first 15 exons of gene RPGR. A maximally informative set of tag SNPs were derived from the 4) And finally the 5 exons of gene RP2, in the last two cases using Caucasian (CEPH) population and their utility has been assessed in mRNA . the Han Chinese, Japanese, and Yoruba populations . Tag SNPs were We consider that this approach is the most effective method (rapid and chosen using algorithms utilizing the linkage disequilibrium statistic r2 accurate) for mutation screening in XLRP cases . (Carlson et al ., 2004) . A higher density of tag SNPs within 10 kb of genes or in evolutionarily conserved regions were chosen using a more P1075. XRcc3 thr241met polymorphism and cNs cancer in a stringent r2 threshold . In addition, we have included ~8,000 nsSNPs and spanish population >1,000 tag SNPs chosen from a 2 kb map of SNPs across the MHC N. Alonso1,2, S. Perdomo1,2, J. L. García2, J. Gómez-Moreta3, R. González region . This panel captures 80%, 68%, and 34% of HapMap Phase I+II Sarmiento1,2; variation in CEPH, Han Chinese/Japanese, and Yoruba populations at 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Instituto de Neurociencias de Castilla y León, r2 ≥ 0.8, respectively. The average spacing between SNP loci is 9kb Universidad de Salamanca, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Sa- (median 5 kb; 90th percentile 19kb) . This panel of tag SNPs will provide lamanca, Spain, 3Departamento de Neurocirugía. Hospital Virgen Vega, Sala- a valuable resource for whole genome genotyping studies to identify manca, Spain. the genetic variation involved in health and disease . Hereditary genetic defects in DNA repair lead to increased risk of cancer. Genetic polymorphisms that influence individual response to P1073. Identification of genetic variants in the ATP7B gene environmental exposures can contribute to cancer susceptibility . promoter and 5‘UtR in Wilson disease patients To find a possible association to brain cancer susceptibility, we E. Margarit1, S. Valera1, D. Gasol1, R. Queralt1, A. Soler1, M. Bruguera2; analyzed both genotype and allele frequencies of XRCC3 Thr241Met 1Genetics, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hepatology, Hospital Clinic, Bar- polymorphism from DSB pathway in brain cancer patients . celona, Spain. We have studied 230 individuals, previously diagnosed with brain Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder that affects cancer and 393 healthy controls . intracellular copper transport, resulting in copper accumulation in Analysis of allele distribution in XRCC3 Thr241Met showed a greater some tissues and leading to hepatic and/or neurological damage . representation of the Thr allele in the group of patients when compared Molecular analyses of the ATP7B gene in Wilson disease patients to the controls (p=0 .000) and it is associated with an increased cancer have identified more than 200 different alterations, some of them risk (OR= 2 .653, 95% CI=2 .007-3 .507) . affecting the regulating regions of this gene . We used SSCP analysis to investigate the 5’UTR and promoter of the ATP7B gene in 40 WD patients, in whom our previous molecular analysis of the coding Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 6 at all subjects tested . We found that C4B*Q0 confers an increased risk POLYMORPHISM n GENOTYPE P value of angina pectoris (AP), myocardial infarction (MI) and MI-associated mortalities in smokers . C4B null alleles were raised at diagnosis in XRCC3 241 Thr/Thr Thr/Met Met/Met smokers with AP (p=0 .02) and MI (p=0 .001), but conspicuously absent in patients who survived a MI and continued to smoke for a period Controls 385 70 18 .2% 174 45 .2% 141 36 .6% exceeding 3 years . The risk of MI short-term (<6 months) mortality Patients 147 63 42 .9% 64 43 .5% 20 13 .6% <0.0011 was much higher in C4B*Q0 carriers than in non-carriers (adjusted odds ratio: 17 .77, p=0 .003) . In non-smokers no increase was observed Meningiomasa 55 24 43 .6% 25 45 .5% 6 10 .9% <0.0012 in C4B*Q0 at MI or AP . The age-associated decrease in C4B*Q0 Gliomas 92 39 42 .40% 39 42 .4% 14 15 .2% <0.0013 previously observed in two remote Caucasian populations was in the present study found to be strongly associated with smoking and to a Difference of genotype frequencies . Meningiomas vs . gliomas occur already at age 50. C4B*Q0 can now be identified as a major p=0 .757 covariate of smoking in precipitating the risk for MI and associated 1 Controls vs . Patients deaths . These results may help to identify new possibilities for future 2 Controls vs . Meningiomas research on the pathophysiology of CVD as well as for development of 3 Controls vs . Gliomas novel prophylactic or therapeutic intervention strategies Table 1. Genotypic frequencies of the XRCC3 241 polymorphism in brain cancer patients and controls Po07. Normal variation, population genetics, genetic Our results suggest that the presence of the Thr allele increases the epidemiology susceptibility to develop brain tumors whereas the Met allele may be considered as a protective factor . P1078. mitochodrial DNA variability in the Kazakh population of middle Asia P1076. Specific RET polymorphisms contributing to G. M. Berezina1, G. S. Svyatova1, M. A. Bermisheva2, E. K. Khusnutdinova2; Hirschsprung patient’s phenotype 1Republican Center of health protection of mother and child,Kazakhstan, R. Smigiel1, A. Lebioda2, D. Patkowski3, K. Pesz1, J. Czernik3, T. Dobosz2, M. Almaty, Kazakhstan, 2Institute of Boichemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian M. Sasiadek1; Federation. 1Genetic Department Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 2Molecular Information about mtDNA variation in Middle Asia is very crucial for Division, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 3Pediatric Surgery and understanding of Asian mtDNA phytogeny as well as for reconstruction Urology Department, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland. of Asian population history. The sequence of the first hypervariable Hirschsprung disease (Hd) is a congenital heterogeneous disorder, segment of mtDNA was determined in 246 individuals from three characterized by the absence of intestinal ganglion cells . In aetiology district of Kazakhstan . 120 polymorphic positions and 192 different of Hirschsprung disease various genes are included . It seems that the HVS 1 haplotypes were revealed. For correct haplogroup affiliation most important role in its aetiology plays RET gene . There are plenty the ambiguous HVS 1 sequences were additionally screened for of different mutations in this gene . No mutation is fully penetrant and RFLP markers . 38 gaplogroups of mtDNA was determined . HVS 1 they have varying effects on the length of the aganglionic segment of haplotypes occuring once (unicum haplotypes) were determined 64,6% the intestine . The aim of our study was to analyse single nucleotide in Kazakhs . Unicum haplotypes is different values in the populations polimorphisms (SNP) of RET gene in exon 2, 3, 7, 11, 13, 14 and 15 . of the Volga-Ural region: for Chuvaschs --64%, for Bashkirs-88%, for To test how the Hd phenotype may be affected by the presence of Tatars -80% . genetic variants, we compared the molecular results with clinical and Index variability of gaplotypes is 0,99 in Kazakhs . Index variability of long-term follow-up data . Molecular DNA analyses were performed gaplotypes are analogical values in the populations of the Volga-Ural in 70 patients with Hd . We found a short and ultra-short segment of region: for Chuvaschs and for Bashkirs-0,98, for Tatars -0,99 . aganglionic gut in 84,3%, and long-segment in 15,7% of all patients . Index of gene diversity (calculated about of the frequencies The 135G/A RET polymorphism in exon 2 was over−represented in gaplogroups) is 0,93 in Kazakhs . From literature it is known that the Hd populations compared to normal, unrelated control individuals . same values index of gene diversity in population for Kirgizs - 0,87, for Two other polymorphisms: 2071G/A (exon 11) and 2712C/G (exon 15) Uzbeks - 0,92, Tajiks - 0,85 [Golubenko et .al ., 2002] . were under−represented in the population of Hd. Moreover, the 135G/ The populations of kazakhs have generally higher values of gene A RET variant has been strongly shown to be associated with the Hd diversity of mtDNA by complicated ethnic history of the Kazakh phenotype . We have demonstrated that RET haplotypes containing population . The comparison of Kazakhs and other ethnic origin reveals these polimorphisms play a role in the aetiology of Hd . While the allelic the complicated structure of mtDNA gene pool in Middle Asia . variant in exon 2 can predispose to Hirschsprung disease development, it seems that tested polymorphisms in exon 11 and 15 could have a P1079. δ-thalassaemia in Cyprus protective effect against the severe type of aganglionosis . M. S. Phylactides1, E. Pavlou1, A. Kyrri2, E. Kalogerou3, M. Kleanthous1; 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Thalassae- P1077. secret of the short life span: smoking and complement mia Centre, Makarios Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Thalassemia Centre, Ma- interact in promoting cardiovascular disease morbidity and karios Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. mortality To help clarify the haematological picture of patients who may be positive G. Füst1,2, J. Kramer3, B. Blasko1,2, P. Thorbjornsdottir4, R. Kolka4, S. T. Sig- for β- and δ-globin gene mutations, the following study was carried urðarson5, G. Sigurðsson5, Z. Rónai6, Z. Prohászka1, M. Sasvári-Székely6, S. out aiming to identify the δ-globin gene mutations found in the Greek Böðvarsson5, G. Thorgeirsson5, G. J. Arason4; Cypriot population, their frequencies and the HbA values associated 2 1Third Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, with them . 74 samples were selected from a random sample of 5030 Hungary, 2Szentágothai János Knowledge Center, Semmelweis University, individuals and the database of the Molecular Genetics Thalassaemia Budapest, Hungary, 3Central Laboratory, Jahn Ferenc Hospital, Budapest, Hun- Department containing diagnostic analyses data was also mined for gary, 4Department of Immunology, Institute for Medical Laboratory Sciences, relevant information . Landspítali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 5Department of Medicine, Three novel for Cyprus δ-globin gene mutations (-30, IVS-I-2, HbA- 2 Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 6Department of Medical Yohoshima) were identified, bringing the total of δ-globin alleles in the Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry, Semmelweis University, Greek Cypriot population to ten: HbA-Yialousa, HbA-Yokoshima, 2 2 Budapest, Hungary. HbA-Troodos, HbA-Pelendri, Codon 4, Codon 59, IVS-II-897, IVS-I-2, 2 2 Smoking carries a major risk for cardiovascular disease (CVD) . We -55, -30 . HbA-Yialousa is the most common mutation with a frequency 2 have determined the frequency of the so-called silent allele of the of 61 .1% followed by Codon 4 (frequency 20 .4%) . complement C4B gene (C4B*Q0) (less C4B than C4A genes in the HbA levels over 1.9% have been found to indicate a significantly 2 genome) in 263 and 233 patients, respectively, with different types reduced possibility for the presence of a δ-globin gene mutation in this of coronary artery disease and in 479 and 274, healthy subjects, population (≤20%). For HbA levels below 1 .9%, the possibility of a 2 respectively from Iceland and Hungary . .Smoking habits were registered Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  heterozygote δ-globin gene mutation rises to 80-100%. of Indo-European language family); 57 Tatars, 66 Bashkirs, 40 Balkars The frequency of all the mutant δ-globin alleles in the sample is 0.0067 (Turkic group of the Altaic language family); 53 Circassians, 50 and the carrier frequency is 1 .26% . Abkhazes (Western group of the North Caucasus language family); 50 Avars (Eastern group of the North Caucasus language family) . P1080. ABO-genotyping by means of gel-based DNA microchips Genotype frequency Allele frequency D. O. Fesenko, O. N. Mityaeva, A. S. Zasedatelev, T. V. Nasedkina; Populations N 1/1 1/2 2/2 1 2 Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation. A method of ABO alleles discrimination using microchip technology Russians 114 0 .96 0 .04 0 0 .98 0 .02 is presented. Gel elements of the microchip contain SNP-specific Tatars 57 0 .93 0 .07 0 0 .96 0 .04 oligonucleotide probes able to reveal polymorphisms in positions 261, 297, 526, 646, 657 and 681 of ABO-locus. The amplification of exon 6 Bashkirs 66 0 .88 0 .008 0 .04 0 .92 0 .08 and 7 was carried out in multiplex nested PCR with fluorescently labeled Circassians 53 0 .75 0 .23 0 .02 0 .87 0 .13 primers . Then hybridization on a chip was performed and the ABO alleles were detected according to haplotype-specific fluorescence of Balkars 40 0 .75 0 .23 0 .02 0 .86 0 .14 gel elements . 75 DNA samples of residents mainly from the Central Abkhazes 50 0 .82 0 .16 0 .02 0 .90 0 .10 region of Russia were investigated . The following blood groops distribution was obtained: I-38 .4%, II-29%, III-28%, IV-4 .6% . The Avars 50 0 .66 0 .30 0 .04 0 .81 0 .19 results of allele determination were the following: A-20 .3%, B-19 .2%, O1-37 .8%, O1v-21 .5%, O2-1.2%. To confirm the accuracy of genotyping By geographical localization, the Russians, the Bashkirs and the Tatars 10 samples were sequenced and the results were verified. belong to steppe populations, while the Circassians, the Balkars, the The sensitivity of the method amounts to 15 pg of DNA for a single test Abkhazes and the Avars belong to mountain populations . which is equal to genome of 3 somatic cells . Due to high sensitivity the We found the frequency of ADH2*2 was significantly different among method will be promising in identification of individuals especially in all examined populations (chi2=35 .25, p<0 .001) and was ranged from complicated cases . Furthermore, the method is able to distinguish 15 2% in Russians to 19% in Avars . In total mountain populations were genotypic blood groops instead of 4 serologic ones that would increase characterized by higher frequency of ADH2*2 allele, compared to that a discrimination power of forensic examination . of steppe populations (chi2=25 .82, p<0 .001) . According to our data ADH2*2 allele has higher frequency in mountain P1081. Genetic polymorphisms as basic predictive markers of populations . We can suggest that because of hard climatic conditions, aging high alcohol consumption and high mortality natural selection led to O. S. Glotov1,2, A. S. Glotov1,2, G. S. Demin1,2, M. V. Moskalenko1,2, N. J. Sh- surviving of individuals with lower risk for alcoholism . ved1, M. V. Aseev1, S. Potulova2, V. G. Vakharlovsky1, T. E. Ivashchenko1, V. S. Baranov1; P1083. Analysis of common alpha-thalassemia point mutations 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian and deletions by reverse-hybridization Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, St.-Petersburg, Russian Fed- H. Puehringer1, H. Najmabadi2, H. Y. Law3, W. Krugluger4, E. Baysal5, V. Vip- eration. rakasit6, S. Pissard7, A. Taher8, A. Al-Ali9, C. Oberkanins1; The polymorphisms of 15 genes (AGT, ACE, AGTR1, PLAT, PAI1, 1ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Genetics Research GPIIIa, MTHFR, NOS3, MTRR, GSTT1, GSTM1, VDR, COL1A1, Center, The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, Tehran, CALCR, ER1) responsible for multifactorial diseases were studied Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Service, KK Women’s and Children’s Hos- in three different groups . The newborn group included 102 unrelated pital, Singapore, Singapore, 4Department of Clinical Chemistry, Rudolfstiftung individuals of newborn age, middle-age group included 122 unrelated Hospital, Vienna, Austria, 5Genetics Department, Al Wasl Hospital, Dubai, individuals of middle age (25-45), the group of elders - 148 unrelated United Arab Emirates, 6Dept. Paediatrics, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, individuals over 70 years . Progressive increasing of frequencies of M/ Bangkok, Thailand, 7Lab de Genetique et de Biochimie, Hopital Henri Mondor, T (AGT) genotype in the elderly group as compared to the middle age Creteil, France, 8Department of Internal Medicine, American University of Beirut (56 .0% and 34 .0%, respectively, p=0 .0006) and I/D (ACE) genotype Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon, 9Department of Clinical Biochemistry, College in the row newborn-middle-age-elderly (41 .3%, 45 .4%, 50 .3%, of Medicine, King Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia. respectively) was registered . The frequency of A/C (AGTR1) genotype Alpha-thalassemia (alpha-thal) is observed in high frequencies decreased in the elderly men compared with middle age (31% and throughout Southeast Asia, India, the Middle East, parts of Africa and 51%) . The frequency of GSTT10/0 genotype was different in studied the Mediterranean area . It is characterized by the reduced synthesis groups (newborn group - 18 .4%, middle-age - 22% and elderly people or absence of alpha-globin chains due to mutations affecting one or - 28%) . The frequencies of deletion homozygotes (GSTT10/0 and both genes . The clinical phenotype varies from asymptomatic to lethal GSTM10/0) gradually increased with aging 6 .7%, 14 .5% and 16 .0% in (Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis) according to the number of impaired alpha- newborns, middle-age and elderly people (after 90 years) respectively . globin genes . The frequencies of genotypes and alleles of other genes were similar We have developed a reverse-hybridization assay (Alpha-Globin in the studied groups. However, combined analysis revealed significant StripAssay) for the rapid and simultaneous detection of 21 alpha-globin prevalence of genotype I/D (ACE), 4a/4b (eNOS), C/C (MTHFR) in mutations: two single gene deletions (-3.7; -4.2), five double gene elderly people compared to middle-age ones (p=0 .035) . So, it might deletions (MED; SEA; THAI; FIL; -20.5 kb), anti-3.7 gene triplication, be speculated, that some alleles of these genes are associated with two point mutations in the alpha 1 gene (cd 14: TGG-TAG; cd 59: Hb life span . Further, it is necessary to perform studies on various groups Adana GGC>GAC) and eleven point mutations in the alpha 2 gene (init of different age, and take into account meta-analysis of the data from cd: ATG>ACG; cd 19: -G; IVS1: 5nt del; cd 59: GGC>GAC; cd 125: other laboratories to estimate the role of some genes in aging . Hb Quong Sze CTG>CCG; cd 142: Hb Constant Spring TAA>CAA; cd 142: Hb Icaria TAA>AAA, cd 142: Hb Pakse TAA>TAT; cd 142: Hb P1082. ADH polymorphism in mountain and steppe populations Koya Dora TAA>TCA; poly A-1: AATAAA-AATAAG; poly A-2: AATAAA- G. G. Faskhutdinova, E. Jurjev, A. Zaynullina, D. Gaysina, I. Kutuev, R. Khu- AATGAA). The test is based on multiplex DNA amplification (including sainova, T. Noskova, E. Khusnutdinova; gap-PCR) and hybridization to teststrips presenting a parallel array Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. of allele-specific oligonucleotide probes for each variant. The entire ADH2 is one of the major enzymes metabolizing alcohol . This enzyme is procedure from blood sampling to the identification of mutations encoded by ADH2 gene, which contains two functional polymorphisms . requires less than 6 hours, and hybridization/detection may be carried Arg47His enzyme (ADH2*2) is superactive, leading to more rapid out manually or essentially automated using existing instrumentation accumulation of acetaldehyde . It has been documented that there are (e.g. TECAN profiBlot). The Alpha-Globin StripAssay has been differences in frequencies of ADH2 allels between populations . carefully validated, both on pre-typed reference samples, as well as in The analysis of ADH2 gene was performed by PCR method . The routine diagnostic settings. (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at) population samples included: 114 Russians (belongs to Slavic group Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P1084. Alzheimer’s Disease and the cystatin c gene in parous and nulliparous AD women supported previous findings polymorphism: an association study. indicating that the e*3/e*3 genotype was associated with higher R. Cittadella1, F. Condino1, N. Romeo1, G. Nicoletti1,2, V. Andreoli1; fertility and the e*4 carrying genotypes with lower fertility . When the 1Istituto di Scienze Neurologiche, Pianolago di Mangone (CS), Italy, 22 Institute combined effects of fertility and APOE genotypes on AD onset age of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. were analysed parity was found to be associated with a significantly Cystatin C is a cysteine protease inhibitor which is found to colocalize lower AD onset age ( 72.3±5.9 years) than nulliparity (79.0±5.6 years; with Aβ in plaques and cerebrovascular deposits in Alzheimer’s P=0 .004) among e*3/e*3 homozygotes . Since e*3/e*3 is the most Disease (AD) . Recent studies have reported a genetic association frequent APOE genotype in Europe (0 . 56--0 .70), past fertility may between the 73 G/A polymorphism within exon 1 of the cystatin C influence AD susceptibility in many women. A similar effect was absent gene (CST3), a common Ala/Thr substitution in the signal peptide, and among e*4 carriers. Our findings indicate that past fertility may have Alzheimer’s disease (AD) with conflicting results. To further investigate a relevant effect on AD onset age and that the effect is mediated by the proposed association in our population, we analyzed this variant APOE genotype . in a clinic and population based group of 171 Italian patients with sporadic AD from southern Italy (Calabria region) and 190 healthy P1087. complex haplotypes from apo(a) gene locus control controls subjects from the same geographical area . All 361 subjects regions and correlation to Lp(a) plasma levels were genotyped for CST3 and APOE polymorphisms but our data K. Zidkova1,2, V. Kebrdlova2, L. Zlatohlavek1, R. Ceska1; showed no association between AD and CST3. We therefore stratified 13rd Medical Department, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hospi- our samples based on age (of controls) or age of onset (of cases): <65- tal, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology 69, 70-79, and 80+ years. After this stratification according to age, in and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, older patients (80+ years) the GG frequency resulted over-represented Prague, Czech Republic. when compared to controls, but far from statistically significant. There Objectives: High lipoprotein(a), Lp(a), level is an independent risk factor was also no evidence of a statistical interaction between CST3 and for developement of premature atherosclerosis . Apolipoprotein(a), APOE polymorphisms . In conclusion, our data suggest that the 73 G/A apo(a), is the main determinant of Lp(a) plasma concentration . The aim polymorphism within exon 1 of the cystatin C gene is not a susceptibility of our study was to reconstruct haplotypes using five polymorphisms factor in AD and nor mitigate the effect of the ApoE -ε 4 allele in the risk from the apo(a) gene regulatory sequences (promoter, DHIII enhancer) of developing AD in our population but further studies will be necessary and to compare their distribution in five groups of individuals with to clarify the CST3 polymorphism position among AD risk factors . different range of Lp(a) level and in a population sample . methods: The out-patients pool of the 3rd Medical Department was P1085. two sNPs in the Fas gene on chromosome 10 are not divided into quintiles according to Lp(a) concentration . Population associated with italian sporadic Alzheimer‘s Disease sample was derived from the Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics . V. Andreoli1, L. Nicoletti1, F. Trecroci1, F. Condino1, N. Romeo1, G. Nicoletti1,2, Three polymorphisms (TTTTAn repetition, +93C/T, +121G/A) from the R. Cittadella1; apo(a) gene promoter and two polymorphisms (-1617C/A, -1230A/G) 1Istituto di Scienze Neurologiche, Pianolago di Mangone (CS), Italy, 22 Institute from the DHIII enhancer region were detected by the fragmentation of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. analysis (TTTTAn repetition ) and by the DGGE method in combination The TNFRSF6 (Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Super Family 6) with sequencing in the quintiles and by the RFLP and allele-specifice gene encodes Fas antigen, a cell surface receptor-mediating cell PCR in the population sample . apoptosis situated on chromosome 10q, near the region of linkage to Results: From the 80 possible haplotypes 23 were able to bulit up all sporadic Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) . Moreover, elevated levels of Fas observed genotypes in the quintiles and population sample . Several have reported in the brain of AD patients . These two criteria, positional statistically significant differences were observed in frequencies and pathobiological, make the Fas antigen an interesting candidate distribution among quintiles and between each quintile and population for an association with AD. To address these findings, we have tested sample . Some of the haplotypes were isolated to a narrow range of two SNPs in the TNFRSF6 gene in a set of 223 Italian patients with Lp(a) levels . non-familial (sporadic) AD from southern Italy and 211 healthy controls conclusion: We conclude from our study that complex haplotypes subjects: a G to A polymorphism at position (-670) in the enhancer from apo(a) gene locus could be used as a marker for certain range of region of the promoter and a single nucleotide change from C to T apo(a) gene length variants and thus Lp(a) levels . 74 nucleotides from the beginning of exon 7 in the Fas gene . There This study was supported by grant IGAMZCR NR-8328-3/200 and by was no statistically significant differences in allelic and genotypic MSM0021620807. frequency distribution between cases and controls or between late and early-onset AD patients . No interactive effect was found between P1088. Polymorphism of the ApoE locus in the Azores islands the Fas polymorphisms and the known risk factor of non-familial AD, (Portugal) Apolipoprotein-E ε4 allele. We also tested whether these different C. Bettencourt1, R. Montiel1, C. Santos1, M. Pavão1, A. Viegas-Crespo2, P. Fas genotypes were associated with clinical features, such as age at Lopes2, M. Lima1; disease onset and disease progression but no significant differences 1University of the Azores, Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 2University of Lis- was detected . The present data suggest that the polymorphisms do bon, Lisbon, Portugal. not represent a risk factor for AD in our population . The aim of this work was to report on the polymorphism of the ApoE locus in the Azores Islands (Portugal) in order to get insights on the P1086. Effect of Apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype and past genetic background that influences the lipid profile in this population, fertility on age of onset of Alzheimer’s disease in women ascertained as considerably high in a preliminary study of a sample R. M. Corbo1, L. Ulizzi1, G. Gambina2, E. Broggio2, G. Moretto2, R. Scacchi3; of healthy subjects (60% of individuals were hypercholesterolemics) . 1University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 2Verona Hospital, Verona, Italy, 3CNR One hundred and twenty six Azorean individuals were typed for ApoE Institute of molecular biology and pathology, Rome, Italy. polymorphism using standard PCR-RFLP . The allelic frequencies Various genetic and non-genetic risk factors have been linked to obtained for ε2, ε3 and ε4 were 6.75%, 83.73% and 9.52%, the development of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) . In women, having respectively . Genotypic frequencies were in conformity with Hardy- had children is one of the non-genetic factors reportedly associated Weinberg expectations. The ε3/ε3 genotype presented the highest with an increased risk of AD . Among genetic factors involved in AD frequency (69.84%), whilst ε4/ε4 was the least frequent (0.79%). susceptibility, the APOE e*4 allele has a major role and its presence The genotypic and allelic frequencies observed were similar to those reduces age at AD onset. But APOE is also thought to influence reported for other Iberian samples . Furthermore, Nei’s gene diversity human reproduction as well, and common APOE genotypes seem to (0 .2864±0 .0351) was similar to the reported for samples from Mainland be associated with differential fertility . With this study, we investigated Portugal . Results obtained did not evidence a particular behaviour of possible relationships between APOE genotype, past fertility, and AD the ApoE locus that could be directly related with the high levels of total onset age in a sample of 116 women with the sporadic form of the cholesterol determined in the Azorean population . disease . Results from a comparison of APOE genotype distribution Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P1089. Birth defects registry in a region of Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 18- frequency ranging from 0 .024 in Tadjiks to 0 .139 in Turkmens . The years experience obtained results demonstrate that Central Asian populations are R. Stoeva1, A. Petrov2, L. Grozdanova1, T. Krastev1, M. Stefanova1; genetically situated between European and Eastern-Asian populations, 1Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical University, Plovdiv, corresponding with Central Asia geographic location . There was no Bulgaria, 2Department of Neonatology, Multiple Specialties Hospital “Plovdiv” population differentiation both in general and relative to the population EAD, Plovdiv, Bulgaria. linguistic attribution, neither at the individual loci examined, nor over Registration programs of congenital anomalies carry out a systematic the two loci . The revealed low frequency of the C282Y mutation (< 1%), collection of congenital anomalies among newborn children and which is the most functionally important of all known HFE mutations for stillborn and perform analyses of these data . Here we present a study, the development of hereditary hemochromatosis type 1, reduced the which includes the data of congenital anomalies registry program for the attractivity of molecular genetic screening of the disease in the risk region of Plovdiv, Bulgaria, during the period of 18 years, 1987-2004 . groups in this region as an effective diagnostic tool . The study comprises 84162 newborn with 1753 registered congenital anomalies and inherited disorders among them (2,08%) The number P1092. An age-associated decrease in the frequency of c4B*Q0 and the proportion of various groups of anomalies towards all newborn and c4A*Q0 genotypes in Hungarian general population as well as all children with anomalies are presented . The greatest part A. Bíró1, Z. Bánlaki1, M. Kovács1, Á. Szilágyi2, Z. Rónai2, M. Sasvári-Székely2, of all anomalies represent the syndromes with multiple anomalies, Z. Pocsai3, G. Széles3, R. Ádány3, B. Blaskó1, G. Füst1; 16,54%, followed by congenital heart defects, 15,86%; limb anomalies, 1Semmelweis University, 3rd Department of Medicine, Szentágothai János 11,69%; open neural tube defects, 9,64%; chromosomal disorders, Knowledge Center, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department of Medical Chemistry, 8,96% . Monogenic disorders and syndromes are resumed separately . Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry, Semmelweis University, Budapest, The parallel analysis between the results of this study and those of Hungary, 3Department of Preventive Medicine, School of Publis Health, Medical other European registries disclose a not fully sufficient application and Health Science Centre, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. of prenatal screening methods among pregnant women especially The C4 complement protein is encoded by two genes (C4A and ultrasound diagnostics of fetal morphology in the region of Plovdiv . C4B) in the MHCIII region . In about 50% of Caucasian population the number of the C4A and C4B genes is equal while in about 25%-25% P1090. the distribution of the c18t and G36t genetic variants the number of C4A genes is lower (C4A*Q0) or higher (C4B*Q0) than of the ADP platelet receptor gene P2Y12 in octogenarians and that of the C4B genes . Previously we found the C4B*Q0 genotype newborns from Russia associated with short life expectancy, while C4A*Q0 genotype, E. L. Smurova, A. E. Taraskina, A. M. Novikova, O. V. Sirotkina; member of the 8 .1 ancestral haplotype (8 .1 AH) was strongly linked to Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. ever smoking trait in women. We wanted to confirm these observations ADP is the most important mediators of haemostasis and thrombosis . by a new RT-PCR based method . The sample group representing age Effect of ADP on platelets is mediated by two receptors - P2Y1 and and sex distribution of the Hungarian general population was randomly P2Y12 . The P2Y12 receptor plays a key role in platelet aggregation . recruited . We determined Hsp70-2, TNF -308 SNPs, and the number Recently two new SNPs in coding region of P2Y12 gene were found in of C4A/C4B genes . Russian population - C18T and G36T . We had analyzed these genetic Samples were from three age groups (30-39 years, 60-69 years, polymorphisms in the case-control study for myocardial infarction and 70-79 years) . In the two younger age groups the percentage of the conclude that C18T may prevent platelets hyperaggregability and C4A=C4B, C4A*Q0 and C4B*Q0 carriers was 47%, 30% and 23%, play a protective role in myocardial infarction development in contrast respectively . In the 70-79 years group a percentage of 78%, 11%, and G36T may be a risk factor for myocardial infarction. For confirmation 11% was found that is the proportion of both C4A*Q0 and C4B*Q0 this hypothesis the frequencies of C18T and G36T genotypes were carriers was dramatically dropped (p<0 .001) . The carrier frequency of investigated in two groups - 132 healthy volunteers older 85 years 8.1 haplotype as defined by carriership of C4A*Q0, TNF2, and Hsp70- without any thromboembolic events or myocardial infarction and 155 2 G was found to be 8 .3%, 11 .8, and 0% in the three age-groups newborn infants . For detection of the C18T and G36T variants the (p=0 .015) . This decrease was restricted to the females . polymerase chain reaction and original endonuclease digestion with Our results confirm that the C4B*Q0 genotype is a negative selection MnlI and SecI were used . We found the prevalence of the 18T allele factor for survival, and indicate that the ever-smoking-related 8 .1AH is (carriers of 18CT and 18TT genotypes) in volunteers older 85 years also associated with decreased life expectancy . compared newborn infants - 65% and 54%, respectively (p=0 .04), and the relative decrease of the 36T allele (carriers of 36GT and 36TT P1093. Maternal influenza during pregnancy and risk of genotypes) in healthy volunteers - 23% compared with newborn infants congenital abnormalities - 32% (p=0.1). The group of newborn infants reflects the distribution of E. Horváth-Puhó1, N. Ács2, F. Bánhidy2, A. E. Czeizel3, M. Szunyogh1, J. Mét- genetic variants in our population but in the healthy volunteers older neki1; 85 years we may reveal the protective alleles . We conclude that C18T 1National Center for Epidemiology, Budapest, Hungary, 2Second Department P2Y12 play a protective role in development of thromboembolism or of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, myocardial infarction . 3Foundation for the Community Control of Hereditary Diseases, Budapest, Hungary. P1091. Analysis of c282Y and H63D mutations of HFE gene in The teratogenic effect of influenza viruses is currently being debated, populations of central Asia therefore we examined the large population-based data set of the R. I. Khusainova, N. N. Khusnutdinova, E. K. Khusnutdinova; Hungarian Case-Control Surveillance of Congenital Abnormalities Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. (1980-1996) to study the possible association between maternal Hemochromatosis is a hereditary disease of iron metabolism influenza and congenital abnormalities. We evaluated 22843 newborns disturbance. Identification of the hemochromatosis-causing genetic or fetuses with different congenital abnormalities and 38151 matched defect will provide early diagnostics, population screening for the carrier controls without any birth defects. The prevalence of maternal influenza state, as well as the performance of medical genetic counseling . With during the entire pregnancy and in the second and/or third month of the aim of identification of heterozygous carriers and establishment pregnancy was compared between the study groups and crude and of the disease screening pattern, as well as for the description of the adjusted odds ratios (OR) with 95 percent confidence intervals (CI) gene pool ethnic features, the C282Y and H63D mutations in the HFE were determined in conditional logistic regression models . The use of gene were examined 594 individuals from 5 populations of Central Asia antifever drugs was an effect modifier, therefore the analyses were belonging to Turkic group of Altaic language familty: Kazakhs, Uzbeks, repeated with the variable of interest stratified. We found a higher Kirgizis, Turkmens, and Uighurs, and from 2 populations belonging prevalence of maternal influenza during the second and/or third month to Iranic group of Indoeuropean language family: Tadjiks, and Kurds . of pregnancy for the group of newborns with cleft lip ± palate (adjusted C282Y mutation has been found in Uighurs (0 .009), Kazakhs and OR, 3.2; 95% CI, 2.0-5.3), neural-tube defects (adjusted OR, 1.9; Tadjiks (0 .012), but hasn’t been found in other populations . H63D 95% CI, 1.1-3.3) and cardiovascular malformations (adjusted OR, 1.7; mutation has been revealed in all investigated populations with 95% CI, 1.3-2.3). However, a direct teratogenic effect from influenza Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 0 viruses appears to be unlikely, and our results suggest that the higher Sequencing of the complete Connexin 26 gene coding region and prevalence of some congenital abnormalities can be explained mainly deletion analysis of the common Δ (GJB6-D13S1830) mutation led by fever, because the risk was reduced by the use of antifever drugs . us to identify 169 unrelated individuals with mutations in Connexin 26 Thus, it is important to consider preventing the potential teratogenic and/or Δ (GJB6-D13S1830):102 patients (60.3%) exhibited a 35delG effect of maternal influenza by vaccination and periconceptional folic homozygous genotype, 47 (27 .8%) were compound heterozygous acid supplementation and by starting adequate antifever therapy as 35delG/not 35delG while 16 patients (9 .5%) were compound soon as possible after the diagnosis of maternal influenza during heterozygous not 35delG and 4 showed a dominant mutation . pregnancy . Our results will give indications about the genetic profile of hearing loss due to mutations in GJB2 and Δ (GJB6-D13S1830) among different P1094. medication use during pregnancy in Hungary in recent Italian areas and will allow to compare on a regional basis the Connexin years 26 and Δ (GJB6-D13S1830) gene mutation rates. M. Szunyogh1, E. Horváth-Puhó1, C. Siffel2, J. Métneki1, J. Sándor1; 1National Center for Epidemiology, Budapest, Hungary, 2National Center on P1096. Descriptive epidemiology of cornelia de Lange syndrome Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilites Centers for Disease Control and I. Barisic1, V. Tokic1, M. Loane2, F. Bianchi3, E. Calzolari4, E. Garne5, H. Dolk2; Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States. 1Childrens Univ. Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Faculty of Life & Health The purpose of our analysis was to evaluate the medication use during Sciences, University of Ulster, Newtownabbey, Ireland, 3Istituto di Fisiologia Cli- pregnancy among mothers of cases with birth defects and healthy nica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Italy, 4Medical Gentics Unit, University controls in recent time period . of Ferrara, Italy, 5University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. We used the population-based dataset of the Hungarian Case-Control CdLS is a multiple congenital anomaly/mental retardation syndrome Surveillance of Congenital Abnormalities in order to calculate the consisting of characteristic dysmorphic features, microcephaly, frequencies of drug intake by mothers during their pregnancy from hypertrichosis, upper limb defects, growth retardation, developmental 1997 through 2002. Cases with birth defects (n = 7,559) were identified delay and a variety of associated major malformations . We present from the HCAR, two healthy control babies (n = 14,448) were identified results of the population-based epidemiological study of the classical by public health nurses . For statistical analysis, we applied logistic form of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) .The data were provided regression . by 33 registries form 16 European countries . Registries participate Medication use among younger pregnant women (<25 years) in the large European network of birth defect registries - EUROCAT, was higher compared to older maternal age group (>=25 years) using the same epidemiological methodologies . 106 cases of CdLS (OR=1.21;95% CI=1.12-1.32). Vitamins, mineral supplements were have been identified in the total of 8 604 049 births, which corresponds used by the majority of mothers among both cases and controls to a prevalence of 1 .23/100000 births . There were 96 live births, 3 (76% any time during pregnancy; 38% during the first trimester). stillbirths, and 6 terminations of pregnancy . Prenatal diagnosis by Therapeutic drug use during pregnancy was higher (OR=1.56;95% ultrasound examination accounts for 23 .5% of all diagnosed cases . CI=1 .47-1 .65) among case mothers (49%) compared to control Live born infants with CdLS have a high first week survival rate mothers (38%) . Medication use was lower among both case (19%) (81%) . The most frequent major congenital malformations associated and control (13%) mothers during the first trimester in comparison with with CdLS are limb defects (73 .1 %), congenital heart defects (45 .6 intake during the second and third trimester (28%; 23%, respectively). %), central nervous system malformations (40 .2%) and cleft palate Our preliminary analysis showed that large proportion of pregnant (21.7%). In the majority of cases the karyotype is normal. Identified women use medications in Hungary, which is higher among mothers of abnormal karyotypes (46,XYdel(3)(q12q21),inv(5)(p13q13) and 46,XX cases with birth defects compared to the general Hungarian pregnant t(X;22)(p11;qter)) presumably disrupt genes identified to be responsible population represented by mothers of healthy control babies in the for CdLS . Maternal age and paternal age do not seem to be the risk dataset. Our findings suggest the continuous need of postmarketing factors for CdLS . Almost 80% of the cases born after the 37th week of drug surveillance among pregnant women in Hungary to evaluate the gestation weight less than 2500 g; low birth weight correlates with a risk-benefit of medication use. more severe phenotype, including severe limb anomalies . We found no evidence of exposure to consistent teratogenes . P1095. Distribution of connexin 26 gene and delta(GJB6- D13s1830) mutations in 601 subjects according to their P1097. investigation of cYP2c9 Polymorphism in six Different geographical origin iranian populations P. Castorina1, P. Primignani2, S. Forte3, L. C. Trotta2, L. Garavelli4, L. Emanu- S. Tanhaei1, F. Biramijamal2, S. Arjmand2, M. Sanati2, M. Sheidaei1; ele5, D. Coviello2, M. Travi2, F. Lalatta1, U. Ambrosetti5; 1Shahid Beheshty University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Insti- 1Medical Genetics Unit Department D.B.N. Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore tute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Policlinico Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratory of Molecular Iran. Genetics Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Mangiagalli e Regina The Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9 enzyme is involved in drug Elena, Milan, Italy, 3Unit of Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Fondazione metabolism and in detoxification of carcinogenic compounds. It Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 4Medi- is described the polymorphism at colon 144 of the CYP2C9 gene cal Genetics Unit Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 5ORL and (Cys/Arg) and susceptibility of several types of cancer . Also, it is Ophtalmological Department, University of Milan, Fondazione Ospedale Mag- reported that CYP2C9 polymorphism is involved in drug resistance . giore Policlinico Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy. To investigate the Cyp2C9 codon 144 polymorphism among different Molecular testing for mutations in the gene encoding Connexin 26 ethnicity, we collected samples from healthy population from six (GJB2) has become the standard of care for genetic diagnosis and different populations from Iran . The CYP2C9 Cys144Arg genotypes counseling of autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing impairment were determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment (ARNSHI) . length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) and direct DNA sequencing Epidemiological data collected to date indicate that there is a great analysis in 205 healthy controls . diversity in the prevalence of each genetic subtype of ARNSHI in Among the healthy subjects with Mazandarani, Turkoman, Kord, Turk different populations . In most of the studies, a single allele predominate, and Fars (including Shiraz & Yazd) ethnicity, the genotype frequency in particular 35delG in Caucasians, 167 delT in Askhkenazi Jews; 235 of CYP2C9 Cys144Arg were 83 .7%, 90 .2%, 86 .6% 92 .5% and 83 .5% delC in Japanese; R143W in Ghana and W24X in India. A few other (86% for Shiraz & 81% for Yazd populations) for Arg allele . alleles have a moderate frequency . No significance difference in CYP2C9 allele distribution was observed Identifying the most frequent mutations leading to NSHI in a given between Mazandarani, Turkoman, Kord, Turk and Fars (including population may contribute to develop molecular diagnostic protocols Shiraz & Yazd) healthy individuals . In each groups, the distribution of well suited for that population, with few specific tests capable of genotypes fits the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. We want to use our detecting most of mutant alleles . data to detect the possible association of the CYP2C9 polymorphisms We report data on a cohort of 601 individuals suffering from hearing with susceptibility to several types of cancer from Iran .This work was impairment collected from all over Italy . supported by NIGEB project number 197 .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 1 P1098. Novel polymorphisms in exon 3 and intron 2 for CYPC from Turkey or North-Africa . The mean sensitivity of common CF-gene gene mutation panels to detect these mutations was 50 .6% (95% CI: 45 .0- F. Biramijamal1, S. Tanhaei2, S. Arjmand1, M. Sanati1, M. Sheidaei2; 56.2%), and differed significantly between Turkish and North African 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic people: 41 .7% (95% CI: 34 .7-48 .6%) versus 66 .4% (95% CI: 57 .7- Republic of Iran, 2Shahid Beheshty University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 75 .2%) . A sensitivity of 63 .6% (95% CI: 58 .2-69 .0) can be achieved by The Cytochrome P450 2C9 gene has a function in detoxification of expanding the mutation panels with these Mediterranean mutations . carcinogenic compounds . It is described the polymorphisms of the Conclusion: A low test-sensitivity of common CF-gene mutation panels CYP2C9 gene . Also, it is reported that CYP2C9 polymorphism is for CF-carrier screening of Mediterranean people was observed . involved in drug resistance . To investigate the Cyp2C9 polymorphisms This raises questions on whether and how to implement CF-carrier- among Iranian popupaltions, we collected samples from healthy screening in a multi-ethnic society . population . The CYP2C9 polymorphisms were determined by direct DNA sequencing analysis in 11 healthy controls and DU-145 cell P1101. Genetic analysis of CFTR mutations in cystic fibrosis line .Among the healthy and patient subjects, we found two novel patients from Romania polymorphisms at codons 112 (ATT→ATC) and 119 (AAA→AGA) L. Tamas1, I. Popa1, L. Pop1, A. Anghel1, Z. Popa2, C. Marian1; in exon 3, also four novel polymorphisms in intron 2, at nucleotides 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 6117 (C→T), 6108 (T→A), 6109 (A→G) and two base deletion (AG) 2National Center of Cystic Fibrosis Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania. at nucleotides 6102 and 6103 . This work was supported by NIGEB Objectives: The aim of this study was to improve the number of cystic projects number 197 . fibrosis mutations detected in patients from the National Center of Cystic Fibrosis from Timisoara (NCCFT) . P1099. Predicting individual metabolizer status using data- Material and methods: the study included a retrospective part which mining tools: application to CYPD6 data. consisted of analyzing the genetic tests results for 79 patients already A. Sabbagh, P. Darlu; investigated in collaboration with Royal Manchester Children’s Hospital INSERM U535, Villejuif, France. - Genetic Unit (UK) and an original, prospective part in which we Cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) plays a crucial role in the selected 17 patients for genetic analysis, based on clinical findings and metabolism of xenobiotics and processes about 20% of all commonly sweat test . 29 mutations were investigated using a ElucigeneTM CF29 prescribed drugs . Genetic polymorphism at the CYP2D6 gene locus is kit which detects point mutations or small deletions in deoxyribonucleic responsible for pronounced interindividual and interethnic differences acid (DNA) using a method based on ARMS allele specific amplification in the catalytic activity of the enzyme . Four main metabolic phenotypes technology . DNA was extracted from lymphocytes from peripheral have been described in human populations : poor, intermediate, rapid, blood samples, genomic DNA was amplified by PCR and the PCR and ultra-rapid metabolizers . Determination of individual metabolizer products were visualized on a UV transiluminator after electrophoresis status before initiation of therapy is crucial to ensure optimal dosing on agarose gel and staining with ethidium bromide . recommendations; this should improve patient outcome by reducing Results: we identified 18 mutated alleles from a total number of 34 alleles adverse effects and improving drug efficacy. and three mutations: ΔF508, G542X and I148T. We combined the new, The objective of this study is to identify the most informative CYP2D6 original data with data from the retrospective part and we obtained new genetic markers for the prediction of individual metabolizer status . To estimates of the frequency for CF mutations in Romania . address this issue, several data-mining tools were explored : decision Conclusion: the most frequent mutation in western and central trees, random forests, artificial neural networks, and the multifactor Europe, ΔF508 (70%) has a lower frequency in Romania (47,92%). dimensionality reduction (MDR) method . Marker selection was There are still many mutations that remain unidentified (34 %) by performed in eight population samples of various ethnic origin . investigating only the usual mutations . The great number of mutations Our results show that the number of polymorphisms required to predict and polymorphisms identified up to date (25) reflects the genetic CYP2D6 metabolic phenotype with a high predictive accuracy can be heterogeneity of Romanian population . dramatically reduced owing to the strong haplotype block structure observed at CYP2D6 . MDR and neural networks provided nearly P1102. Population study at two additional stR loci D2s1338 and identical results and performed the best . The results of this study will D19s433 in the representative sample of multinational Bosnia be helpful for the design of time- and cost-effective genotyping tests, and Herzegovina residents adapted to specific populations, that could be used as routine tools in D. Marjanovic1,2, J. Davoren3, A. Durmic1, N. Pojskic1, N. Bakal1, L. Kovacevic1, clinical practice . K. Drobnic4, V. Skaro2, K. Bajrovic1, D. Primorac5, R. Hadziselimovic1; 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and P1100. European cF survey: results of a European concerted Herzegovina, 2Center for Integrative Genomics, Molecular Diagnostics, Cell action on the identity and frequency of cFtR gene mutations and Gene Therapy, “Rudjer Boskovic” Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 3International among turkish and North African cF patients in Europe commission on missing persons, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 4Forensic P. Lakeman1,2, J. J. P. Gille1, J. E. Dankert-Roelse1, H. G. M. Heijerman3, M. C. Laboratory and Research Center, Ministry of the Interior, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Cornel1,2, L. P. ten Kate1; 5Laboratory for Clinical and Forensic Genetics, University Hospital Split, Split, 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Institute for Re- Croatia. search in Extramural Medicine (EMGO Institute), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, In our previous population studies of B&H human population, we have 3HagaHospital, The Hague, The Netherlands. used 15 STR loci included in the PowerPlex 16® System, twelve Y- Background: It is well known that mutation spectra of the CFTR gene chromosomal short tandem repeats loci incorporated in the PowerPlex® vary between populations, even within Europe . Knowledge of these Y System and 28 Y-chromosome NRY bi-allelic markers . All obtained mutation spectra is needed for diagnostic purposes, for counselling in results were included in Bosnian referent database . In order of future CF families and for screening, either neonatal to improve prognosis, development of this database we have decide to analyze two additional or preconceptional and prenatal to provide for reproductive options . STR loci: D2S1338 and D19S433 . Therefore, we have tested 110 There is only limited knowledge about the mutation spectra in migrant unrelated healthy individuals born in the Bosnia and Herzegovina, from populations in Europe . three main ethnical groups . Qiagen DnaeasyTM Tissue Kit was used for Objectives: To determine the identity and frequency of mutations found DNA extraction from buccal swabs and blood stains, QuantiBlot® assay in Turkish and North African CF patients and to study whether the test- for quantification and AmpFlSTR®Identifiler® for amplification and sensitivity of common CFTR gene mutation panels is appropriate for detection. Amplification was carried out as described previously. The Mediterranean people when offering CF-carrier screening . total volume of each reaction was 12.5μl. The PCR amplifications have Methods: In a survey among 373 European CF-centres, we asked been carried out in PE GeneAmp PCR-System 9700 Thermal Cycler whether and which mutations have been found among Turkish and according to the manufacturer’s recommendations . Electrophoresis North African CF-patients . of the amplification products was preformed on an ABI PRISM Results: Fifty different mutations had been found on 75 .2% (95%CI: 3100. Numerical allele designations of the profiles were obtained by 70 .4-80 .0%) of the CFTR alleles of patients (n=156) with both parents processing with GeneScan® 3 .7 .1 and Genotyper® 3 .7 . Deviation from Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, observed and expected heterozygosity, have not been studied up to now by PCR-fingerprinting. The aim of power of discrimination and exclusion were calculated . Also, we have present study is revealing of possible DNA polymorphisms by RAPD- compared B&H data with data obtained from geographically closer PCR in cells of different histogenesis in newborn and adult C57Black/6 (neighboring) European populations . Results of this study are going to and outbreed mice . The brain, liver, skeletal muscle, heart, intestine, be used as guidelines in additional investigation of genetic relationship lungs, kidneys, spleen, and testicle were used . between recent B&H and neighboring populations, originated in our The patterns of the total genetic variability of C57Black/6 and outbreed previous studies on Y-chromosome bi-allelic markers, as well in its mice had some differences . The general quantity of DNA variations application in the field of population, human and forensic genetics. was in several times more (from 2 to 6 times) in outbreed mice than in C57Black/6 mice in two examined periods . However both groups of P1103. Detection of deletions/null alleles in small pedigrees mice showed the more of the polymorphisms in newborn mice than in A. M. Johansson1, T. Säll1, H. Lilja2,3, C. Halldén3; adult mice . The individual differences did not reveal in the newborn 1Dept. of Cell and Organism Biology, Lund, Sweden, 2Departments of Clinical mice, but at the same time they were very strong in adult mice . Laboratories, Urology, and Medicine Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,, The most genetic variability was revealed in DNA of heart, skeletal New York, NY, United States, 3Dept. of Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital, muscle and lungs of newborn mice . But in adult C57Black/6 mice Malmö, Sweden. DNA polymorphisms of tissues were differed from strong decreasing Null alleles for PCR-based genetic markers can either be due to (skeletal muscle, brain) or complete absence (intestine, heart, lungs, polymorphisms in the primer annealing sites or to deletions . When liver, kidneys, spleen) DNA variations . In outbreed mice in contrary we analysing diseases with a complex inheritance, the detection of found out the polymorphisms in different tissues . deletions is very important, since deletions may in many cases Our data have shown that the number of genomic alterations rose directly contribute in the causation of disease . Null alleles, other than during ontogenesis and that this DNA variability markedly differed in deletions, are also of interest since undetected null alleles may cause individual animals . errors in haplotype inference and population genetic analyses . We have earlier described how deletions causing a dominant disease P1106. trends in the prevalence of livebirth Down syndrome can be detected (Johansson et al . 2005 Hum .Hered . 60:26-35) . Here during 25 years we investigate a method that is useful for complex diseases, but also M. Roth, B. Dott, Y. Alembik, C. Stoll; for normal variation . Null alleles can be detected as a special case Genetique medicale, Strasbourg, France. of non-Mendelian inheritance, i .e . when a parent and child appear to Down syndrome(DS) constitutes 8% of cases of registered congenital be homozygous for different alleles . The probability for this event was anomalies in Europe .The objectives of this study were to examine derived for: a parent and one child, a trio, a trio with one grandparent trends in the live birth prevalence of and a trio with two grandparents . The power to detect a deletion for DS during 25 years in a well defined population in the light of trends in a fixed overall number of investigated individuals was calculated for maternal age and prenatal diagnosis . SNPs and multiallelic markers with varying allele frequencies . The The material for this study came from multiple sources on births and results show that for SNPs, a trio with two grandparents are always terminations of pregnancy (TOP)after prenatal diagnosis of DS in more efficient than the other family types despite a lower total number 334,305 consecutive pregnancies of known outcome .The study period of founder chromosomes . For multiallelic markers the outcome varies . was divided into 3 subgroups 1979-1988, 1989-1996 and 1997-2003 . The method was applied to SNP data in 41 three-generation pedigrees In the area under study prenatal diagnosis of DS is offered to all containing 4-5 individuals . Several cases of segregating deletions and women >38 years .Maternal serum screening(triple test)is offered to other null alleles were detected and will be described . all pregnant women since 1997 and fetal ultrasonographic scanning is routine practice . P1104. the genetic demographic structure of the rural Between 1979-1988,1989-1996 and 1997-2002 TOP for DS was populations in tomsk region. 16 .2%, 46 .8% and 73 .4%, respectively .During the 3 time periods J. Kotalevskaya1, O. Salyukova2, L. Nazarenko2; the livebirth prevalence per 10,000 of DS was 9 .79, 10 .26, and 5 .14, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Medical respectively .The total prevalence of Down syndrome was 11 .69,19 .31 Genetics, Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. and 19 .29, respectively .The livebirth prevalence of DS has since 1997 We analyzed the data of the marriage records over the period from 1999 increasingly diverged from the rising total prevalence .The main reason to 2004, and then we calculated the some rates of population structure for these observations is the increase in maternal age, from 24 .8 to in our region . Today over 116 nationalities live in Tomsk region . The 30 .1 . total population is about 1 .057 million including 453 thousands of rural In conclusion the rise of maternal age has brought with it an increase population . The middle age was 26 .84±2 .13 for men and 24 .32±1 .55 for in the number of pregnancies affected by DS .The widespread practice women who got married during this period . The part of postreproductive of routine prenatal diagnosis and TOP has counteract the effect of marriages was 10 .3% . The part of young men and women (20 year maternal age in its effect on livebirth prevalence of DS . However the and early) among spouses were 11 .4% and 28 .3% respectively . The high total prevalence of fetal DS shows that more efforts on the primary national structure of the married couples included 75 nationalities: 67 prevention of chromosomal abnormalities are needed . for men and 59 for women . About 91 .4% Russians, 2 .34% Germans and 1 .6% Ukrainians were determined among contracting marriages P1107. Human X-chromosomal lineages in the Armenian persons . The part of marriages between spouses the same nationality population was 83 .3% . The ethnic marriage assortativeness (A’) was 7 .01% for K. Hovhannesyan1,2, V. Yotova2, T. Sarkisian1, D. Labuda2; Germans, 11 .79% for Russians and 6 .38% for Ukrainians . There were 1Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Centre de Recherche Hôpital about 77% natives of Tomsk region among all marriage couples . The Ste-Justine, Universté de Montréal, Montreal, PQ, Canada. natives of Siberian region averaged 7 .7% . The migration rate was Armenians belong to the one of the oldest Middle Eastern civilizations 0.409 and did not differ significantly between sexes. with a recorded history of about 3000 years . Studies of their genetic In that way, women get married on 2 .5 year earlier than men and twice diversity were previously carried out at the level of Y-chromosome and more often in young age . The dominate nationality in Tomsk region are mitochondrial DNA . Here we are extending them to a polymorphic Russians . The some nationalities are characterized by high rates of segment of the dystrophin locus in the chromosome Xp21 .3 . ethnical endogamy . The migration activity is low in population of our We genotyped thirty-six polymorphisms (substitutions, small region . insertions/deletions and T-repeat microsatellite) in eight population groups from Armenia and derived the underlying haplotypes . 416 P1105. Genetic variability revealed by RAPD-PcR in newborn Armenian chromosomes were compared with previously typed 1121 and adult mouse different tissues chromosomes from Africa, Asia and Europe . Armenian populations S. Alexandrova; were found to share 42 common haplotypes with other populations . Institute of Cytology RAS, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. We also found 15 new Armenian specific haplotypes representing 4.6% The DNA rearrangements in various organs and tissues of animals chromosomes, which can be derived from the frequent haplotypes Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  assuming simple recombination event . autosomal recessive diseases . Previously, we performed medical Our results show that geographically distinct Armenian regions do genetic study in different regions of Siberia (Tomsk region, Altai, not significantly differ both in the haplotype composition and in the Tuva and Yakutia Republics), but we identified rare syndromes such haplotype diversity (h=0.8) implying that gene flow took place in as Lesch-Nyhan, Werner, Diamond Blackfan, Bloch-Sulzberger and the whole territory of Armenia . Fst analysis indicate that only 0 .23% LEOPARD syndromes only in Khakasia . We continue the study of load of genetic variation is among populations and 99 .77% - within and the prevalence of hereditary pathology in Khakasia Republic . populations . Likewise, comparable haplotype diversity of Armenian population to Europe and Arabian Peninsula also suggests gene flow P1110. ADD3 (gamma adducin) haplotype variation and positive rather than isolation as well as a possibility of admixture, consistent selection with the geography of Armenia, situated at the borders of Europe L. Citterio, C. Lanzani, S. Delli Carpini, P. Manunta, G. Bianchi; and Asia . These conclusions are also in agreement with the principal University “Vita-Salute” - San Raffaele, Milano, Italy. component analysis . These results will be discussed in the context of Adducin functions within the cytoskeleton as an heterodimer that is other genetic systems studied earlier, providing interesting insight into formed by an a_subunit and either a b_or g subunit . Each subunit genetic history of Armenian population . is coded by genes (ADD1, ADD2, ADD3) mapping on different chromosomes . In kidney tissue adducin expression leads to a prevalent P1108. cytogenetic study on the effect of Prestige oil on human presence of a-g_heterodimer . Hypertensive patients carrying the health ADD1-460Trp variant (rs4961) have a flattened slope of the pressure- B. Pérez-Cadahía1,2, B. Laffon1,2, E. Pásaro1, J. Méndez2; natriuresis curve . Epistatic interaction between ADD1-460Trp and 1Toxicology Unit, La Coruña, Spain, 2Dept. Cell and Molecular Biology, Univer- ADD3-IVS11+386G (rs3731566-SNP5) polymorphisms affects 24h sity of A Coruña, La Coruña, Spain. ambulatory blood pressure, pulse-pressure and pressure-natriuresis In November, 2002, the oil tanker Prestige broke up in front of Galicia, relationship in three indipendent studies . spilling more than 73,000 tons of crude oil . The oil was composed AIM: We investigated the pattern of variation at ADD3 locus starting basically of volatile organic compounds (VOC), polycyclic aromatic from SNP5 performing two different approaches: 1) SNP and haplotype hydrocarbons (PAH) and resins . From the beginning, a lot of people analysis; 2) comparative genomic analysis in different populations. worked in the cleaning tasks . Among them, there were volunteers METHODS: Bioinformatic searching in various databases (dbSNP, that collaborated for one week (V), hired manual workers (MW) and ABI-Celera, CNG, HapMap, Ensembl, UCSC); genotyping of 100 high-pressure cleaner workers (HPW) . The aim of this work was to hypertensive patients; haplotype analysis using the criteria of Gabriel evaluate the genotoxic risk that oil exposure could exert on the human in Haploview package . health . Environmental exposure to VOC was evaluated by passive RESULTS: 1-ADD3 SNP5 is peculiar of Europeans and the derived G dosimetres and a chromatographic methodology . Two genotoxicity allele (MAF 0,40) is only included in the most frequent and long-range tests were applied on human lymphocytes: micronucleus (MN) and haplotype class (H1) . 2- Only in Europeans ADD3 genomic region, but sister-chromatid exchanges (SCE) . It is well known that some intrinsic not surrounding genes, reports a negative Tajima’s D value . 3-ADD3 factors may modulate the interindividual different responses to an HapMap data comparison indicates an unusual frequency spectrum of exposure . Since epoxide-hydrolase (encoded by EPHX1 gene) is one higher degree of rare variants only in Europeans . of the main enzymes that take part in COV and PAH metabolisms, CONCLUSIONS: All these peculiarities raise the possibility that positive and paying attention to the activating character of this enzyme when selection recently has been acting or has acted in ADD3 region and dealing with these substances, we have also evaluated the association that the SNP5/haplotypeH1 spread rapidly in Europe, such as in skin between two polymorphisms in EPHX1 gene and the cytogenetic pigmentation regulatory genes . parameters analysed . No exposure effect was detected on MN frequency, but HPW showed P1111. the cAcA GAS6 haplotype is associated with significantly higher SCE values than controls. Sex effect was observed atherothrombotic stroke in SCE test and age influence was significant in the exposed population X. Muñoz1, V. Obach2, B. Hurtado1, P. García de Frutos3, A. Chamorro2, N. for both tests . Smoking increased SCE frequency both in exposed and Sala1; in controls . Finally, the effect of epoxide-hydrolase expected activity on 1IDIBELL-IRO-CGMM, Barcelona, Spain, 2Stroke Unit, Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, the genotoxicity of the Prestige oil seemed not to be relevant . Barcelona, Spain, 3IIBB-CSIC-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. Growth arrest-specific 6 gene product (GAS6) is a tyrosine kinase P1109. the epidemiology of hereditary diseases in Khakasia receptor ligand with anti-apoptotic and pro-thrombotic effects . In Republic a previous study we identified different GAS6 SNPs and found an O. Salyukova1,2, L. Minaycheva1, L. Nazarenko1,2, O. Togochakova3, A. Dergu- association between c .834+7G>A, in intron 8, and stroke . The purpose nova3, E. Kozhevnikova3, S. Fadyushina1; of the present study was to analyze the association between specific 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State GAS6 haplotypes and disease in a population of 656 stroke patients Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Centre of Family Planning and (457 ischemic and 199 hemorrhagic) and 150 healthy controls . Reproduction of Khakasia Republic, Abakan, Russian Federation. Genotyping was performed by use of different PCR-based methods . The medical genetic study of the population of Khakasia Republic The THESIAS program was used to measure linkage disequilibrium (Russia) was performed . Khakasia Republic is situated in the centre of and haplotype frequencies . South Siberia, the total population is 542 .7 thousands people (the urban Results: Genotype and haplotype analysis revealed that the population - 336 thousands, the rural population - 206 .7 thousands) . c .834+7AA genotype was found associated with protection from stroke The most numerous ethnic groups are Russians (79 .5%) and Khakass (OR: 0.53; 95% CI: 0.32-0.89). After adjustment for known vascular (11 .1%), the other groups amount 9 .4% . The 286 patients from 200 risk factors, this association was maintained for the atherothrombosis- families with monogenic hereditary diseases were revealed . The 202 related (atherosclerotic, lacunar and deep ICH) strokes and it was even patients from 145 families were Russians, 74 patients from 47 families stronger when the c.834+7A allele was present in a specific haplotype were Khakass . The 8 families with 10 patients were other nationalities (CACA) of four GAS6 polymorphisms (c .280+170C>G, c .712+26G>A, (Armenians, Germans and Moldavians) . Thus, the 192 patients from c .713-155T>C, c .834+7G>A) . The prevalence of the CACA haplotype 130 families were found with autosomal dominant diseases; the 65 was 9 .7%, 11 .8% and 14 .6%, respectively in patients with ischemic patients from 52 families had autosomal recessive pathology; the 19 stroke, hemorrhagic stroke and in controls . After adjustment for patients from 10 families were revealed with X-linked forms . The group known vascular risk factors, the CACA haplotype was independently of hereditary syndromes predominated in the structure of hereditary associated with ischemic stroke (OR 0 .48 [0 .28-0 .83]), as well as with pathology (autosomal dominant - 44 .5%, autosomal recessive - atherothrombotic strokes (OR 0 .43 [0 .24-0 .79]) . 42 .8%, X-linked - 57 .1%) . The group of skeletal and connective tissue conclusions: The AA genotype of the GAS6 c .834+7 G>A SNP disorders was more often among autosomal dominant pathology and more strongly the GAS6 CACA haplotype are associated with (33 .3%) . The inborn metabolism defects and neurological pathology protection from ischemic and, atherothrombosis-related strokes . (25% and 17 .8% respectively) were the most prevalent among We thank Spanish MEC (SAF 2001-1059-C02 and SAF 2004-07539) Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  and ISCIII (01/1468 and C03/07) for grants . P1114. Determination of the carrier Frequency of the common GJB2 (connexin-26) 35delG mutation in the Greek cypriot P1112. study of genetic diversity among 18 iranian Ethnic group Population using Y chromosome marker V. Neocleous1, V. Anastasiadou2,1, G. Portides3, L. A. Phylactou1; Z. Lashgary1, F. Mahjoubi2, M. Sanatti3; 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Makarios III 1Ph.D student, National Institue for Genetic Engineering Tehran, Islamic Re- Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Intercollege, Nicosia, Cyprus. public of Iran, 2National Institue for Genetic Engineering And Biotechnology, Mutations in the GJB2 (connexin 26) gene are responsible for more Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National Institue for Genetic Engineering and than half of all cases of prelingual recessive inherited non-syndromic Biotechnology,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. deafness in Europe. One specific mutation 35delG, accounts for up to Since the Y chromosome passes from father to son, man’s paternal 70 % of the mutations detected in European populations and is one of ancestry can be traced using the DNA on his Y chromosome (Y_DNA) . the most frequent disease mutations identified so far. The aim of this This is a useful tool for study the genetic diversity among different study is to determine the percentage of carriers of this mutation in the ethnic groups and also the migration patterns in different geographical Greek Cypriot population . region . Genomic DNA was isolated from a total of 405 healthy unrelated In this study we aim to look at 27 marker on the Y chromosome (15 Greek Cypriot adults . Screening for the frameshift 35delG mutation Y-STR and 12 Y-SNP) for investigation of genetic diversity among was performed by using an allele-specific PCR protocol. Moreover, different Iranian ethnic groups ( farsis, kurde ,Lors ,Balooch , Azari, using the Poisson probability distribution, we compared the carrier Sistany Turkaman, Arab, Negro, Bandari,Gilak, Mazandarani, kermani, frequencies of the 35delG mutation of the Greek Cypriot population to Yazdi,Korasani, Jews, Ashoori, Armenian) . the various European and Middle Eastern populations . Blood samples from unrelated (at least three generation) individuals The carrier frequency in the Greek Cypriot population was estimated to from each ethnic group were collected (Total=1370) . DNA was be 2 .5 % and is similar to that observed in other European populations . extracted from blood sample using standard protocols . Multiplex PCR The variance estimate for 35delG mutation produces slightly wider systems have been set up for the simultaneous PCR amplification of intervals with the Poisson model when compared with Binomial many of these markers . probability variance estimate . The present study is an attempt to determine the genetic variation among different population in our country for application in evolutionary P1115. Distribution of Y-chromosome minimal haplotypes in studies, forensics, medical genetics and genealogical reconstruction . Ukraine S. A. Kravchenko, L. A. Livshits; P1113. Evidence of a major gene related to the infection of Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine. Leishmania braziliensis in a western Amazonian Population. Y-chromosomal microsatellite are highly valuable in human evolutionary R. G. M. Ferreira1, L. M. A. Camargo1, M. M. Moura2, V. Engracia2,3, E. P. Ca- and human history populations studies. Nine Y-chromosome-specific margo1, B. Beiguelman1, H. Krieger1; human microsatellite loci (DYS19, DYS389I, DYS389II, DYS390, 1Departmento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade DYS391, DYS392, DYS393, DYS385a/b) were typed in 243 males with de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Universidade Federal de Rondonia, Porto Slavic origin from Ukraine with the use of fluorescent PCR followed by Velho, Brazil, 3Instituto de Pesquisa em Patologias Tropicais, Porto Velho, high-throughput fragment analysis on a single-wavelength automated Brazil. DNA sequencer . The distribution and frequencies of minimal haplotypes American cutaneous leishmaniasis (ACL) is a parasitic disease caused were determined and compared with other populations based upon by several species of the protozoa Leishmania (subgenera Viannia data from the Y-chromosomal Haplotype Reference Database (YHRD) . and Leishmania) and is endemic from Yucatán to Northern Argentina . Nine Y-linked STR-loci were found to generate 190 different haplotypes, A sample of 313 individuals from Monte Negro (10o15’S, 63o18’W), a out of which 162 (85%) were unique . The mean of haplotype diversity small rural county in the State of Rondônia, Brazil, was collected in a in Ukrainian population was 0 .992 . Locus diversity values ranged from large Genetic-Epidemiologic survey and subjected to the Montenegro 0 .29 (DYS392) to 0 .82 (DYS385a/b) . It was shown that the several skin test (MST), aiming to uncover genetic mechanisms involved in ancestral neighbour’s haplotypes (16/13-31/24/11/11/13/14 .15, 16/13- the human host response to ACL . In this region of Amazon, ACL is 30/25/11/11/13/11 .14 and 16/13-30/25/11/11/13/11 .15) took part in mainly caused by Leishmania (Viannia) braziliensis . The prevalence formation of Ukranian male line . of positive reactions was 0 .42 . Complex segregation analysis was applied to the MST data corrected for age and sex, using the unified P1116. single origin for a worldwide common Hirschsprung model of Lalouel et al. (1983) . As shown bellow, the analysis indicated (HscR) susceptibility non-coding RET mutation the presence of a major recessive gene (frequency q = 0.548) that F. Lantieri1,2, J. Amiel3, G. Antinolo4, S. Borrego4, G. Burzynski5, I. Ceccherini1, influences the outcome of MST in the studied population. E. Emison6, C. Eng7, R. Fernandez4, M. Garcia-Barcelo8, P. Griseri1, R. Hofstra5, Complex Segregation Analysis of the Montenegro skin test in Monte C. Kashuk6, S. Lyonnet3, P. Tam8, A. Tullio-Pelet3, K. West6, A. Chakravarti6; Negro, Rondônia, Brazil 1Inst. G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2Dip. Scienze della Salute, Università di Geno- Model -2 ln L χ2 P test e .p . AIC va, Genova, Italy, 3Dept Genetique et Unite INSERM U-393, Paris, France, 4UC Genetica y Reproduccion, HH UU Virgen del Rocio, Seville, Spain, 5Dept Medi- 1 .Mixed 428 .91 4 436 .911 cal Genetics, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 6Inst Ge- netic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University of Baltimore, Baltimore, MD, United 2 .Sporadic 455 .94 27 .024 0 .000 2vs .1 0 455 .936 States, 7Dept Molecular Genetics, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States, 8Dept Surgery, Genome Research Centre, University of Hong Kong, 3 .No major gene 455 .14 26 .233 0 .000 3vs .1 1 457 .144 Hong Kong, China. HSCR is a complex genetic disease characterized by colonic 4 .No multifactorial 428 .98 0 .070 0 .791 4vs .1 3 434 .982 aganglionosis . The RET proto-oncogene is a major HSCR gene, whose coding sequence mutations account for a small proportion of cases, while a common noncoding variant in intron 1 has been proposed as .Recessive (d=0) . 0.00 0.6 vs.1  .16 a major disease factor . We have collected HSCR families from six countries over three continents, and genotyped 2,672 individuals for 14 markers at the RET 6 .Additive (d=0 .5) 449 .52 20 .611 0 .000 6vs .1 3 455 .523 locus . Overall, the T allele of the intron1 “I1 .357” SNP, demonstrated to 7 .Dominant (d=1) 452 .98 24 .072 0 .000 7vs .1 3 458 .983 be an enhancer mutation, showed the highest transmission to affected sibs (τ=0.85; p=5.06 *10-66), with a frequency of 59% among transmitted alleles and 24% in untransmitted chromosomes . Differences among -2 ln L = minus twice the log likelihood . e .p . = estimated parameters sample sets were consistent with the higher prevalence of HSCR in AIC = Akaike’s information criterion Chinese than in Caucasian populations . To prove the identity by descent Supported by CNPq, FAPESP .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  of the mutation, we reconstructed transmitted and untransmitted P1119. Low density microarrays for HLA-DQA1 genotyping. haplotypes . In Caucasians, the two haplotypes that included the I1 .357 O. N. Mityaeva, D. O. Fesenko, A. Zasedatelev, Y. P. Lysov, T. V. Nasedkina; T allele, called “long” and “short”, were the most frequently transmitted, Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation. while in the Chinese sample only the long haplotype was present . The aim of this work was to develop an oligonucleotide microarray for These haplotypes share a common allelic combination extending from the analysis of HLA-DQA1 locus . At present, 28 alleles of HLA-DQA1 5’ UTR to exon 5 . are known . The developed microarray allows to analyze 9 groups of We conclude that the enhancer mutation arose on the long haplotype alleles of the HLA-DQA1 . The group 1 includes 0101, 0104, 0105, which, after the Asian-European split, rearranged to give also the short 0107 alleles; the group 2 includes 0102 alleles; the group 3 includes haplotype . Accordingly, a recombination hotspot between introns 5 0103 allele; the group 4 includes 0106 allele; the group 5 includes and 8 was estimated by the PHASE software and confirmed by linkage 0201 allele, the group 6 includes 0303 alleles; the group 7 includes disequilibrium analysis . 04 alleles; the group 8 includes 05 alleles, the group 9 includes 06 These findings represent a first step to elucidate the genetic history alleles. The procedure engages two-stage PCR with fluorescently that has led to the current worldwide HSCR associated RET alleles labeled primers and hybridization with oligonucleotide microarray . The distribution . fluorescent signal is analyzed using a chip-reader equipped with CCD- camera . The sensitivity of the method is about 10-100 pg per analysis . P1117. Hitoh syndrome The microarray was tested with DNA samples isolated from fresh M. V. V. Reddy; blood, saliva and spot of blood. To confirm the results of genotyping Osmania Medical college, Hyderabad, India. the selected samples were also sequenced and/or analyzed by allele The male of 9 years old, first child in the family the other two are specific PCR-kit (“DNA-Technology”, Moscow, Russia). Totally, we females children and are normal . Products of full term and forceps tested 55 samples of DNA of individuals from the Moscow region . The delivery . Doubtful cephalheamatoma is found to be normal . Father and following alleles frequencies have been found: for the group 1 - 16,9%; sister are not clever. Clinical findings reveal mild mental retardation, group 2 - 16,2%, group 3 - 3 .8%, group 4 - 0%, group 5 - 9,2%, group intelligent quotient is of 50 . Mild webbing of neck, knock -knee noted, 6 - 9,2%, group 7 - 13,8%, group 8 - 34,6%, group 9 - 0,8% . This hypothenar and thenar eminenent in both hands shows wasting . His microarray is suggested to be used in forensic DNA analysis, medical gait is disturbed due to shortening of one of lower limb . Right testes analysis of histo-compatibility, association studies of the HLA-DAQ1 palpable in inguinal region with testes not palpable in the left scrotal locus with different diseases . sac or inguinal area . Ultrasound of abdomen with testes not visualized with its appearance in the inguinal region . Audiogram showed mild to P1120. Distribution of ancestry informative markers in Russian moderate hearing loss . populations The above case study is observed and the cytogenetic investigations M. A. Perkova, B. A. Malyarchuk, M. V. Derenko; carried out, the karyotype of subject and both the parents found to be Institute of Biological Problems of the North, Magadan, Russian Federation. normal and none of the paternal and maternal fore fathers are with Individual ancestry can be revealed using a set of ancestry informative such abnormalities and the no complications documented during the markers (AIMs) . These markers may be useful to control for the delivery and at the time of carrying the child . The lower intelligent presence of genetic structure due to admixture (Bonilla et al . 2005) . quotients and levels are not answered by chromosomal analysis of In the present study, AIMs were represented by mitochondrial DNA any syndromes of known karyotype anomalies . (mtDNA), Y-chromosome and three SNPs in the P-gene associated So we anticipate that further molecular analysis would answer the with human pigmentation . Twelve Russian populations from queries of this investigation . European Russia were studied . It was found that 1 .5% of mtDNAs found in Russians fall into East Eurasian haplogroups . However, two P1118. mixed modeling and multiple imputation to characterize populations from North-Western Russia (Velikij Novgorod and Volot) epistasis in association studies with unobservable phase exhibited more than 3 .5% of East Eurasian lineages . Y-chromosome A. S. Foulkes1, R. Yucel1, M. Reilly2; data show that only Pskov population (also from North-Western 1University of MA School of Public Health and Health Sciences, Amherst, MA, Russia) demonstrates a significant similarity with Finno-Ugric/Baltic United States, 2University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, populations . Variability of Y-chromosome microsatellite loci indicates PA, United States. that high frequency of haplogroup N3 in Pskov population (35%) is Background: The recent explosion of molecular level information caused mostly by the presence of Baltic N3-variants, although gene coupled with large epidemiological studies, presents an exciting pools of Russians from central and southern parts of European Russia opportunity to uncover the genetic underpinnings of complex diseases; are characterized by prevalence of lineages characteristic for Finno- however, analytic methods accounting for (1) synergy across a large Ugric populations . Results of the P-gene variation study show that number of genetic loci and environmental factors and (2) uncertainty there are significant differences between distribution of SNP*R419G in allelic phase, will be essential . Methods: To this aim, we propose in Russian populations . Frequency of 419G allele (which is thought a combination of multiple-imputation and mixed effects modeling to to be associated with green/hazel colour of eyes) is much higher in determine whether combinations of genetic polymorphisms contribute North-Western Russians (6% in Novgorod and Pskov samples) than to ART associated hypertriglyceridemia in N=626 individuals with HIV-1 . in South-Western ones (3 .6% in Belgorod sample) . Thus, the data Four candidate genes were considered: ApoC-III, SREBP1c, TNF-alpha presented demonstrate that North-Western Russian populations and MDR-1 . Simulation studies were performed to characterize the represent a complex pattern of population structure, reflecting diverse power and false discovery rates associated with this method . Results: interactions that occurred at different times between populations of The proposed analytical technique identified an overall interaction West and East Eurasian ancestry . between ApoC-III, TNF-alpha, and PI exposure within Hispanics but not in Caucasians and Blacks . Simulation studies suggested that a sample P1121. Three distinct methylation profiles in human H19 DMR size of N=340 provides greater than 80% power to detect a standard with conserved monoallelic expression deviation in multi-locus effects as low as 0 .4 times the error standard J. M. Dupont1,2, H. Jammes3, J. Tost4, D. Vaiman3, I. G. Gut4; deviation in 1,2,3 and 4-locus genotype models . False discovery rates 1Université Paris Descartes - APHP, Hôpital Cochin, PARIS, France, 2Université were consistently <10% for 1,2,3 and 4-locus models . Conclusions: Paris Descartes - INSERM U 709, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 3Université The pathophysiology of dyslipidemia in ART-treated HIV patients is Paris Descartes - INSERM U 709, Hôpital Cochin, PARIS, France, 4Centre likely to be multifactorial and involve synergy among several gene National de Génotypage, EVRY, France. and gene-drug pathways . This manuscript presents a novel statistical About 0 .5 % of human genes are imprinted with a parent-of-origin method to explore potential multi-locus effects on plasma TGs across specific expression of one allele related to differential methylation of candidate genes that accounts for potential ambiguity in allelic phase . specific CpG-rich regions (DMRs). Ultimately, this approach will allow investigators to discover complex The IGF2/H19 locus is the most widely studied imprinted region clinical and biological associations in the context of unobservable particularly in mice . State of the art in methylation analysis consists genetic information . of bisulphite modification of genomic DNA that converts unmethylated Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 6 cytosines in uraciles while leaving methylated Cytosine unchanged, and genetic basis of common diseases and of quantitative traits . A medical subsequent cloning and Sanger sequencing which is cumbersome questionnaire and a set of laboratory analysis were proposed to the We took advantage of a new real time quantitative sequencing population and most of the inhabitants were willing to participate . The technology, Pyrosequencing®, to analyse the methylation profiles in availability of demographic data from the city and the church archives two IGF2 and the H19 DMR in human lymphocytes and placentas . will be exploited to trace back genealogical trees and to reconstruct In the IGF2 DMR, we found an average methylation level compatible the familial structure of the population. Results of the first set of clinical with the expected median-methylated status, but with a highly variable and genealogical analysis regarding about half of the population will methylation level at successive CpGs, yielding a DMR-specific profile be presented . irrespective of the biological sample . In contrast the methylation profile often departed from the expected P1124. SNP fine mapping of genes and flanking sequences. Way median-methylated stage in maternal lymphocytes as well as in to find regulatory elements placental samples in the H19 DMR . Rather, three distinct methylation S. Jalilzadeh1,2, S. Kääb3, M. Näbauer3, M. Thomas1,2, A. Pfeufer1,2; levels were observed that were specific for a certain individual. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich, Germany, Moreover, a predominantly monoallelic expression of H19 was 2Institute of Human Genetics, GSF National Research Center, Neuherberg, preserved independently of the DMR methylation status demonstrating Germany, 3Department of Medicine I, Klinikum Grosshadern, LMU-University, that DMR allele-specific methylation and allele-specific expression of Munich, Germany. imprinted genes are not always correlated . The complexity of higher organisms is -more than previously thought- Preliminary analysis of relatives from three families showed that the attributable to the evolution of regulatory elements . Alternative inheritance of these methylation profiles was compatible with a simple promoters have recently been shown to be common to almost half of all Mendelian model considering one gene with three alleles . human genes . The function of regulatory elements can be modulated These results should lead us to be cautious when transferring results by alleleic variants usually termed “regulatory SNPs” . These may affect derived in mice to human epigenetics . transcription levels, alternative splicing and mRNA stability as well as translation or post-translational modification. P1122. A-to-c exchange in 3‘-utr of the human IL1B gene is In a candidate gene based LD-mapping project of the QT-interval, associated with th1-mediated infectious diseases we discovered a SNP (rs727957 G>T) located 50 kb upstream of M. Freidin1, O. Kolokolova2, A. Rudko1, A. Strelis3, V. Puzyrev1,3; the KCNE1 gene which had an effect on QT interval in the general 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Military-Medical In- population (KORA S-4000, p =0 .0051) .1 stitute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, HapMAp data indicates this SNP may be under selection (polymorphic Russian Federation. in CEU but monomorphic in HCB, JPT and YRI populations) . IL-12 is a key cytokine of Th1-mediated cellular immunity against Bioinformatic analysis shows that the transversion can produce a new infectious diseases . It is comprised of p19 and p40 subunits encoded transcription factor binding site for the muscular transcription factor by two distinct genes, IL12A and IL12B, respectively . p40 subunit is TEF-1 . Analysis of cDNAs from 48 different human hearts showed shared by another Th1 cytokine, IL-23, which is also actively involved that 3 alternative promoters of KCNE1 exist. All identified transcripts in anti-infectious immunity . Rare mutations in IL12B gene cause of KCNE1 (contain up to 5 exons) are translated to the same KCNE1 atypical disseminated infection due to poorly virulent mycobacteria protein. SNP rs727957 influences alternative promoter usage of and salmonella . A-to-C exchange was described in 3‘-utr of the gene in KCNE1 . position 1188 that correlates with decreased protein secretion and might High resolution LD-mapping of complex traits thus is shown to be a affect common predisposition to Th1-mediated infectious diseases . powerful gene annotation method for functional genomics and systems We performed association study of IL12B 1188A/C polymorphism biology . with active tuberculosis (TB) and salmonellosis in Russians from Tomsk city . Three hundreds and four TB, 49 salmonellosis, and 129 P1125. Lactase persistence in sardinian villages (italy). control cases matched by age and gender were genotyped by IL12B M. E. Ghiani, I. S. Piras, C. M. Calò, G. Vona; 1188A/C polymorphism . Also, 40 family trios with tuberculosis affected University of Cagliari, Dep Experimental Biology, Cagliari, Italy. offspring were studied by Transmission/Disequlibrium Test (TDT) . The The ability to digest the milk sugar lactose as an adult (lactose prevalence of the 1188C allele in TB (0 .240±0 .018) and in salmonellosis persistence) is a variable genetic trait in human populations . (0.347±0.048) was significantly higher than in controls (0.174±0.024; The lactase-persistence phenotype frequencies vary in human χ2 = 4.075, p=0.044 and χ2 = 11 .264, p=0 .001, respectively) . Also, the populations, generally low frequencies may be found in the majority 1188C allele was overtransmitted from heterozygous parents to TB of tested populations in sub Saharan Africa, but, in some populations, offspring as compared to the alternate (13 vs. 2 times; TDT = 8.067, particularly pastoral groups, it is significantly more frequent. In Europe, p = 0 .005) . Thus, both case-control and family-based association data the highest frequencies of lactase persistence can be observed in the suggest that IL12B 1188A/C polymorphism predispose to Th1-mediated north western populations, where milk-dependent pastoralism was infectious disorders due to intracellular bacteria . This association may developed very early, traversing towards the south and east there is a be because of impaired expression rate of the 1188C allele or due to decrease in prevalence of lactose persistence . Recently, the T allele its linkage disequilibrium with other common polymorphisms in IL12B . of a C/T polymorphism in a potential regulatory site located 13,910 bp upstream the lactase gene was found to be completely associated P1123. the Val Borbera Project: epidemiological and with lactase persistence in Northern Europeans. A significant, although genealogical analysis of an isolated population in Northern italy. less strong association, was also observed with a second -22,018 bp C. Sala1, S. Bione1,2, L. Crocco1, M. Gatti1, E. Poggiali3, R. Bellazzi4, I. Buetti4, G/A mutation . C. Rognoni4, C. Camaschella3, D. Toniolo1; Our aim, is to perform for the first time a molecular screening of lactose 1DIBIT San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 2Institute of Molecular Ge- tolerance distributions, by testing two biallelic markers (-13910 C>T and netics-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 3Vita-Salute University, San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, -22018 G>A) apparently associated with lactose tolerance, in Sardinian Italy, 4Dept. Informatics and Systems Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. populations (Italy) with different types of economy . In particular we The Val Borbera is an isolated valley in the Appenine Region in Northern have chosen two villages in the Oristano region (Central Sardinia), Italy that has been geographically isolated from the surrounding area one village (Cabras) is situated at the sea level, where prevails fishing until recent years . The population was mainly farming until 50 years economy, and the other (Scanomontiferro) is situated at an altitude of ago and they seem to have had a constant but limited growth over 400m above sea level where pastoral activity is prevalent . the centuries until a large portion emigrated to the Americas at the beginning of the last century . The part of the population that did not emigrate is still living in the valley or in the surroundings and can be traced easily . It should correspond to about 2000 people . The Val Borbera Project is aimed at the establishment of a comprehensive collection of biological samples and clinical records in which to study the Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P1126. What is the best way to break large genealogies for the P1128. Familial risk for migraine with aura and migraine without genetic study of complex traits? aura among first-degree relatives of migraineurs C. Bellenguez1, M. Ciullo2, T. Nutile2, V. Colonna2, M. G. Persico2, C. Bour- C. Lemos1, M. Castro1, J. Barros2, J. Sequeiros1, J. Pereira-Monteiro2, A. gain1; Sousa1; 1INSERM U535 - University Paris XI, Villejuif, France, 2Institute of Genetics and 1UnIGENe-IBMC and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço Neurologia, HGSA, Biophysics A.Buzatti-Traverso, CNR, Naples, Italy. Porto, Portugal. Large genealogies provide many individuals for linkage analysis . Migraine is a primary, chronic, headache, affecting 11%-20% of the However, the software available for nonparametric multipoint linkage general population . Familial clustering of migraine with aura (MA) and analysis is limited in the complexity of the families it can handle . without aura (MO), the two most common subtypes, was described in Partition into subfamilies is necessary . several studies . Two methods have been proposed to partition pedigrees automatically, Probands and their first-degree relatives were classified according to one based on factor analysis1, and the other on a maximum-clique their migraine subtype, to evaluate familial risk for MA and MO . The partitioning approach2 . Both were proposed for the study of quantitative use of family history to classify relatives as migraine sufferers was also traits . validated; though probands were able to correctly identify their affected We adapted these methods to qualitative trait analysis and assessed the relatives, migraine was still underestimated: only relatives with a direct sensitivity of subsequent NPL analysis to these approaches and their interview were thus included . parameters . Better results were obtained when the pair relationship Familial risk was estimated using the relative risk (RR) in first-degree measure on which the breaking is based is highly correlated with the relatives . Prevalence in our general population has been estimated linkage informativity of the pair . Additionally, results were appreciably previously at 1 .4% for MA, and 6 .0% for MO . The risk for MA and MO improved if partitioning was first based on affected individuals only. was evaluated separately in 51 families of probands with MA and in 94 Our results are illustrated with a genome-wide NPL analysis of families of migraineurs with MO . hypertension in a 2636-member pedigree from the isolated village The RR of MA and MO among first-degree relatives of probands with of Campora, South Italy. We show that the genome-wide significant MA was 10 .58 (95% CI: 6 .24-17 .93) and 6 .51 (95% CI: 4 .98-8 .51), linkage detection of a new locus on 8q22-23 as well as the replication respectively. The RR of MO of first-degree relatives of probands with of two known loci (1q42-43 and 4p16) are conditioned on the quality of MO was 8 .82 (7 .10-10 .95) . The risk for MA in relatives of MO probands the genealogy partition . was not possible to estimate, as only a few parents were affected Our results illustrate the great sensitivity of linkage analyses in large by MA. Our findings show that, in our sample, MA is less frequent genealogies to the quality of the genealogy partition . They also show than MO as previously described. The RR for first-degree relatives of that, partitioned in an optimal way, large genealogies from population migraineurs with MA is highly suggestive of a genetic contribution . For isolates offer a good power to detect genetic risk factors for complex MO, the results also point out to familial clustering . diseases . 1 Pankratz and Iturria (2001) Genet Epidemiol ; 21 Suppl 1:S258-63 P1129. mitochondrial DNA polymorphism in Evenks and Buryats 2 Falchi et al (2004) Am J Hum Genet ; 75(6):1015-31 from chita region of Russia M. V. Golubenko1,2, V. P. Puzyrev1, R. Villems2; P1127. Use of isolated population to understand genetic bases 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Estonian Biocen- of late onset progressive hearing impairments ter, Tartu, Estonia. E. Marciano1, C. Lanzara2,3, M. Ciullo4, P. d’Adamo2,3, G. Andrighetto5, T. Nutile4, Chita region is administrative unit of Russian Federation situated in A. Franze’4, G. Persico4, P. Gasparini2,6; the Transbaikal Region, north to Mongolia and China . Now most of 1Dipartimento di Neuroscienze e di Scienze del Comportamento, Università the population are Russians who started to arrive there since the degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy, 2TIGEM (Telethon Istitute of Ge- 17th Century . Indigenous peoples of the region are Evenks living in netics and Medicine), Naples, Italy, 3IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 4Isti- the north of the region (about 1000) and Buryats in the south (about tuto di Genetica e Biofisica CNR “A. Buzzati Traverso”, Naples, Italy, 5”Mauro 42000) . We have studied mtDNA polymorphism (by HVS-I sequencing Baschirotto” Institute for Rare Diseases, B.I.R.D. Europe Foundation ONLUS, and high-resolution RFLP) in 81 Evenks and 115 Buryats from the Vicenza, Italy, 6Dipartimento di Scienze della Riproduzione e dello Sviluppo, area . In total, 33 and 75 different HVS-I haplotypes were found in Università degli Studi di Trieste, Trieste, Italy. Evenks and Buryats, respectively . The most frequent haplogroups in Hearing impairment is a frequent disorder affecting one in 1,000 Evenks were C and D; A, G, N9 and Z haplogroups were also present. children, whose prevalence increases with age . At least 60% of cases Buryats are more heterogeneous, with predominance of C, D, and G, are due to genetic causes; and may manifest itself as syndromic (20% while A, B, F, Z and M7 were found to be less frequent . . West-Eurasian of all cases) or non-syndromic (80% of all cases) form . Despite the derived haplogroups (H, J, U and a few others) encompassed about fact that a number of loci has been identified for hearing loss, a poor 8% of samples in Evenks and 11% in Buryats . Interestingly, one Buryat knowledge exist on the genetic bases of late onset progressive hearing individual carrying haplogroup X was identified. The two Buryats with impairments (starting around the age of 40), the most common cause 16325 substitution in haplogroup C and two Evenks encompassing of adult auditory deficiency, resulting from yet unidentified interactions 16111 change in haplogroup A may mark Native American founder between environmental and strong genetic factors . The study of late- haplotypes . The two ethnic samples had only 8 mtDNA haplotypes in onset forms in isolated populations is particularly useful because of both common, indicating quite isolated gene pools of these populations . In genetic and environmental homogeneity . We have selected 3 isolated contrast to that, studied by us Buryats had 23 lineages in common with Italian villages for which genotypes and audiological phenotypes have Buryats from the Repubic of Buryatia (Derenko et al . 2003) . The study been collected: Campora (600 inhabitants), Carlantino (1400) and was supported by RFBR grant 04-04-48792 . Stoccaredo (400) . In Campora 51% of the whole population has been diagnosed as suffering from late onset severe hearing impairments . P1130. manganese superoxide dismutase (mnsOD) In Carlantino 54% of the whole population is affected by bilateral polymorphism and breast cancer risk sensorineural hearing loss (10% in people aged less than 40) . Data E. Emel, G. Akpinar, A. Sazci; from Stoccaredo are still under evaluation. A first known locus between University of Kocaeli,Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli, Turkey. markers D1S104 and D1S466 (DFNA7) has been already identified Oxidative damage induced by the generation of reactive oxygen in Campora . Since a huge number of information has been collected species (ROS) by exogenous and endogenous exposures is believed for each individual (biochemical, instrumental and lifestyle data) it to be implicated in breast cancer . MnSOD is the primary antioxidant would be much easier to understand the relationships between genes enzyme in the mitochondria with a function of the detoxification of involved in hearing loss in these populations, including modifier genes, superoxide free radicals and thus protecting cells from oxidative and to define the interplay role between genetic and environmental stress . MnSOD is a nuclear-encoded protein that is transported into factors . the mitochondrium through the mitochondrial targeting sequence . A polymorphism in this sequence with a valine to alanine substitution is believed to alter transport of the enzyme into mitochondria, has been Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  reported to be associated with increased risk for breast cancer among P1133. investigation of the genetic basis of oral-facial clefting in women with low intake of dietary antioxidants . humans We examined what role of MnSOD polymorphism plays in the V. Kucinskas1, D. Steponaviciute1, A. Morkuniene1, M. Chung2, V. Sliuzas1, Y. development of breast cancer in a case control study . MnSOD J. Chen2, L. Linkeviciene1, A. Utkus1; genotype was determined in 156 sporadic premenopausal breast 1Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, cancer patients and 228 healthy controls using a PCR-RFLP method . China. Statistical analysis of the data suggested that there was no allelic Oral clefts (OCs) are important to public health in terms of birth association between the cases and controls (Chi2=3 .447, df=2, prevalence, costs of care, and psychosocial impact . Recent genetic P=0 .178) . Whereas the AV genotype gave an odds ratio of 1 .476 . and epidemiological studies have led to new theories about the causes (OR=1 .476, 95%CI=0 .978-2 .229, df=1, P=0 .063) . However it was of cleft lip and/or cleft palate (CL/CP) . statistically insignificant. The frequency of the A allele was 54.17% It has been shown that there is considerable international variation in in cases and 55 .26% in controls . The frequency of the V alalle was the frequency of OCs influenced by numerous factors. There are many 45 .83% in cases and 44 .74% in controls . In conclusion, MnSOD parts of the world - including Eastern Europe - for which we still have polymorphism might be a weak genetic risk factor for breast cancer in little or no information on the frequency of OCs . Out of 382 newborns premenopausal sporadic breast cancer women in Turkey with OCs registered in Lithuania during last 5 years there were 99 (25 .6%) syndromic and 283 (74 .1%) non-syndromic CL/CP cases . The P1131. Defining the allelic variants of NAT gene in the moscow incidence of OCs in Lithuania was 1 .84 for 1000 newborns . population using biochips A subset of candidate genes (TGFA, END1, RARA, TGFB, SK1, Z. M. Kozhekbaeva1, A. S. Glotov2, S. A. Bruskin3, I. V. Goldenkova-Pavlova3, DLX1/2, PITXZ, PAX9, AP2, TTF2, PVRL1) have been shown to E. S. Piruzyan3, A. S. Zasedatelev1, T. V. Nasedkina1; play an important role in the development of the head, with particular 1Institute of Molecular Biology of the RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Sci- relevance to the development of the lip and palate . Additional genes entific Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology of Russian Academy coding for growth, signalling and transcription factors that play a role of Medical Scienceof a name of D.O.Otta, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, in the facial development include JAG1, SHH, PTCH, CREB1, GLI3, 3Institute of the General Genetics of the RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. FGFR1, CASK, TCOF1, FGFR2, DLX5/6, and PAX3 . The purpose of The product of the gene NAT2 (N-acetyltransferase 2) participates our research was to test the hypothesis that TGFA, TGFB3, GABRB3, in detoxication of some arylamine derivatives (in particular 2- RARA, BCL3 and IRF6 genes are involved in the etiology of CL/CP . aminophtorene, 4- aminobiphenyl and - naphftylamine), which are Three chromosomal rearrangements identified by comparative strong mutagenes and cancerogenes, and metabolizes various drugs . genomic hybridization in 3 out of 27 syndromic CL/CP patients from More than 17 SNP and 36 alleles of NAT2 gene are known, which Lithuania point to 14q32 .11-qter, 20p13-pter and 21q21 .2-qter as code fast (R/R, R/S) and slow (SS) acetylation mode: *4, *11 (A, B), potential chromosomal regions to search for new candidate genes . *12 (A, B, C, D), *13, *18 and *5 (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J), *6 (A, B, C, D, E), *7 (A, B), *10, *14 (And, B, C, D, E, F, G), *17, *19 . We P1134. Parental smoking and polymorphisms in epoxide have developed the biochip for the analysis of all 17 SNP of gene . The hydrolase and glutathione s-transferase P1 affect nonsyndromic developed biochip allows simultaneous analysis of the 17 SNP within a orofacial cleft risk in offspring NAT2 gene fragment approximately 900 b .p . in length . The 86 healthy I. P. C. Krapels1,2, J. Eichhorn2, W. H. M. Peters2, H. M. J. Roelofs2, F. Ras3, R. persons of the Moscow population were investigated . It was found that P. M. Steegers-Theunissen4; 47% of individuals had the slow acetylator genotype . These data are in 1Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Radboud Univer- accordance with previously described frequency of slow acetylators in sity Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3University Medical other European populations (40-60%) . Center Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Erasmus University Medical Center, The work has been particular supported by a grant „Fundamental Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Science for Medicine“ from the Presidium of the Russian Academy of Background: In addition to genetic predispositions, environmental Sciences . factors, such as parental smoking, are thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of nonsyndromic orofacial clefts . The toxicity of smoking P1132. Online Encyclopedia for Genetic Epidemiology studies during embryogenesis varies in time, dose and frequency of exposure, (OEGE): www.oege.org and is dependent on maternal metabolism, transfer of the toxins T. R. Gaunt, S. Rodriguez, I. N. M. Day; from the extraembryonic tissues to the embryo and the detoxification School of Medicine, Southampton, United Kingdom. capacity of the individual. Genetic variations in the detoxification The Online Encyclopedia for Genetic Epidemiology studies (www . enzymes microsomal epoxide hydrolase (EPHX, exon 3, exon 4), oege .org) aims to collate information and links about and for human glutathione S-transferase-P1-1 (GSTP1, exon 5) may therefore affect genetic research studies relevant to population genetics and health . the teratogenicity of lifestyles such as smoking . We investigated the It gives annotated links to the world’s population and case/family role of polymorphisms in EPHX and GSTP1, parental periconceptional genetic epidemiological studies and relevant gene and sequence smoking, and their interaction with cleft lip with or without cleft palate databases, genetic variation databases, trait measurement, resource (CLP) risk in the offspring . labs, journals, software, general information, disease genes and methods: Dutch Caucasian non-consanguineous triads (mother, genetic diversity . A links page to genetic and epidemiological societies father and child) with complete valid genetic data per polymorphism and meetings is available and links pages to relevant commercial were included (EPHX exon 3: 118 CLP and 70 control triads, EPHX suppliers of genotyping, phenotyping and software tools and services exon 4: 149 CLP and 95 control triads, GSTP1 exon 5: 69 CLP and 95 will be made available . Other original OEGE content includes online control triads) . Transmission disequilibrium testing (TDT) and logistic software tools (e .g . a Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium test calculator regression analyses were performed . and a sequence manipulator) and tutorials are also being added . It Results: Polymorphic EPHX exon 3 and exon 4 alleles associated is designed to help professionals working in this or associated fields, with CLP (TDT; p≤0.05). Paternal EPHX exon 4 polymorphisms and acting as a World Wide Web portal for Genetic Epidemiology studies, paternal smoking increased CLP risk, OR: 2 .5 (95% CI=1 .1, 5 .9) . but it may also be of interest to genealogists and historians interested Homozygosity for GSTP1 exon 5 polymorphisms in mothers or children in molecular genealogy . Visitors can submit new information by web approximately 3-fold increased CLP risk . form or email, there are gene discussion forums; and update and other conclusion: The EPHX exon 3 and exon 4, GSTP1 exon 5 news is available by RSS feed, home page news or email .Initiated polymorphisms, and EPHX exon 4 polymorphism in combination with January 2006 . Online now . Please email any enquiries or comments paternal smoking contribute to CLP risk . to webmaster@oege.orgNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P1135. islet amyloid polypeptide (amylin) haplotypes and a STR*244/*248, (0,144) . There was no deviation in distribution of bone mineral density in young and elderly women in southern frequencies of a STR-genotypes from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium . sweden In the Kazakh populations allele STR*244 (frequency 0,310) is most S. Gebre-Medhin1, P. Gerdhem2, M. Callreus2, K. Åkesson2, H. Luthman3; often as well as in other populations of the world . Allele STR*248 was 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, on the second place by the frequency (0,220) . On the data of the 2Dept of Orthopedics, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden, 3Dept of literature this allele most frequently meets at Turkish peoples of Volga- Endocrinology, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden. Ural region in Russia (from 0,13±0,03 at Chuvashs to 0,18±0,02 at BACKGROUND AND AIM: Islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP or amylin) Bashkirs) [Akhmetova V ., 2001] . is a candidate hormone which is predominantly expressed by the We have done the comparative analysis of distribution of frequencies pancreatic beta-cells and co-secreted with insulin in response to STR allele of a gene PAH and have found out authentic distinctions food intake . Several studies have implied a role for IAPP in bone between sample of the Kazakhs and Udmurts(chi-square=14,180, remodeling . For instance, IAPP knockout mice display increased p=0,041), Maris (chi-square=14,780, p=0,029), Mordvins (chi- numbers of osteoclasts and develop an osteporosis-like phenotype square=19,60, p=0,004) and Chinese (chi-square=19,130, p=0,005) in adulthood . In the present work we have investigated whether [Goltsov et al., 1994; Akhmetova V., 2001]. Observed heterozygosity different IAPP haplotypes are associated with bone mineral density was 0,810 . This meaning was higher than in populations of Europe (BMD) in young women at peak bone mass and elderly women at high (0,800), Asia (0,730) and Volga-Ural region of Russia (0,790) . risk of fracture . MATERIALS AND METHODS: 1005 young women from the Malmö Peak-study (age 25±0 .1 yrs, BMI 23 .0±3 .7 kg/cm2) P1138. inactivation status of PCDH11X: sexual dimorphism in and 1044 elderly women (Malmö OPRA-study; age 75±0.1 yrs, BMI gene expression levels in brain 26 .2±4 .2 kg/cm2) were recruited . The primary phenotype was BMD A. M. Lopes1, N. Ross2, J. Close2, A. Dagnal2, A. Amorim1, T. J. Crow2; assessed by DXA . Body composition data, calcaneus ultrasound 1IPATIMUP; FCUP, Porto, Portugal, 2Dep. of Psychiatry, Oxford University, Ox- estimates and fracture data (OPRA-study) were also available . Short ford, United Kingdom. nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the vicinity of the IAPP gene Genes escaping X-inactivation are predicted to contribute to differences were retrieved from the International HapMap Genotype Database and in gene dosage between the sexes and are the prime candidates genotyped by PCR using the ABI SNP genotyping assay . RESULTS for being involved in the phenotype observed in individuals with X AND DISCUSSION: Obtained data and an update of this study will be chromosome aneuploidies . Of particular interest is ProtocadherinX presented . (PCDH11X or PCDHX), a recently described gene expressed in brain . Although PCDH11X has a homologue on the Y chromosome in P1136. Analysis of polymorphisms of VDR, COL1A1, ESR1 and humans and is predicted to escape from X-inactivation, there was only DBP genes in three ethnic groups of Volga-Ural region. weak evidence for the escapee status of this gene, from experiments L. Selezneva, R. Khusainova, E. Khusnutdinova; in lymphoblastoid cell lines . Institute of biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. Employing bisulfite sequencing we analyzed two CpG islands in the Osteoporosis (OP) is a complex disease with a strong genetic 5´end of the gene and found absence of methylation on both the active component. There are significant differences in osteoporosis and the inactive X chromosomes, in blood leukocytes and in brain morbidity between different ethnic groups . The polymorphisms of four tissue (grey mater), giving a strong indication that PCDH11X escapes candidate genes for osteoporosis (FokI- VDR, SpI-COL1A1, PvuII, inactivation in humans . Furthermore, a sexual dimorphism in levels of XbaI- ESR1, (TAAA)n-DBP) were studied . We analyzed genotypes expression in brain tissue was observed for this gene, by quantitative and alleles frequency distribution of these polymorphisms in three real-time PCR, with females presenting an up to twofold excess in ethnic groups of Volga-Ural region (116 Bashkirs, 85 Russians and 95 the abundance of PCDH11X transcripts. We relate these findings to Tatars) . We found genotype frequency distribution of FokI, XbaI and sexually dimorphic traits in the human brain . (TAAA)n polymorphisms in Bashkirs ethnic group differed from that in Russians and Tatars . The frequency of VDR*f allele was 28 .3% in P1139. the analysis of the stR polymorphism FGA, vWF genes Bashkirs versus 44.5% in Tatars (χ2=12 .8, p=0 .0003, df=1) and 40 .6% and D3s1358 locus in East Eurasian populations in Russians (χ2=6 .48, p=0 .01, df=1) and the frequency of VDR*f*f V. L. Akhmetova1, E. K. Khusnutdinova1, L. A. Zhivotovsky2; genotype was 6.6%, 17.9% (χ2=15 .06, p=0 .0005, df=21) and 17 .6% 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Scientific Center of RAS, Ufa, (χ2=7 .06, p=0 .029, df=2), respectively . The frequency of ESR1*x*x Russian Federation, 2Vavilov Institute of general Genetics of RAS, Moscow, genotype was 6.8% in Bashkirs versus 21.3% (χ2=7 .61, p]=0 .022, Russian Federation. df=2) in Russians and 43,9% in Tatars (χ2=39 .18, p]=0 .00001, df=2) . STR loci are used for personal identification in the medical and forensic The frequencies of GC-18*8, GC-18*10, GC-18*11, GC-18*12 alleles casework because of their multiallelic variation and, consequently, high of DBP (TAAA)n polymorphism were 16%, 79%, 5%, 0% in Bashkirs, level of informativeness . There are substantial differences in allele 5.5%, 86.2%, 7,7%, 1% in Russians (χ2=13 .72, p=0 .0033, df=3) and frequency distributions for independence DNA loci among ethnic groups . 4%, 88%, 6%, 2% in Tatars (χ2=21 .21, p=0 .00009, df=3), respectively . Therefore in each region and for each ethnic group is essential to create No significant differences in frequencies of alleles of SpI and PvuII one’s population-genetic base on allele and genotype frequencies for polymorphisms were observed . Our data showed that frequencies DNA loci used in the world-wide forensic-genetic practice . We have of these polymorphisms of VDR, ESR1, DBP genes are significant studied the STR polymorphism of FGA, vWF genes and D3S1358 in different between ethnic groups. Because of specific ethnic allele’s ten East Eurasian populations: Bashkirs, Tatars, Chuvashes, Komies, frequency distribution, these polymorphisms reflect population’s Mordvinians, Udmurts, Russians, Ukrainians, Belarusians and Yakuts . differences of osteoporosis morbidity . Future studies of OP need to The exact test demonstrated that STR of the FGA gene had deviations take into account ethnic factors . from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in Udmurts and Russians (p<0 .05) only . Comparison of the informativeness of STR loci FGA, vWF and P1137. Research of stR polymorphism of PAH gene in D3S1358 allows us to consider the first more informative by findings of Kazakhstan statistical parameters of forensic importance: the average value of the V. Akhmetova1, E. Khusnutdinova1, G. Svyatova2, M. Orazgalieva2; observed heterozygosity was 0 .831 in FGA, 0 .818 in vWF and 0 .762 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Scientific Centre of RAS, Russian in D3S1358; polymorphism information content (PIC) and power of Federation, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Republican Scientific Research Centre discrimination (pD) were also higher in FGA (PIC=0 .830, pD=0 .949) than Of Mother and Child Health Protection, Almaty, Kazakhstan. in vWF (PIC=0.765, pD=0.915) and in D3S1358 (PIC=0.721, pD=0.895); We investigated the frequencies distribution of highly polymorphic matching probability (pM) - 0.051, 0.085 and 0.011, consequently; the microsatellite TCTA-repeats located in 3 intron of PAH gene (STR coefficient of allelic variety was 6.662 in FGA, 4.892 in vWF and 4.230 allele) . For research we have taken DNA from blood of 201 not related in D3S1358; index of Shennon diversity - 0.344, 0.321 and 0.285, representatives of the Kazakh nation . In the Kazakh population we consequently . In conclusion, investigated FGA, vWF and D3S1358 loci have revealed 8 various alleles . This alleles distinguished from can serve as highly informative markers for genetic research, forensic each other on 4 b .p . We have found 27 genotypes, most often was casework and determination of biological relatedness of individuals .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 0 P1140. Angiotensinogen m235t polymorphism and the risk of between CYP2C9 genotypes and phenytoin dose requirement . It myocardial infarction and stroke among hypertensive patients is suggested that the CYP2C9 genotyping can be used routinely to on ACE-inhibitors or β-blockers obtain efficient phenytoin therapy and to lower the risk of concentration H. Schelleman1, O. H. Klungel2, J. C. M. Witteman1, M. M. B. Breteler1, A. H. J. dependent intoxications of phenytoin in mutated carriers . Danser1, A. Hofman1, C. M. van Duijn1, A. de Boer2, B. H. C. Stricker1; 1ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Utrecht University, Utrecht, The P1142. Predictive genetic testing in obstetrics and gynecological Netherlands. pathology introduction: It remains difficult to predict the effect of an particular V. Baranov; antihypertensive drug in an individual patient and pharmacogenetics Lab. for prenatal diagnostics, Ott’s Institute of Obst.& Gynecol. RAMS, might optimise this . Angiotensinogen is a component of the renin- St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. angiotensin system and ACE-inhibitors and β-blockers both have a The review of on-going studies dealing with molecular analysis of direct influence on this system. genetic polymorphisms involved in some common obstetrics and Objective: To investigate whether the association between use gynecological diseases and their complications in fetal development . of ACE-inhibitors or β-blockers and the risk of stroke or myocardial The study included endometriosis, adenomyosis, habitual ( recurrent) infarction (MI) is modified by the T-allele of the angiotensinogen M235T miscarriages, preeclampsia , placental insufficiency. Relevant gene polymorphism . cassettas has been composed for each disease and functionally methods: Data were used from the Rotterdam Study, a population- significant polymorphisms for each gene has been studied. Special based prospective cohort study in the Netherlands . In total, 4093 emphasis has been paid to the set of metabolic genes, participating subjects with hypertension were included from July 1st, 1991 onwards . in the 1st and the 2nd phases of detoxification processes. Functionally Follow-up ended at the diagnosis of MI or stroke, death, or the end inferior alleles of GSTT1,GST-1, CYP19 and NAT2 genes in the women of the study period (January 1st, 2002) . The drug-gene interaction were found to be non-random associated with endometriosis and and the risk of MI or stroke was determined with a Cox proportional adenomyosis origin, progression and treatment efficiency. Genotypes hazard model with adjustment for each drug class as time-dependent GSTT10/0, GSTM10/0 GSTP1 D/-- and ACE I/I- with early recurrent covariates . spontaneous miscarriages and placental insufficiency . Genotypes Results: The interaction between current use of ACE-inhibitors and PAI14 G/4G ., eNOS 4a/4a, +14/+14HLA-G genes were associated the angiotensinogen M235T polymorphism was multiplicative on the with preeclampsia . . The predictive testing for these and some other risk of MI (interaction HR:4.00; 95%CI:1.32-12.11). There was a non- relevant pathology in pregnant and non-pregnant women as well as significant increased risk of stroke (interaction HR: 1.83; 95%CI:0.95- in newborns ( chromosomal disorders, neural tube defects etc .) in 3 .54) in subjects with the MT or TT genotype compared to the MM conjunction with molecular carrier testing for common monogenic genotype. No interaction was found between current use of β-blockers diseases contribute to so called Genetic Form of Reproductive Health and the AGT M235T polymorphism on the risk of MI (HR:1.30; suggested and used in our laboratory . Owing to this Form the women 95%CI:0.60-2.83) or stroke (HR:1.39; 95%CI:0.81-2.39). at high risk of relevant pathology could be efficiently detected before or conclusion: Subjects with at least one copy of the 235T allele of the early in pregnancy and thus could be subjected to preventive treatment . AGT gene might have less benefit from ACE-inhibitor therapy. Special Pharmagen-Biochip which enables efficient identification of 14 polymorphisms in 8 different metabolic genes ( CYP1A1,CYP2D P1141. cYP2c9 polymorphism in patients under phenytoin 6,GSTM1,GSTT1,NAT2,MTHFR,CYP2C9 and CYP2C19) has been therapy elaborated . Perspectives and limitations of its application in routine D. Sevinç1, A. Ergün Özkaynakçı2, Ç. Özkara3, M. Uzan4, A. Koçer5, R. Aker2, genetic polymorphisms testing are discussed . Z. Gören2, E. Küçükibrahimoğlu2, H. B. Özyurt6, R. Bircan7, I. Güney8, F. Onat2; 1Maltepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and Ge- P1143. Hereditary prosopagnosia as a very common deficit - first netics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara University Faculty of Medicine Department of worldwide survey Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University I. Kennerknecht1, R. Raman2, V. Wong3, S. Edwards4; , Cerrahpaşa Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey, 1Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Münster, Germany, 2Banaras 4Istanbul University, Cerrahpaşa Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurosur- Hindu University, Varanasi, India, 3The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, gery, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Kartal State Hospital, Department of Neurology, Istan- Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China, 4Zululand University, bul, Turkey, 6Kartal State Hospital, Department of Radiation Oncology, Istanbul, KwaDlangezwa, South Africa. Turkey, 7Marmara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biol- Prosopagnosia or face blindness refers to a deficit in face recognition ogy, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Marmara University Faculty of Medicine Department of in the presence of intact sensory and intellectual function . The acquired Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey. form of prosopagnosia is a rare condition and the congenital form was The hepatic enzymes CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 are responsible for the previously considered to be even less common . However, in the German metabolism of numerous clinically important drugs such as phenytoin population we recently assessed a very high congenital prosopagnostic with a narrow therapeutic index . Phenytoin is mainly oxidized by prevalence of 2 .5 % (CI 95% 1 .3 - 3 .8) . We could further show that this CYP2C9 and to a minor extend by CYP2C19 . Polymorphism of CYP2C9 congenital anomaly had almost always familial recurrence which is and CYP2C19 has been reported previously . Pharmacogenetic compatible with simple autosomal dominant inheritance . We therefore polymorphisms, can divide the population into four phenotypes introduced the term hereditary prosopagnosia (Kennerknecht et al . including poor metabolisers(PM), intermediary metabolizers (IM), 2002, Grüter et al . 2005) . extensive metabolisers (EM) and ultrarapid metabolisers (UM) . In The high frequency of this deficit hitherto only described in the our study, the frequency of CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 allelic variants Caucasian population prompted us to extend our search to other were examined in a group of 76 Turkish epileptic patients who received ethnic groups in the form of a questionnaire based screening at phenytoin for at least two weeks 200-500 mg/day orally . Genomic universities in India, Hong Kong, Zululand, and among Campesinos DNA was isolated from peripheral leukocytes using phenol-chloroform in the peruvian Altiplano . Candidates suspicious for prosopagnosia extraction procedure . underwent a semi-structured interview . The following frequencies of The allelic variants were studied by polimerase chain reaction prosopagnosics were found: India 1 prosopagnosic out of 160, Hong and restriction fragment length polymorphism . Plasma phenytoin Kong 9/534, Zululand 3/573, Peru 9/490. These figures are minimal concentrations were determined utilizing fluorescence polarization estimates as not all suspicious candidates could be interviewed . In immuno assay (FPIA) on Abbott AxSYM system and high performance half of the index probands we could also find two or more affected liquid chromatography (HPLC) . The frequencies of CYP2C9 first-degree relatives supporting an autosomal dominant segregation genotypes in the study group were 75%, 17,1%, 8% for CYP2C9*1/1, pattern . The similar prevalence of prosopagnosia in very different CYP2C9*1/2 and CYP2C9*1/3 respectively . The mean phenytoin populations is suggestive of a very old mutation . serum concentrations were determined to be 8.32 μg/ml for genotype CYP2C9*1/1, 10.93 μg/ml for CYP2C9*1/2 and 17.43 μg/ml for CYP2C9*1/3 . The results show that there is a strong correlation Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 1 P1144. Genetically isolated population study: molecular basis of of salt-sensitivity varies among individuals . Genes that play a role in taste genetics salt-sensitivity are alpha-adducin (ADD1) and genes involved in the C. Lanzara1,2, P. d’Adamo1,2, A. Ferrara1, S. Ulivi2, L. Esposito1,2, I. Koellinker3, renin-angiotensin system (RAS) . We studied the association between B. Tepper3, P. Gasparini1,2; the ADD1 Gly460Trp polymorphism, angiotensinogen gene (AGT) 1Tigem, Naples, Italy, 2IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 3Rutgers University, M235T polymorphism and the angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) New Brunswick, NJ, United States. C573T polymorphism in relation to blood pressure, atherosclerosis, Some individuals are taste blind to bitter compound having the cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease . This study was part of thiourea moiety (-N-C=S), such as phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) and 6- the Rotterdam Study and Rotterdam Scan Study . We analysed the n-propylthiouracil (PROP) . Taste sensitivity to PTC/PROP is bimodally data with Cox and logistic regression, adjusting for age and sex . distributed: nontasters make up approximatelly 30% of the adult For ADD1, we found that carriers of the T allele had an significantly caucasian population and tasters make up the remaining 70% . This increased mean intima-media thickness of the common carotid artery percentage can vary, depending on geographic location and ethnic (p=0.04), a modest but significantly increased risk of any stroke origin . (HR 1 .22, 95 % CI: 1 .02-1 .45), ischemic stroke (HR 1 .29, 95 % CI: Some evidences suggested that the taster status is a result of the 1 .02-1 .63), hemorrhagic stroke (HR 1 .07, 95% CI: 0 .59-1 .92) and interaction between PTC/PROP gene and enviromental factors . myocardial infarction (HR 1 .33, 95 % CI: 1 .05-1 .69), compared with In this study we determine the correlation between taster status and the GG genotype . The TT genotype of AGT significantly increased the PTC genotype, and the influence of PROP status and food preferences mean systolic and diastolic blood pressure (p=0.03) and significantly in Carlantino, a genetically and culturally isolated village located in increased the risk of carotid artery plaque (RR 1 .25, 95% CI: 1 .02- southern Italy . It was settled at the end of 16th century by a few number 1.52). This genotype also significantly increased the mean volume of founders . The endogamy rate, calculated during last century, was deep sub cortical white matter lesions (p=0 .008) compared with the 99 .5% . Actually, Carlantino counts 1519 inhabitans . MM genotype. No significant associations were found for AT1R . We A sample of 587 adults, 15 to 89 years of age, was recruited from the show that genes involved in salt-sensitivity have pleiotropic effects village . Analysis of variance was used to assess differences in bitter influencing not only blood pressure, but also several cardiovascular perception and in liking of food groups as functions of PROP status and cerebrovascular outcomes . and food adventurousness . Our data show that the percentage of PROP status is comparable to P1147. Sex identification in humans by variable-stringency PCR caucasian population . Women are more sensitive to PTC/PROP than of Y chromosome alpha satellite men, and PTC genotypes explain only the 64% of phenotype . We didn‘t O. Popa1, L. Popa1, E. Pisica1, M. Popa2, D. Murariu1, N. Coman3; find any correlation between PROP status and food preferences. 1”Grigore Antipa” National Museum of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania, For the first time, these data have been validated by a high number of 2”Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Immunol- samples coming from a genetically isolated population . ogy and Physiopathology, Bucharest, Romania, 3”Babes-Boliay” University, Department of Experimental Medicine, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. P1145. RFLP analysis of DNA polymorphisms of pERt87-8/taq1 In this report we describe a method for sex identification in humans and 16intron/taq1 loci in radiologists and control group. using Y chromosome specific primers for the centromeric alphoid V. V. Egorov1, V. C. Sacara1, L. S. Coretschi2; region . A method called variable-stringency PCR was designed to 1National Centre of reproductive health and medical genetics, Chisinau, Repub- amplify a specific 281/285 bp product from male DNA, and some lic of Moldova, 2National Center of Preventive Medicine., Chisinau, Republic of random DNA products from both male and female samples, in order Moldova. to asses the sex of unknown human samples. The amplification of Y Background: One of most important consequence of ionized radiation chromosome alphoid DNA is a very robust reaction, not very sensitive is appearance of point mutations . There showed effects of ionizing to the quality and source of the DNA sample . The variable-stringency radiation on the chromosomes of embrional and somatic cells, which profile of the amplification reaction consisted in a succession of high- are lead to chromosomal instability, involved in cancerogenesis, but stringency / low-stringency / high-stringency stages, in all cases the the role of intragenic molecular markers from non-coding regions stringency being determined by the annealing temperature in the PCR remains largely uncertain . reaction . We used the sex diagnostic method presented here to assign Aims: Carrying out a comparative analysis of restriction fragment’s the sex of some unknown human samples, both males and females . length polymorphism of pERT87-8/Taq1 and 16intron/TaqI loci in The method provided the correct sex in all cases . In conclusion, our group of technicians who are exposed to ionized radiation (during 5-25 study indicates that the co-amplification of both Y chromosome specific years) and in control group . and random DNA sequences in a unique reaction mixture is a fast, Materials and Methods: Were studied DNA samples obtained from sensitive and reliable method providing sex identification in humans, 53 radiologists (91 X-chromosomes) and from 70 X-chromosomes of thus being very useful in forensic research . control group (CG) . The prevalent duration of employment was from 10 to 15 years (26 .4%) . We used polymerase chain reaction of pERT7- P1148. the genetic structure of s.tomé: a case-study of human 8/TaqI polymorph site and 16intron/TaqI locus with RFLP-analysis . For microevolution the validation of results were applied methods of variational statistics, M. Coelho1,2, C. Alves1, G. Destro-Bisol3,4, A. Amorim1,2, J. Rocha1,2; using of X2 Pearson criterion . 1Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do Porto Results: E1 allele of 16intron/TaqI locus (without site of restriction) (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal, 2Departamento de Zoologia Antropologia, Fac- was greatly more frequent in CG compared to radiologists (0 .773 v . uldade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Dipartimento di 0.348); the distribution of haplotypes was significantly different (X2 = Biologia Animale e dell Uomo, Universitá La Sapienza, Roma, Italy, 4Istituto 78 .3, df = 1, p < 0 .01) . The frequency of allele A1 of pERT87-8/TaqI Italiano di Antropologia, Roma, Italy. in radiologists was 2 .4-fold higher in radiologists compared to control The extent to which human population clusters emerge from underlying group (0.451 v. 0.185), and haplotype’s distribution were significantly genetic patterns or are imposed on data by particular sampling schemes different (X2 = 27,7, df = 1, p < 0 .01) . is a fundamental problem in current anthropological and biomedical Conclusions: Was revealed statistically significant difference of the research . By applying methods for assessing population structure frequency of polymorphic site pERT87-8/Tag1 and 16intron/Tag1 locus solely on the basis of individual genetic similarity, several studies in radiologists compared to healthy donors . have shown that individuals sort into clusters that correspond to broad geographic regions . However, much less attention has been dedicated P1146. Pleiotropic effects of genes involved in salt-sensitivity to evaluate how individual variation is structured on a smaller-scale . M. J. E. van Rijn, M. J. Bos, M. Yazdanpanah, A. Isaacs, A. Arias-Vásquez, B. As a contribution to the understanding of population structure at the H. C. Stricker, P. J. Koudstaal, A. Hofman, J. C. Witteman, C. M. van Duijn, M. microgeographical level, we have studied the genetic patterns of the M. B. Breteler; small plantation island of São Tomé (832 km2) by coupling a transect Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. sampling strategy with a Bayesian clustering approach . Using data Dietary sodium is an important contributor to hypertension . The degree from only 15 microsatellite loci typed in 394 unrelated individuals from Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  14 localities, we found evidence that São Tomé is far from being a P1151. the transferability of tagsNPs derived from Hapmap to single panmitic unit, despite the maximum distance between any two an Estonian population sampled sites being less than 50 km . This uneven distribution is clearly M. Nelis1,2, A. Montpetit3, P. Laflamme3, R. Mägi1, X. Ke4, M. Remm1, L. Car- more related to language than to geographic distance and was best don4, T. J. Hudson3, A. Metspalu1,2; captured by two clusters . One of the clusters predominates in villages 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, where the Angolar creole is the major autochthonous language and Tartu, Estonia, 3McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, carries a distinct imprint of genetic drift, indicating that this could have Montreal, PQ, Canada, 4Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University been one of the first maroon communities in the Atlantic slave trade. of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom. Our observations demonstrate that neither genetic microdifferentiation The recently published Haplotype Map of the human genome shows is confined to archaic human societies nor homogenization is the only the patterns of variation in four populations and will help researchers expected outcome of modern periods of population expansion . in their quest to find complex disease genes by reducing the number of variants or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to test . However, P1149. incidence of spinal muscular Atrophy typei in tunisia the usefulness of this selection process needs to be verified in Estimated from consanguineous marriages. populations outside those used for the HapMap project . In this study, R. M‘rad1, M. Trabelsi1, I. Dorboz1, F. Maazoul2, L. Ben Jemaa1, M. Chaabouni1, we analyzed 1090 individuals from Estonia . The population of this H. Chaabouni1; northern European country has been influenced by different migrations 1Department of human genetics Faculty of medicine Tunis, Tunisia, 2Depart- from Europe and Russia . We genotyped 1536 randomly selected SNPs ment of human genetics Chales Nicolle hospital, Tunis, Tunisia. from two 500 kb ENCODE regions on chromosome 2 . We observe that Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder the tagSNPs selected from the CEU HapMap samples (derived from and an incidence in Europe of 1/6,000 - 1/10,000 Incidence can be U .S . residents with northern and western European ancestry) capture estimated from rates of first cousin consanguineous marriages using most of the variation in the Estonian sample (90-95% of the SNPs with Dahlberg’s formula: If both C’ and C are determined one can estimate a minor allele frequency >5% have an r2 of at least 0 .8 with one of the the frequency of allele (q) and therefore of the disease (q²) according CEU tagSNPs) . Overall, we observed that the sample size, the allelic to the following formula derived from the Dahlberg’s formula: q = [C (1- frequency and the SNP density in the dataset used to select the tags, C’)] / [C (1-C’)+16(C’- C)] . In Tunisia, the frequency of consanguineous each have important effects on the tagging performance and have to marriages in the general population has been established . In the be taken into account when designing association studies . In order present study 52 SMA types I unrelated families were enrolled . . SMA to estimate the relatedness of haplotypes, a median-joining network type I diagnosis was confirmed in all cases on the basis the detection analysis was performed . The common haplotypes are shared in all of homozygous exon 7 SMN1 gene deletion . studied populations . As expected, the Estonian samples usually share The frequency of first cousin marriages was C’ = 42.30 % (22/52). their haplotypes with the CEU samples and there are low frequency The frequency of consanguineous marriages was 30/52=57 .7% . haplotypes that are only seen in the HapMap population recruited in These result show an increase of about 2 fold in consanguinity among Africa . parents of SMA type I patients with respect to the general population . Using the first equation given in the introduction q the gene frequency P1152. Analysis of allelic variation in the three GAs6 receptors’ of SMA type I can be calculated to be 0 .0343 and a heterozygote genes, TYRO, AXL and MERTK in a spanish population frequency (2pq) of 1/15.The incidence (q²) of SMA type I in Tunisia can N. Abasolo, B. Hurtado, A. Sánchez, O. Nualart, X. Muñoz, N. Sala; be calculated as 1 / 850 . IDIBELL-IRO-CGMM, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. The estimate reported in the present study should be considered as a Growth arrest-specific 6 gene (GAS6) has anti-apoptotic and proliferative value of incidence at birth of SMA type I . effects through its interaction with TAM (tYRO3-AXL-mERTK) tyrosine- In conclusion, . SMA type I is a frequent genetic disorder in Tunisia . kinase receptors . We have recently shown an association between GAS6 polymorphisms and atherothrombotic stroke. As a first step to P1150. molecular genetics and epidemiology of spinocerebellar study association with diseases like atherothrombosis and cancer, we type 8 ataxia in spain have analysed the variation of TAM genes in our population . H. S. Nicolás1, J. Corral1, I. Banchs1, S. Bernal1, J. Armstrong1, I. Ferrer1, O. methods: Twenty-two candidate functional variants in the TAM genes, Combarros2, J. Berciano2, D. Genís3, V. Volpini1; selected from public databases (dbSNP, Ensembl), were analysed in a 1IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Htal. Valdecilla, Santander, Spain, minimum of 50 healthy controls by means of PCR, RFLP, SSCPs and 3Htal. Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain. sequencing . Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) are caused by unstable trinucleotide Results: One SNP among 8 analysed in AXL was polymorphic repeat expansions . Sevent genes have been cloned, SCAs1-3, (frequency>1%) in our population and we found 5 new AXL variants: SCAs6-7, SCA12 and SCA17, with a CAG repeat which encodes one in 5’UTR and three in intron 19 that were polymorphic and a two a polyglutamine tract . The exception is SCA8, which consists of an nucleotide deletion in intron 1 . In TYRO3, four of the five selected SNPs exonic but untranslated CTG repeat . We present here the molecular were polymorphic and we identified two novel intronic polymorphisms. analysis of 248 unrelated familial and 749 sporadic and idiopathic Seven out of the nine selected variants in MERTK were confirmed as Spanish cases of SCA. Over the familial cases 8,93% were SCA1; polymorphic and two novel SNPs were found in intron 15 . 30,36% SCA2; 34,82% SCA3; 5,36% SCA6; 8,04% SCA7; 10,71% Allelic frequencies of the selected SNPs matched with those reported, SCA8; and 1,79% SCA17. In SCA8 the CTG range goes from 85 to excepting two SNPs in MERTK and one in TYRO3 which had an 183 repeats (109,97% ± 22,13%; Pearson Coef. =20,12%). Maternal inverted allelic frequency . transmissions presented elongations of the triplet CTG combined conclusion: Only 55% of the TAM SNPs selected from public databases sequence ranging from +2 to +13 repeats (7,5 ± 5,5; Pearson Coef = were polymorphic in our population and three had an inverted allelic 73,33%) . In contrast, paternal transmissions presented contractions frequency than reported . SSCP and sequencing analysis allowed for ranging from -1 to -17 repeats (-9,75 ± 5,97; Pearson Coef = -61,23%). the identification of nine novel SNPs and a deletion mutation in TAM Nine giant SCA8 expansions have been detected in unaffected adult receptors genes . We thank Spanish MEC (SAF 2001-1059-C02 and individuals and originated from homozygous SCA8 affected mother SAF 2004-07539-C02) and ISCIII network C03/07) for grants . with alleles of moderate expanded size . In contrast, homozygous males usually transmited contracted alleles, as in heterozygous cases P1153. is tension-type headache inherited? occurs . We have tested 90 individuals from general population and M. B. Russell1,2, N. Levi1, J. Kaprio3; the distribution of SCA8 alleles could be classified in two groups: 15 1Head and neck research group, Akershus University Hospital, Nordbyhagen, to 34 CTGs with frequence 98% and 77 to 86 CTGs with frequence Oslo, Norway, 2Faculty division Akershus University Hospital, University of 2% . We have not found any giant allele in this sample . About 60% Oslo, 1474 Nordbyhagen, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of Public Health, Univer- of familial ADCA cases remained genetically unclassified. No SCA sity of Helsinki, Finland. mutations were detected in the 749 isolated and idiopathic cases of Objective. To investigate the importance of genetic and environmental spinocerebellar ataxia . factors in the etiology of tension-type headache with a population-Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  based twin sample . of heterozygous TPMT genotype in Croatian population can be Subjects and Methods. Twin pairs were recruited from the population explained by interethnic variations of TPMT alleles . In our oppinion based Danish Twin Registry . A total of 16,181 twin pairs were eligible this information would be helpful for identifying patients at high risk of for the study . They received a posted questionnaire about tension-type inadequate responses to thiopurine therapy . headache . Only twin pairs where both twins replied were included . Results. A total of 3,523 monozygotic (MZ), 4,150 dizygotic (DZ) same P1156. insertion/Deletion DNA Polymorphisms in Rajasthan gender and 3,526 DZ opposite gender twin pairs were included . The tribal Populations and Rajputs prevalence of tension-type headache was significantly more frequent S. Kamboj, R. Dada, K. Kucheria; in men than women . The MX analysis indicates that tension-type All India Institute of Medical Sciences, N Delhi, India. headache is caused by a combination of additive genetic effects, In recent times, polymorphic DNA markers are widely used to study the common and unique environment effects . The heritability estimates genomic diversity of Indian populations as most are selectively neutral, were 48% in men and 44% in women . more ubiquitous and have higher heterozygosities than polymorphic Conclusions. Tension-type headache is likely to be slightly influenced protein and enzyme markers . As new alleles are not generated at by genetic factors . Alu insertion/deletion loci, and as there is no identified selection pressure on these loci, these loci have gained importance in the study P1154. thymidylate synthase gene polymorphisms in croatian of genetic structures of human populations . In the present study six population human - specific insertion/deletion polymorphisms were studied M. Jokic, S. Kapitanovic; in two endogamous tribal populations, namely, Minas and Bhils of Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. Banswara and Rajputs of Rajasthan . DNA samples from 79 unrelated Thymidylate synthase (TS) is crucial enzyme in the nucleotide individuals (37 Bhils, 23 Minas and 19 Rajputs) were analysed . Of biosynthetic pathway because it calalyzes the reductive methylation of these polymorphic markers five are Alu insertion/deletion markers (Alu dUMP by 5,10-MTHFR to form dTMP . TS gene has been an important PV 92, Alu FX III B, Alu D1, Alu APO, Alu ACE and Alu-CD4), while the target for a variety of chemotherapeutics such as 5-FU . The human sixth marker (mt → NUC) pertains to a mitochondrial DNA segment, TS promoter region includes polymorphic enhancer containing two or 540 bp in length, which got inserted into human nuclear genome . three 28-bp tandem repeats and has been implicated in affecting on TS The results of this study show that all loci are polymorphic in all three mRNA expression . The majority of individual human TS alleles harbor populations . Most of the loci showed high levels of heterozygosity in either a double repeat (2R) or a triple repeat (3R) for this polymorphism, all three populations . Genetic data allow researchers to determine the creating genotypes of 2R/2R, 2R/3R i 3R/3R . Individuals homozygous relatedness of different racial and ethnic groups and to arrange them in for the 3R were found to have elevated intratumoral TS mRNA and an evolutionary or phylogenetic tree . Special statistical packages will protein level. Recently identified G→C SNP in the second repeat of be used for statistical analysis of the data . the 3R alleles has shown that the 3R sequence with G has three to four times greater efficiency of translation than the 3R with C and the P1157. A twin study of ten cardiovascular risk factors 2R sequence . Due to associations of the TS polymorphisms with the L. Retterstol, K. Berg; prognosis of several tumor types, we performed a study to determine Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. the distribution of TS polymorphisms in Croatian population . Aims: Cardiovascular disease itself and several of its risk factors A total of 125 healthy unrelated individuals were genotyped for the TS exhibit a significant degree of heredity. The degree of heredity can 5‘ UTR polymorphisms using PCR-RFLP method with HaeIII restriction be quantified as heritability. In this study, we provide a list of ten enzyme . Genotype frequencies for 5’ UTR TS polymorphisms were established cardiovascular risk factors in order to put the genetic 26,4 %, 16%, 2,4%, 42,4%, 8,8% and 4% for 2R/3G, 3G/3C, 3G/3G, contribution levels into a wider cardiovascular perspective . Thus, the 2R/2R, 2R/3C, 3C/3C genotype respectively . purpose of this study was to estimate the heritability of these ten risk Our results showed that in Croatian population low TS expression factors and compare them . genotypes were more frequent (55 .2%) than high TS expression Methods: Subjects were recruited from an extensive study of MZ twins genotypes (44.8%) but not significant. initiated in the late 1970ies and the early 1980ies . The present series of 155 pairs (68 male pairs and 87 female pairs) were between 38 and P1155. tPmt gene polymorphisms in croatian population 57 years old (mean age 44 years) . Spearmans rho was used to check S. Kapitanovic, M. Jokic, G. Jurisic; for within-pair correlations in MZ twins . Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. Results: A list of ten risk factors is presented below . Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) catalyzes the S-methylation Conclusion: Several risk factors exhibit significant heritability. of azathioprine (AZA), 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) and thioguanine, Comparing risk factors in the same twin panel gives the opportunity to medications widely used to treat malignancies, rheumatic diseases, point out which risk factors are inherited and which are not . dermatologic conditions, inflammatory bowel disease and solid organ Within-pair correlation coefficients (with 95% confidence intervals) in transplantat rejection. Low TPMT activity plays a significant role in decreasing order in 155 healthy monozygotic twins for ten risk factors the occurence of life-threatening myelosupression, a serious toxicity of cardiovascular disease . of thiopurine drugs . Altered TPMT activity predominantly results from Variable Within-pair correlation single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) . To date, eight TPMT alleles have been identified, including three alleles (TPMT*2, TPMT*3A and Lp (a) lipoprotein ~1 .0 - TPMT*3C) which account for 80-95% of intermediate or low enzyme activity . Ten percent of individuals with intermediate activity are Body Mass Index 0 .76 (0 .68-0 .82) heterozygous at the TPMT gene locus and 0 .3% are homozygous for low activity alleles . Total cholesterol 0 .68 (0 .59-0 .76) The aim of our study was to estimate allelic frequency for three SNPs Systolic BP 0 .64 (0 .54-0 .72) in TPMT gene in the Croatian population . DNAs obtained from 350 unrelated individuals were genotyped for the TPMT*2, TPMT*3A, Homocysteine 0 .53 (0 .41-0 .63) TPMT*3B and TPMT*3C SNPs using allele-specific PCR or PCR- RFLP method . Diastolic BP 0 .51 (0 .38-0 .62) The frequency of heterozygous TPMT genotype in Croatian population Triglycerides 0 .46 (0 .33-0 .58) was 5 .7% . The frequency of the three allelic variants of the TPMT gene were: 0 .6% for TPMT*2, 4 .2% for TPMT*3A, and 0 .9% for CRP 0 .40 (0 .26-0 .52) TPMT*3C . The TPMT*3B allele was not detected in any of the samples analyzed . NO 0 .32 (0 .17-0 .45) x In conclusion, this study demonstrate that the TPMT*3A allele is a common allele in the Croatian population . The low frequency Fibrinogen 0 .27 (0 .12-0 .41)Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P1158. Analysis of the UGt1A1 promoter polymorphism in sao Patras, Greece, 6Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, miguel population (Azores, Portugal) 7Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. P. R. Pacheco1,2, C. T. Gomes1,2, R. Cabral1,2, C. C. Branco1,2, L. Mota-Vieira1,2; Pheromones are water-soluble chemicals used as signals that 1Hospital Divino Espirito Santo, Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciên- provide information about gender, dominance and reproduction cia, Oeiras, Portugal. within individuals of the same species, while they elicit profound A dinucleotide polymorphism in the TATA box promoter of the UDP- neuroendocrine and physiological changes . Although multiple functional glucuronosyl transferase 1 (UGT1A1) gene is implicated in Gilbert pheromone receptor genes are present in insects and mammals, there syndrome (GS), a benign form of unconjugated bilirubinemia . is only one such gene found to be functional in humans, namely the Population studies show that this polymorphism has racial variability, VN1R1 gene, encoding for a putative seven-transmembrane protein being the (TA)7 allele the most frequently associated to Caucasian and whose transcripts are found in the human olfactory mucosa . We patients . Recently, we demonstrated that Sao Miguel population has have undertaken a large mutation screening approach in 125 adult an admixed genetic background composed mainly of European, Jews individuals (66 males and 59 females) from 3 population groups and Africans . (Hellenic, Greek Cypriot and Iranian) to investigate whether the allelic To investigate the nature and incidence of the UGT1A1 mutation differences, present in the VN1R1 gene, are gender-specific. Here in our population, we studied the promoter region in a group of 24 we show that, although both VN1R1 1a and 1b alleles are found in patients with suspected GS and 76 unrelated healthy blood donors . chromosomes of both male and female subjects at a frequency of The polymorphism was detected using PCR and fragment analysis by 25 .2% and 74 .8% respectively, the 1a/1a genotype was never observed capillary electrophoresis . in our female group contrary to our male group . The abovementioned Out of 24 suspected GS patients, 17 (70 .8%) were homozygous for VN1R1 allelic differences potentially cause minor changes in the the most frequent mutation (TA)7/(TA)7, 4 (16 .7%) were heterozygous protein conformation and its transmembrane domains, as simulated (TA)6/(TA)7 and 3 (12 .5%) were homozygous for the normal allele by the TMHMM software . Given the equal distribution of both VN1R1 (TA)6/(TA)6. In the control group, we identified 0.7% (TA)5 alleles, 1a and 1b allelic frequencies in male and female individuals of our 72 .4% (TA)6 alleles and 26 .9% (TA)7 alleles, and four genotypes: study sample and assuming that the functional properties of the two 1 .3% (TA)5/(TA)6, 52 .6% (TA)6/(TA)6, 38 .2% (TA)6/(TA)7 and 7 .9% allelic forms of the VN1R1 protein are different, based on the protein (TA)7/(TA)7 . These results show that the frequency of the (TA)7 allele conformation simulation, our data suggest that the absence of the was 0 .79% in suspected GS patients and 0 .33% in 76 healthy control 1a/1a genotype in females may correlate with distinct gender-specific subjects . behaviour . Considering the Azorean genetic ancestry and the presence of the (TA)5 allele, which is characteristic of black populations, we expect to P1161. Phylogeography of Y cromosome in northern and eastern find the (TA)8 allele also present in Africans. For this reason, we are Africa analysing a total of 469 healthy individuals, which are representative F. Cruciani1, R. La Fratta1, P. Santolamazza1, D. Sellitto2, M. E. Cefalì1, E. Be- of the 6 municipalities of Sao Miguel Island. (paularpacheco@hdes.pt, raud Colomb3, J. M. Dugoujon4, R. Scozzari1,2; DRCT founding) . 1Università “La Sapienza”, Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, Rome, Italy, 2CNR, Istituto di Biologia e Patologia Molecolari, Rome, Italy, P1159. Genetic variation of the 3’ VNtR region of human 3Hopital de Sainte-Marguerite, Marseille, France, 4Centre d’Anthropologie, dopamine transporter gene (DAt1) in the iranian population CNRS, Toulouse, France. M. Banoei1, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtari22, M. Dehghan Menshadi1, T. Majidi- We have typed 893 male subjects from 23 populations in northern zadeh1, M. Rostami1, B. Kamali1, M. Sanati1; and eastern Africa with a set of 27 new and 74 previously described 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Y chromosome single nucleotide polymorphisms, and identified 40 Republic of Iran, 2Shahr- e- Kord University of Medical Science, Shahr- e- Kord, different binary haplogroups . The analysis of molecular variance Islamic Republic of Iran. revealed a high and significant degree of Y-haplogroup interpopulation Variable numbers of tandem repeats have wide application in genetic diversity (Fst = 0 .23, P<0 .0001) . Upon grouping of the populations population study, because of their stability across generation on change according to a geographic criterion, we obtained a Fct = 0 .12, (P<0 .0001) in size upon passage to offspring they have been known as valuable and a Fsc = 0 .16 (P<0 .0001), indicating a high level of heterogeneity tools for genetic study among individual and population . One of them both among and within groups . The northeastern group of populations has located with a 40 - bp core unit in the 3’ untranslated region of showed the highest degree of internal variation, a finding that could be dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) . DAT1 gene plays a role in genetic only partially explained by genetic drift alone . diseases of the brain . This gene acts to transport released dopamine The majority of the populations analyzed speak languages belonging into presynaptic terminals of the brain . Allele distributions of DAT1 to 4 different branches of the afroasiatic linguistic family (berber, polymorphisms were analyzed in Iranian ethnic groups in order to semitic, cushitic and omotic) . When afroasiatic speaking populations examine the effect of geographical and linguistic affiliation on the genetic were grouped following their linguistic affiliation, we observed a low affinities mentioned groups. Amplification of the human dopamine and not significant level of apportionment of the variance between transporter gene was performed by the polymerase chain reaction, 449 groups, suggesting that the afroasiatic linguistic branches spread Samples were selected to determine polymorphism of the VNTR locus, independently with respect to genes . all samples collected from 8 Ethnic groups including Pars (5 regions), Haplogroup E-DYS271, a haplogroup commonly found in sub- Azeri(Turk), Kurd, Gilak, Lur, Arab, from Iranian population . Genomic Saharan Africa, was found in most populations from northern Africa DNAs were extracted from whole blood . Screened 898 chromosome at frequencies around 5% . However, the analysis of 11-microsatellite- showed four alleles (6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11) which distribution of alleles based network showed a very different haplotype distribution among were identical among more different sampling region so that allele10 the two regions, a finding consistent with the occurrence of relatively had high frequency in North, West and Southwest and South while in old trans-Saharan human movements . Center and East Allele 8 was predominant in one ethnicity (Mashhad) Finally, the overall phylogeographic profile of E-M78 chromosomes and was seen much more in other two ethnicity ( Esfahan and Yazd)in revealed geographic partitions of sub-haplogroups that may indicate comparison with other ethnicities . This study shows DAT1 distribution source and direction of human migrations between eastern and in Iran has independently gene flow from other studies. northern Africa . P1160. Gender-specific association of homozygous VN1R1 P1162. Remarkable homogeneity of the human Y chromosome P pheromone receptor 1a allele genotype in humans lineage at the level of alphoid heteroduplex polymorphic system C. Mitropoulos1, P. G. Menounos2, A. Papachatzopoulou3, G. Bertolis4, C. L. Popa1, F. di Giacomo2, O. Popa3, F. Raicu4, N. Coman5; Kolonelou5, M. Kleanthous6, G. P. Patrinos7,1; 1Grigore Antipa National Museum of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania, 1Asclepion Genetics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Nursing Military Academy, Ath- 2University “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 3”Carol Davila” University of Medicine ens, Greece, 3University of Patras, School of Medicine, Patras, Greece, 4Aghia and Pharmacy, Department of Immunology and Physiopathology, Bucharest, Olga Hospital, Athens, Greece, 5University of Patras, School of Medicine, Romania, 4”Francisc Rainer” Center of Anthropology, Bucharest, Romania, Genomics, technology, bioinformatics  5”Babes-Bolyai” University, Department of Experimental Medicine, Cluj-Napoca, contains 30% Rlb3 and 28% I . This work suggests the possibility to Romania. genetically distinguish surnames of Irish-Gaelic and putative Viking The Y chromosome alphoid heteroduplex (αh) polymorphic system is (Norse) origin . We have begun typing 228 buccal swabs from men in based on the simultaneous amplification of two-to-several loci (which Northern Ireland for 10 SNP (Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms) on the differ by small point mutations and/or indels) in the centromeric alphoid Y chromosome . Preliminary results show virtually no difference in men region of the Y chromosome .This allows the generation of heteroduplex with Irish-Gaelic surnames: 63 of 68 samples (92 .2%) in haplogroup molecules (in addition to the normal homoduplexes) that can be seen PR* (inclusive of R1b3) and 5 of 68 in haplogroup GJ* (including I), as shifted bands in native poliacrylamide gels . The alphoid polymorphic and those with Norse surnames (83 of 90 in PR* or 92 .6%, and 6 of 90 system is highly polymorphic, and it can be generated by a combination in GJ*) . These results contrast with those seen in parts of Scotland and of unique events (point mutations) and deletions/duplications in the Northern England where the Norse and Danish Vikings had a more right side of the alphoid block . significant impact on the population. The αh polymorphic system was investigated in 135 Eurasian Y chromosomes belonging to six lineages (DE, G2, I, J, N, P*(xR1a), P1165. the Bantu expansion: demographic features of the R1a) . All the samples belonging to the P lineage presented the same western and eastern waves of advance αh2 haplotype and all the samples presenting αh2 haplotype belonged S. Beleza1,2, A. Amorim1,3, A. Carracedo2, L. Gusmão1, A. Salas2; to P lineage . The same homogeneity can be observed in the clade G2, 1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2Unidad de Genética Forense, Instituto de Me- with all the samples belonging to αh4, but the small number of samples dicina Legal, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Faculdade de Ciências da Uni- belonging to G2 clade prevents the inference of any conclusion . All the versidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. other analyzed clades (DE, I, J and N) showed heterogeneity at the The present genetic patterning in Sub-Saharan Africa reflects the level of the αh polymorphic system. effects of one of the most important human pre-historical demographic Despite the multi-mutational background of the αh system, we found movements . The dispersal of Bantu-speaking farmers from central- no variation at all at this level for the P lineage, which confirms the west Africa towards the south (along both the western and eastern known homogeneity of this lineage of the Y chromosome tree . coasts) is a typical example of a demic diffusion model of gene flow. The increasing availability of food allowed population growth, which P1163. Phylogeography of Y-chromosomal lineages in siberia in turn led to the need for migrating . Data collected until now suggest and cenral Asia differences in the progression of the western and eastern waves of V. A. Stepanov, V. N. Kharkov; advance . Important questions remain concerning the numbers of Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. people involved not only in the whole process, but also in the two main The composition and frequencies of Y chromosome haplogroups, independent Bantu migration routes . In this study, we use likelihood based on genotyping of 36 biallelic loci in its non-recombining part, was analyses based on the coalescence theory (MIGRATE software) to revealed in native populations of Siberia, Eastern Europe and Central evaluate the magnitude of the male migration rates and of the male Asia . 25 haplogroups were observed, but frequencies of only 7 of them population effective sizes involved in both waves of advance of the were higher than 3 percent . In sum these 7 haplogroups comprise 86% Bantu expansion . To investigate these, we analysed a collection of Y- of Y-chromosomal gene pool in population of North Eurasia . chromosome biallelic and microsatellite markers in a population from The proportion of inter-population differences in the total genetic South-western Africa and in a number of Sub-Saharan populations variability of region’s population according to the analysis of molecular gathered from the literature that were in the path of both expansion variance data is 19 .04% . Inter-individual differences within populations waves . Estimated diversity indices, genetic distances and migration account for the rest of total genetic diversity (81%) . Analysis of genetic rates can be explained in light of the Bantu expansion . Together with diversity within geographical groups reveals the high level of genetic phylogenetic analyses, our data support the hypothesis suggested differentiation in Eastern (Fst = 0 .334) and Western (Fst = 0 .300) by previous mtDNA analyses that the western stream of the Bantu Siberia . Male lineages in population North-East Asia and Central Asia expansion was a more gradual process than the eastern counterpart, are less differentiated . Slavic population of Eastern Europe in contrast which likely involved multiple short dispersals . to other regions are characterized by the uniformity of male gene pool (Fst = -0 .0016) . Po08. Genomics, technology, bioinformatics Based on analysis of microsatellite haplotypes within main Y- chromosomal haplogroups, molecular diversity within monophyletic P1166. Williams-Beuren-syndrome: Determination of deletion- lineages were calculated and phylogenetic trees for most common size using quantitative Real-time-PcR haplogroups were reconstructed . Western-Eurasian lineages (R1a1, C. Schubert, F. Laccone; R1b) are characterized by the maximal diversity in Caucasoid Institute of Human Genetics, 37073 Goettingen, Germany. populations . Among Siberian ethnic groups, the highest diversity The Williams-Beuren-Syndrome (WBS) a rare (1/20000-50000) genetic of these lineages was found in Altay-Sayan populations, which disorder, is usually associated with a 1 .5-2Mb hemizygous deletion probably reflects the presence of substantial amount of ancient on chromosome 7q11 .23 . WBS-patients display vascular stenosis, Neolithic Caucasoid components in their gene pool . Eastern-Eurasian weakness of connective-tissue, dysmorphic face, short stature and lineages have the high level of diversity of microsatellite haplotypes in mental retardation. At least twenty-five genes have been identified populations of Eastern Siberia and North-East Asia . in the deletion-region in WBS-patients, which is flanked by large low- copy-repeat sequences (> 320Kb) . P1164. comparing Y chromosome haplotypes and surnames of Haploinsuffiency of the ELN-gene, LIMK1-gene and TFI-II-gene family Norse and irish origin in men in Northern ireland has been shown to be causally involved in the pathogenesis of WBS . E. K. Conant, A. J. Bjourson, C. S. Downes; The flanking genes of ELN are assumed to cause additional features University of Ulster Coleraine, Coleraine, United Kingdom. of WBS like mental retardation, hypercalcaemia and connective tissue The paternally-inherited Y chromosome has been fundamental in abnormalities . By using FISH- and/or microsatellites analysis it is not understanding historic and pre-historic human migration patterns . possible to get a precise identification of the size of the deletions. For Unlike autosomal markers, Y chromosome haplotypes are uni- determining the deletion-sizes, we developed a reliable quantitative parentally inherited and can therefore trace lineages . Y chromsome PCR-approach (qPCR) . Our assay screens 2 .5Mb of the WBS-region markers also have the advantage of being inherited in the same in 100-200 Kb intervals . This methodology has been tested in DNA manner as surnames in some cultures, allowing for the comparison samples of 65 patients with the clinical suspicion of WBS . In every of cultural and genetic inheritance . Recent studies have shown that case we were able to identify or to exclude the presence of a deletion due to Ireland’s relatively recent colonization by modern humans, and its size . Detected deletion sizes vary from 0 .2Mb to 2 .5Mb . This coupled with its geographic isolation, it an ideal location for surname/ last rearrangement represents the largest described deletion and it Y-chromosome comparisons . Earlier work focused in the Republic of was detected in a very severely affected patient . We report on the Ireland has shown the majority of Irish males (>98% in Connaught) detection efficiency of this new system and on the genotype/phenotype- belong to a single haplotype, R1b3 . The remaining samples belong to correlation . haplogroup I . By contrast, a sample of the modern Norse population Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 6 P1167. sequence scanner software v1.0: A comprehensive, P1169. High resolution mapping of DNA copy alterations in Effective and Free tool to View and Edit sequence traces human chromosome 22 using high density tiling oligonucleotide A. Pradhan; arrays Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. A. E. Urban1, J. O. Korbel1, R. Selzer2, T. Richmond2, J. F. Cubells3, A. Hacker4, With the availability of high throughput sequencing technology, R. Green2, B. S. Emanuel5, M. B. Gerstein1, S. M. Weissman1, M. Snyder1; researchers today are generating up to 250K samples per day . With 1Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States, 2NimbleGen Systems, Inc., such vast quantity of data the QC process, which involves identifying Madison, WI, United States, 3Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States, sample failures, tracking data anomalies and reviewing low quality 4Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5University samples can be time and labor intensive . of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. We present Sequence Scanner Software, a free tool (web download Deletions and amplifications of the human genomic sequence (Copy available at www .appliedbiosystems .com/sequencescanner) that Number Polymorphisms) are the cause for numerous diseases and allows researchers to navigate directly to failed samples and unique a potential cause of phenotypic variation in the normal population . trends in data quality, with graphical result reports and multiple viewing Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) has been useful as a tool options . For example, the thumbnails view is an effective way to for detecting large alterations in genomic DNA copy number . We have quickly scan through large amounts of data and look for anomalies . To developed High-Resolution CGH (HR-CGH) to detect accurately the troubleshoot and inspect low quality bases within a trace a user can presence and extent of chromosomal aberrations in human DNA (1) . simultaneously view both the raw and the analyzed data peaks . Maskless array synthesis was used to construct arrays containing Sequence Scanner Software generates several trace quality reports 385,000 oligonucleotides with isothermal probes of 45-85 bp in length; such as trace read lengths in bar graphs making it easier and faster to arrays tiling the b-globin locus and chromosome 22q were prepared . evaluate data . In addition the reports contain hyperlink functionality that An array with a 9 bp tiling path was used to map a 622 bp heterozygous allow users to directly link between results and data . We demonstrate deletion in the b-globin locus . Arrays with an 85 bp tiling path were several features with Sequence Scanner Software that help provide an used to analyze DNA from patients with copy number changes in the easy and effective data review workflow. pericentromeric region of chromosome 22q . Heterozygous deletions and duplications as well as partial triploidies and partial tetraploidies P1168. Regulation of 22q11 deletion syndrome genes during of portions of chromosome 22q were mapped with high resolution mouse development: expression microarray analysis (typically up to 200 bp) in each patient, and the precise breakpoints F. Amati1, M. Biancolella1, A. Farcomeni2, D. Minella1, S. Bueno2, S. Giallo- of two deletions were confirmed by DNA sequencing. Deletions that nardi1, L. Vecchione1, G. Chillemi2, A. Desideri1, G. Novelli1; had been undistinguishable by FISH were shown to be different in 1Tor Vergata, University, Roma, Italy, 2CASPUR, Roma, Italy. size . Additional peaks potentially corresponding to known and novel 22q11 deletion (DiGeorge/velocardiofacial) syndrome (22q11DS) additional CNPs were also observed . Our results demonstrate that is a developmental anomaly caused by an heterozygous interstitial HR-CGH allows the detection of copy-number changes in the human chromosomal deletion . Although mouse models indicated Tbx1 as genome at an unprecedented level of resolution . the gene responsible of the phenotype, the phenotypic spectrum 1 . Urban AE, Korbel JO et al . (2006) PNAS, in press of patients is complex suggesting that gene-gene and gene- environment interactions are crucial in delineating the pathogenesis P1170. Phylogenetic analysis of the Apolipoprotein E family of of 22q11DS. In order to define cis-acting regulatory effects of 22q11Ds proteins haploinsufficiency during development we designed a low density A. Sazci, M. Kasap, G. Akpinar, E. Ergul; microarray (22q11DS-chip) . University of Kocaeli,Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli, Turkey. Expression level filtering and statistical analysis identified genes that Among apolipoproteins, apolipoproteinE (ApoE) plays a pivotal role in were consistently differentially expressed during specific developmental lipid transport and is proposed to be involved in neural repair . Because stages (from 4 .5 dpc to 14 .5 dpc) . Interestingly at each developmental of long divergence history of apolipoproteins, it is not known, however, stage all the genes that are above the threshold level (FC>±2) have a how ApoE proteins evolved in time . Insight into their evolutionary similar behaviour; in fact they are all or upregulated or downregulated relationships could profoundly improve our understanding of ApoE (Tab 1) . These experimental results have been complemented with a protein family . To investigate the evolution and relationships among bioinformatic study of regulative sequence elements in the promoter ApoE proteins, we used the information from molecular data and regionof these genes . analyzed phylogeny of ApoE proteins . The phylogeny of ApoE, as Moreover eight genes are significantly expressed during all the inferred from both the protein sequences and the corresponding gene developmental stages analysed; four are 22q11 genes (Pcqap, sequences are compared . Appereantly a speciation event occurred Ranbp1, Mrpl40, Top3b) and four are out of the 22q11 region (Pax3, that led to the formation of ApoE protein varients of human, monkey, Foxc2, Hoxa1, Hoxa3) . olive baboon, chimpanzee, gibbon, and orangutan . ApoE of sheep, QRT-PCR validated microarray results . cattle, guinea pig, mouse and rat is placed separately in all trees built The identification of 22q11 genes whose expression is dependent and thus are not very closely related to the ApoE of human and its to specific development stages and that of 22q11 genes constantly sister taxa. ApoE sequences of fish and frog were found to be less expressed during embryogenesis, may be useful to understand the related to the ApoE sequences of other taxa that were examined in role of these genes in causing the 22q11DS clinical spectrum .This this study . The most recent common ancestor of the ApoE is found to work was supported by a MIUR grant (Italian Ministry of University) be the ApoE of frog . Tab 1 P1171. Detection of sub-Kilobase sized DNA copy Number Developmental Downregulated Upregulated genes Variants in the Human Genome Using Ultra-High Resolution stage genes Whole-Genome Array cGH Pax3; Hoxa1; P. S. Eis1, R. R. Selzer1, T. A. Richmond1, M. J. Walter2, R. R. Ries2, J. E. Pay- 4,5 dpc - Foxc2 ton2, X. Li2, W. D. Shannon2, T. J. Ley2; 1NimbleGen Systems Inc., Madison, WI, United States, 2Washington University Stk22b; Usp18; 6,5 dpc - Medical School, St. Louis, MO, United States. Txndr2 Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) 7,5 dpc Usp18 - methods have been used to investigate chromosomal abnormalities 8,5 dpc Txndr2; Cldn5 - associated with cancer and developmental disorders on a genome- wide level . This method is also being applied for the investigation 9,5 dpc Crabp1; Txndr2 - of copy number variants (CNVs) in the normal population . While 11,5 dpc - Comt several groups have reported on the presence of 10 Kb to several Mb Nlvcf; Ranpb1; sized copy number variants (CNVs) in the normal population, recent 14,5 dpc - Crabp1 investigations indicate a high prevalence of CNVs down to ~0 .5 Kb size Genomics, technology, bioinformatics  fragments. These studies suggest that CNVs play a significant role in Results phenotypic variation and are likely play a role in areas of human health 1 . ArrayCGH performed on DNAs from the AML series yielded a such as drug metabolism and susceptibility to complex diseases . In readable high resolution genome profile in all analyzed samples addition to normal CNVs, it is anticipated that ultra-high resolution DNA allowing the detection of additional changes in 17% of the samples . copy number studies will reveal the presence of a significant number 2 . 13% of the samples with normal karyotype showed single copy of disease-specific small-sized deletions and amplifications (e.g., in number changes: 4 deletions, 1 duplication . Chromosome regions the case of running tumor and germline DNA from the same patient in affected by the changes were 2p23, 5q35, 6p24, 12q24, and Xp22, cancer studies) . among others . Changes’ size ranged between 2 .8 Mb and 150 Kb To investigate the full range of human genome variation, we have 3 . None of the 19 cases with numerical abnormalities (single and developed an oligonucleotide-based array CGH platform that contains double trisomies) showed additional structural gains or losses . 390K unique probes per array . A tiling-path array design format was 4 . 63% of cases with structural aberrations (as 20q-, 7q-9q-) showed an used to systematically map copy number changes within genes and increased number of genomic aberrations after the arrayCGH analysis . intergenic regions . Isothermal probes (target Tm = 76C), varying in The number of the aberrant chromosome regions was increased and length from 45 to 85 nucleotides, were used to enable detection of their limits and nature of the changes have been characterized . copy number changes in both AT- and GC-rich regions in the genome . Data will be presented on a set of cancer-free individuals at two levels P1174. A genome-wide panel of non-synonymous sNPs for of resolution (~1 and 20 Kb) . disease association studies R. Gwilliam1, S. Nutland2, M. Inouye1, O. Burren2, P. Whittaker1, S. Hunt1, R. P1172. Development of a new array-mAPH methodology for McGinnis1, J. Todd2, P. Deloukas1, Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium detection of copy-number changes and screening of patients (WTCCC); with X-linked mental retardation. 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2JDRF/WT Dia- L. K. Kousoulidou1, K. Mannik2, S. Parkel2, O. Zilina2, N. Tonisson2, C. Sis- betes & Inflammation Laboratory , Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, mani1, P. Palta2, H. Puusepp2, M. Remm2, A. Kurg2, P. C. Patsalis1; Cambridge, United Kingdom. 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Institute of Systematic studies of sequence variation in humans have allowed the Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. compilation of a comprehensive list of circa 10 million common variants, Accurate and sensitive genome-wide screening to detect small predominantly SNPs . Exonic SNPs causing amino acid changes or genomic imbalances has been a technical challenge for a long time . STOP codon alterations (non-synonymous SNPs [nsSNPs]) are, The focus of this study was to introduce a novel methodology, applying by definition, very likely to have an impact on phenotype including the basic principle of Multiplex Amplifiable Probe Hybridization disease . (MAPH) to a microarray-based approach for fast, accurate and We validated approximately 50,000 of the candidate nsSNPs available reliable determination of copy-number changes of any loci in complex in dbSNP, using the Golden Gate assay (Illumina), in the HapMap CEU genomes . We have developed a new methodology and software for panel . Data were integrated with the publicly available Perlegen and designing PCR-amplifiable hybridization probes (200-600bp) that can HapMap validated SNPs and used to select a non-redundant set of be used for both array-MAPH and array-CGH . We have designed, 15,700 nsSNPs with frequency above 1% . The nsSNPs together with amplified, cloned and spotted onto arrays 560 target sequences for ~1300 tag SNPs from the MHC region were used to generate a custom human chromosome X to cover it uniformly with median spacing of chip for use with the Infinium assay (Illumina). The chip harbours 238kb . Another 107 autosomal sequences were selected and used 15,436 loci and can process six samples in parallel . as normalization controls . For validation of the new methodology, As part of the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC; several normal DNA samples and patient samples with known and http://www .wtccc .org .uk) we are using the nsSNP chip in an association unknown chromosome X aberrations were analyzed . Array-MAPH study of four diseases (ankylosis spondylitis, breast cancer, multiple detected deletions and duplications, which were confirmed by PCR sclerosis and autoimmune thyroid disease) with 1000 cases per and/or FISH analyses, demonstrating the accuracy and sensitivity of disease (national UK Caucasian samples) and 1500 common controls the new approach . The new array-MAPH method was further applied from the 1958 British Birth Cohort . for screening of 20 male patients from families with X-linked mental Analysis of 600 samples identified ~14,500 loci (95%) with good retardation (kindly provided by EURO-XLMR consortium) . One deletion clustering and in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium . Call rate for the above of approximately 500kb and two duplications of approximately 1 .6Mb loci was greater than 99 .8% . The controls are also being genotyped and 0 .9Mb were detected and their segregation in the corresponding with the Affymetrix 500K chip arrays as part of a whole-genome scan families was investigated . The new microarray methodology provides WTCCC being conducted on eight other common diseases . Initial an alternative to array-CGH as well as several advantages for high- comparison of the 1500 SNP markers that are common to the two throughput diagnostic screening by enabling high flexibility to study chips showed good concordance, ~99% . virtually any region in the human genome . P1175. Neuropeptide ‘semax’ action on gene expression of P1173. Acute myeloid leukemia arrayCGH profiling reveals BDNF and NGF in rat brain distinct categories within the genetic intermediate risk group T. Agapova, Y. Agniullin, M. Shadrina, P. Slominsky, V. Shram; J. Suela1, F. Cifuentes2, S. Alvarez1, M. Calasanz3, J. C. Cigudosa1; Institute of Molecular Genetic, Moscow, Russian Federation. 1Molecular Cytogenetics Group. Human Cancer Genetics Programme. CNIO, ‘Semax’ is a short peptide, the physiologically active analogue of Madrid, Spain, 2Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, United States, adrenocorticotropic hormone (4 - 10) . It exerts neurotrophic and 3Department of Genetics. Unversity of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. nootropic influence on the organism. This drug influences on the Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an hematological tumor characterized survival of neurons . It was shown previously that ‘Semax’ administration by the clonal proliferation of undifferentiated myeloid precursors . modifies neurotrophic factor genes expression. So the aim of our Patients are classified into the favorable, intermediate or adverse risk work was further investigation of ‘Semax’ action on the genome group according to chromosome analysis . The intermediate risk group expression . According to the one of hypothesis ‘Semax’ stimulates is characterized both by highly variable clinical outcome and genetic the production of neurotrophic factors BDNF and NGF in neural tissue heterogeneity . and increases the vital capacity of neurons. We observed it’s influence Objective: To characterize the genomic profile of the “intermediate on the expression of BDNF and NGF in rat retina and some parts of cytogenetic risk group” AML at diagnosis by oligo-based arrayCGH, brain under the intranasal peptide introduction . The real-time PCR Bone marrow DNAs from 88 cases of AML from the intermediate analysis showed that ‘Semax’ exerted different action on rat brain gene group were analyzed . All cases were previously clinical and expression . BDNF expression increased reliably in rat brainstem (35%), chromosomally characterized. Molecular profiling was performed cerebellum (57%) and hippocamp (46%) . We also observed less valid with a oligonucleotide-arrayCGH that contains 44K 60-mer probes increasing of BDNF expression in retina (46%) and decreasing of it and includes all known genes and positional probes at an average in frontal cortex (24%) . An analogous results were observed in NGF resolution 45Kb (manufactured by Agilent Technologies) . expression changes . The expression decreased reliably in rat frontal Genomics, technology, bioinformatics  cortex (52%) and increased in hippocamp (92%) . There also was less involved in homologous recombination and DNA-repair . valid increasing of NGF expression in brainstem (56%) and cerebellum Our previous studies have revealed multiple intrachromosomal (68%). So our investigation confirmed the neurotrophic ‘Semax’ rearrangements, duplications, inversions and deletions on 9p23-24 in action in vivo. Further investigation of it’s influence on different genes lymphocytes of BRCA2+/− members from independently ascertained expression could elucidate the exact mechanism of ‘Semax’ medicine familial breast cancer clusters . action in treatment of hypoxia, cerebral ischemia and glaucoma . With the intention to define the localizations of the rearrangements and identify the involved DNA sequences we constructed three genomic P1176. the Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA) project at EBi bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) libraries of three BRCA2 mutation R. Huntley, E. Camon, E. Dimmer, D. Barrell; carriers . The lymphocytes derived from three different families with EBI, Hinxton, United Kingdom. breast cancer history . The Gene Ontology (GO) is a well-established, structured vocabulary The libraries consist in total of about 100,000 clones with an average that has been successfully used for 8 years in the annotation of insert size of approximately 150kb . The insert sizes of the BAC-clones proteins . GO terms, created in consultation with the biology community, range from 60 to 280kb . are used to replace the multiple nomenclatures used by scientific The libraries were screened for 9p-specific regions which showed databases that can hamper data integration . Currently GO consists of chromosomal rearrangements in previous FISH experiments . The more than 20,300 terms distributed over three ontologies that describe identified clones where end-sequenced, database-confirmed, size- the molecular function, process and location of action of a protein in analysed (pulse field electrophoresis) and used for FISH-mapping on a generic cell . metaphase-chromosomes from non-mutation carriers . The Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA) database (http://www .ebi . ac .uk/GOA) aims to provide high-quality manual and electronic P1179. A Very Fast Run module Optimized for medical GO annotations to proteins within the UniProt Knowledgebase . By sequencing for the Applied Biosystems 3730xl series DNA annotating all ‘known’ proteins with GO terms and transferring this Analyzers knowledge to highly similar ‘unknown’ proteins, GOA offers a valuable S. R. Berosik, S. Pisharody, P. N. Ma, J. Bourey, C. S. Gehman, B. F. Johnson, contribution to the understanding of all proteomes . E. Nordman; GOA provides annotated entries for almost 100,000 species and is Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. the largest and most comprehensive open-source contributor of With the completion of the sequencing of the human genome, focus annotations to the GO Consortium annotation effort . In addition, by has moved to resequencing regions of medical research interest . integrating GO annotations from model organism groups (FlyBase, Because the average human exon is less than 200 bases, the research GeneDB, HGNC, MGI, RGD, SGD, TAIR, Gramene, TIGR, ZFIN, strategy for medical sequencing has been to obtain short read lengths AgBase, Reactome and IntAct), GOA ensures the dataset remains a with high quality data . We have developed a very rapid run module and key reference . GOA prioritises the annotation of the human proteome basecaller system for this application on the 3730/xl DNA Analyzer . and fully supports the Human Proteomics Initiative (HPI), by focussing The new module uses the existing 3730 DNA Analyzer hardware and on the annotation of proteins involved in human health and disease . firmware, 36-cm capillary arrays, POP-7TM polymer, and the current The GOA dataset can be queried through a user-friendly web interface BigDye® v3 .1 sequencing kit-based chemistry . A new version of KBTM via our QuickGO browser (http://www .ebi .ac .uk/ego) or downloaded basecaller, version 1 .3, has been developed for data analysis . This in a parsable format via the EBI (ftp://ftp .ebi .ac .uk/pub/databases/GO/ module is able to produce 400 to 500 bases of Q20 and greater data goa) and GO FTP sites . in less than 20 minutes run-to-run time . Nearly 7,000 samples can be run on one 3730xl Analyzer in one day, generating 2 .8 million P1177. Detection of large deletions and duplications in genomic Q20 bases or more . The collection time can be further shortened for DNA using semi-quantitative multiplex PcR-based assay on read lengths between 200 and 400 bases and these user editable capillary electrophoresis systems modifications have been captured in a chart we have generated to help S. Jankowski1, S. Karudapuram2, M. Barrois3, A. Minière3, A. Rico1; provide module modification guidance based upon read length needs. 1Applied Biosystems France, Courtaboeuf Cedex, France, 2Applied Biosystems, Sequencing data from the new module will be shown . Foster City, CA, United States, 3Laboratoire de Génétique, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. P1180. Functional study of transcription cis-regulatory elements Deletions and duplications in genomic DNA have been implicated as predicted in the cDK5R1 3’UtR pathogenic mutations in many diseases . Traditionally, detection of S. Moncini1, M. Venturin1, A. Bevilacqua2, A. Nicolin2, P. Riva2; these types of mutations is done using southern blot hybridization or 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Science, University of Milan, Fluorescence in situ hybridization, techniques which can be laborious, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Pharmacology, Chemotherapy and Medical Toxicol- time-consuming and require high quantities of starting material . In this ogy, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. study we present a semi-quantitative multiplex PCR-based method CDK5R1 encodes for p35, a neuron-specific activator of cyclin- that uses relative quantitation of fluorescently-labeled short fragments. dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), whose activity plays a central role in Fragments from BRCA1, BRCA2, 9p21 and MMR (MSH2) regions neuronal migration during CNS development and which has been were amplified using FAM™-labeled primers from DNA that had been implicated in several neurodegenerative disorders . isolated from blood. Amplified samples were then run on an Applied The remarkable size of CDK5R1 3’UTR prompted us to search for Biosystems capillary electrophoresis platform and the data was UTR regulatory elements which act on mRNA stability and translational analyzed in GeneMapper® software . After normalization to a control efficiency, by means of the UTRScan bioinformatic tool. We predicted amplicon, peak regions that had undergone deletions or duplications eight possible ARE (AU-Rich Elements), involved in transcript were identified using the GeneMapper software v4.0 report manager deadenylation/degradation, and a GY-box element, known to have feature and verified using the dye scale functionality. Our results will a role in Drosophila post-transcriptional negative regulation of gene highlight an easy to use, optimal system that can be used for both expression . small and large-scale studies . A Dual Luciferase assay was used to carry out the functional analysis: we cotransfected in SK-N-BE and HEK-293 cellular lines a Firefly P1178. construction and characterization of genomic libraries of luciferase expressing control plasmid and six overlapping fragments, BRCA mutation carriers covering the entire CDK5R1 3’UTR (C1-6), cloned in plasmids J. G. Schmitt, E. Sagulenko, M. Sawinska, L. Savelyeva, M. Schwab; expressing Renilla reniformis luciferase at the 3’ end of the reporter Division of Tumor Genetics, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, gene . Germany. ARE containing C1 and C2 fragments showed a decreased luciferase Mutations in the BRCA genes increase the risk of breast cancer . activity in both cell lines, while ARE containing C5 and C6 fragments BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the two major genes responsible for the displayed similar levels of luciferase activity, compared to the control breast and ovarian cancers that cluster in families with a genetically plasmid . The C3 fragment, covering the GY-box, showed high luciferase determined predisposition . Recent studies showed that BRCA2 is activity, suggesting for this element a function of transcript stabilizer in Genomics, technology, bioinformatics  human cells, differently from that evidenced in Drosophila . The ARE P1183. An optimized acGH protocol permits reduced genomic fragment C4, displayed reduced luciferase levels only in SK-N-BE DNA input cells, suggesting a line-specific post-translational regulation control. C. J. Rizzo1, R. Taylor1, A. De-Witte2; The contribution of the predicted regulatory elements on post- 1Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE, United States, 2Agilent Technologies, transcriptional regulation mechanisms will be further elucidated by Santa Clara, CA, United States. studying deleted/mutated fragments and performing degradation The use of microarray technology has been growing rapidly over the past assays . decade . Array comparative genome hybridization (aCGH) has become the method of choice for the detection of copy number changes in P1181. simultaneous analysis and phase detection of the tumors and genetic disorders . When working with patient samples, the iVs8 Poly(tG) and Poly(t) Repeat tracts in the CFTR Gene : amount of target material available for use on arrays is often limited . We comparison of three single step methods have developed a new protocol for preparing genomic DNA samples C. Costa1, J. Costa2, M. Goossens1, E. Girodon1; to be hybridized to our 60mer oligonucleotide CGH microarrays . The 1Hopital Henri Mondor AP-HP-INSERM U654, CRETEIL, France, 2Molecular improved method does not require a DNA amplification step and the Buiology Laboratory-Hopital Americain de Paris, Neuilly, France. digestion and labeling reactions have been streamlined resulting in Precise genotyping at the IVS8 poly(TG) and poly(T) repeat tracts a shorter processing time without compromising array performance . of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) Using this optimized workflow we can reliably hybridize as little as 500 gene may be of clinical relevance in the CFTR pathology . It has been nanograms of genomic DNA to arrays while maintaining high quality demonstrated that length variations of both tracts influence splicing of results . The protocol has been validated on our aCGH microarray exon 9, longer (TG)m associated with shorter (T)n repeats being less platform in experiments using DNA from commercial sources, DNA favourable for its efficiency. Identification of (TG)12 or (TG)13 repeats isolated from cell lines, and DNA isolated from formalin-fixed, paraffin- adjacent to (T)5 could be essential, as these haplotypes are more likely embedded tissues . Normal male/female DNA comparisons yielded to be associated with an abnormal phenotype . As a result of growing ROC areas (a measure of true positives versus false positives) of interest, several assessment methods have been developed, most of greater than 0 .98, indicating a high degree of accuracy . Analysis of them multistep, time consuming and not always designed to determine DNA isolated from colon carcinoma cell line HT29 (ATCC) successfully the phase . detected previously identified aberrations in chromosomes 8 and 16. We here present a comparison of three molecular methods of Preliminary results from cell line and FFPE samples indicate the simultaneous poly(TG) and poly(T) genotyping which rely on a protocol may be useful with even lower input levels . single step assay and allow direct phase detection, thus avoiding family linkage study . Genomic DNAs from 75 patients referred to our P1184. Two novel methods for rapid quantification of human laboratory and previously studied with our routine method based on complement c4A and c4B genes denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), were analysed by a B. Blaskó1, Á. Szilágyi1, D. Szilassy2, G. Füst1, M. Sasvári-Székely1, Z. Rónai1; following protocol recently described based on melting curve analysis 1Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Applera Hungary LTD, Budapest, of hybridization probes combined with real-time PCR . We then applied Hungary. a third method newly developed which relies on a fluorescent multiplex The fourth component of human complement (C4), an essential factor alleles specific PCR : the 5, 7 and 9 poly(T) repeats are specifically of the innate immunity, is represented as two isoforms (C4A and C4B) amplified and detected after fragment analysis on an ABI sequence in the genome . The C4A and C4B genes, encoding the two isoforms of analyzer . Exact poly(T) and poly(TG) lengths are determined by colors complement 4, are located in the chromosome 6, and manifested by and sizes of PCR products respectively . Advantages and disadvantages variable copy numbers among individuals between zero to six in the of each method are discussed human diploid genome. Quantification of the C4A and C4B genes has great clinical importance since unbalanced production of C4A and C4B P1182. Genomic divergence between mouse and man visible is associated with several diseases . High throughput analysis methods from Vega for C4 gene dosage determination are not yet available . L. G. Wilming, C. Amid, S. Donaldson, A. Frankish, R. C. Gibson, E. A. Hart, Here, we show two new, rapid high throughput genotyping methods G. K. Laird, J. E. Loveland, J. Mudge, J. Rajan, H. K. Sehra, C. A. Steward, M. for the determination of the number of the complement C4A and C4B Suner, J. L. Harrow, T. Hubbard; genes. The first method based on real time PCR, and affiliates the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. two major applications of TaqMan probes: quantitative assay and SNP Approximately 80% of mouse genes have a single known orthologue in detection (Szilagyi, 2006) . The second method a novel combination of human in large blocks of sequence, however there are several regions allele specific PCR and capillary gel electrophoresis (CGE) separation where this is not the case . A region of extensive micro-rearrangements for rapid quantification of the C4A and C4B. is present on mouse chromosome 11 (mm11) orthologous to part of These methods enables automated and high throughput gene dosage human 17 (hs17) where the region is involved in two neuropathies analysis, especially in large scale populations screening . (Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease and Smith Magenis Syndrome) . Conversely, a region on mm4 which is associated with various deletions P1185. copy number detection by gene dosage assays using (the so-called brown deletions) is spread over different parts of the taqman® real-time PcR equivalent hs9 and also displays, in mouse, a micro-duplication and K. Li, S. Liew, K. Lazaruk; unique tandemly duplicated genes . Further we observe a number of Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. gene clusters such as keratin, keratin associated protein, major urinary Gene copy number variation is becoming recognized as an important protein, prolactin and vomeronasal receptor, that exhibit considerable type of polymorphism in human genome . It is believed that differences difference in gene number between mouse and man (usually expanded in gene copy number could be a significant source of genetic variation in mouse). These have specific functions and are involved in mating/ between individuals . Gene copy number polymorphisms have been reproduction or the sensory mechanism . associated with genetic diseases such as cancer, immunological Comparison of these regions between species requires accurate and neurological disorders . Gene duplication or deletion can have a manual annotation on finished sequence. Because of the nature of significant impact on phenotype. For example, copy number changes these genes and regions automatic annotation, such as generated by for drug metabolism genes such as GSTM1, GSTT1, and CYP2D6 Genewise (used by Ensembl) or Pairagon, generally does not suffice, are known to be associated with variations in phenotype . Developing neither on the structure nor on the nomenclature level . For example robust and accurate assays to detect copy number change will help to pseudogenes, important when comparing clusters, are mostly absent . understand the role of gene dosage variation in human genetic disease The Havana group at the Sanger Institute performs manual annotation and alterations in metabolism . Here we report the development of real- on human, mouse and other chromosomes . The results are accessible time quantitative PCR assays to quantify copy number using TaqMan® through the Vega web browser, an Ensembl derived genome annotation technology. The method involves relative quantification of the gene of viewer . Vega can display the annotation of equivalent human and interest versus a reference gene known to be single copy . Relative mouse regions simultaneously through the MultiContigView interface . quantity is determined by the ΔΔCt method, where the endogenous Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 60 control is RNase P, and the calibrator is a DNA sample used as the basis P1188. introduction of conformation sensitive capillary for comparative results . Gene copy number is 2 x relative quantity . We Electrophoresis as a reliable tool for mutation detection in have developed assays to measure gene dosage in a variety of genes, routine DNA-diagnostics including 4 important drug metabolism genes (CYP2D6, CYP2E1, E. A. Sistermans, K. van der Donk, E. Bosgoed, L. Hoefsloot, M. Ligtenberg, F. GSTM1 and GSTT1) . The TaqMan-based duplex gene dosage assay Hol, H. Scheffer; is more reproducible, accurate, and robust for copy number detection Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. compared to other methods . Although large-scale mutation analysis by sequencing is now possible and very accurate, it still is relatively laborious and expensive . Current P1186. Universal Detector assay for measuring DNA copy indirect scanning methods such as DGGE and dHPLC are reliable, number changes but the throughput is limited . We have studied whether Conformation- A. R. Tobler, A. J. Broomer, P. J. Sali, R. T. Koehler, D. C. Merrill, K. J. Sensitive Capillary Electrophoresis (CSCE) using the new POPTM Guegler, C. Chen; Conformational Analysis Polymer (CAP, Applied Biosystems) might Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. be a fast and reliable alternative . Using this polymer under semi- Understanding the genetic basis of human phenotypic differences denaturing conditions on an automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems requires the study of an increasing variety of human genetic variations . 3730) we validated 243 different mutations in 14 genes, including 74 Detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) has been at the mutations in BRCA1, 78 mutations in BRCA2, 43 mutations in CHD7 center of efforts to characterize the genetic components of diseases (CHARGE syndrome) and 9 mutations in the mitochondrial DNA . All and traits . However, emerging evidence suggests that intermediate mutations were correctly identified due to a shift in the peak pattern. and large-scale DNA copy number changes in a genome are prevalent For mitochondrial DNA, mutations present at 10% heteroplasmy and account for an important source of genetic variation between could easily be identified. Several parameters were tested to further individuals . Several methods have been developed to measure DNA optimise the method, including the length of the fragment and the use copy number changes . Most of them require the enzymatic manipulation of common primers for labelling of the fragments . As CSCE allows the of genomic DNA and the analysis of fluorescently labeled DNA possibility of multiplexing, at least 4 fragments can be simultaneously fragments by either array hybridization or capillary electrophoresis . We analysed in each capillary in one sequencer run (2 hours, 50 cm report here a new assay called Universal Detector (UD) for accurately capillary) . For a 48 capillary sequencer this results in a throughput measuring copy number changes . The UD assay utilizes a 96-plex of approximately 2300 fragments within a twenty-four hours’ period . oligonucleotide ligation assay (OLA) followed by 48 duplex TaqMan( Data-analysis is also straightforward since the introduction of dedicated PCR reactions for analyzing up to 96 genetic loci . Our results show BioNumerics software . We conclude that CSCE proves to be a fast and an accurate identification of duplicated sequences in samples with reliable method for routine mutation detection in a diagnostic setting . known chromosome duplications . The UD assay further has a linear Furthermore, as no optimization is needed, this technique can also be performance if a sequence is amplified up to 8-fold, whereas higher used for the rapid analysis of candidate genes . fold changes are slightly overestimated . In addition, the UD assay is quantitative for less than 2-fold copy number changes . It can be P1189. the mouse Genome informatics (mGi) Database: using completed within a day and is suitable for genetic studies requiring the mouse to decipher the genetic etiology of human disease a low to medium sample throughput . UD is a powerful, new tool for A. V. Anagnostopoulos, H. Dene, S. M. Bello, H. Onda, M. A. Cassell, D. L. accurately measuring DNA copy number changes . Burkart, I. Lu, L. L. Washburn, M. Tomczuk, R. Babiuk, B. Richards-Smith, C. Smith, J. T. Eppig; P1187. in silico search for cryptic Rss with high recombination The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States. potential in the human genome The MGI Database (http://www .informatics .jax .org) represents an A. Y. Gubsky1, A. B. Sudarikov2, A. V. Baranova3; integrated, in-depth resource of genetic, genomic and biological data 1Odessa National I.I. Mechnikov University, Odessa, Ukraine, 2National Hema- for the laboratory mouse . MGI maintains a pivotal role in comparative tology Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3George Mason Univer- phenotype analysis through full integration of rich biological data sets, sity, Fairfax, VA, United States. ultimately aiming to grant effortless navigation through sequence, When the system of V(D)J-recombination gets out of control the expression, mapping, biochemical process, phenotypic outcome protein complex RAG1/2 can break of DNA outside human Ig and and disease model information . Recent enhancements capitalize on TCR genes . The resulting deletions and translocations damage the robust annotation of aberrant mouse phenotypes in the context some genes (HPRT, SCL, etc .) . In this case sites targets of enzymes of mutations, strain variations, QTLs, and complex traits that serve are cryptic recombination signals (cRSS) which are not structurally as putative models of human genetic diseases, with supplementary identical to recombination signal sequences (RSS) of Ig and TCR phenotype-related images, where possible . Enhanced querying genes . At present no information is available about the quantity and parameters include phenotype search terms from controlled intragenic location of cRSS whose structure has a high recombination vocabularies that circumvent the limitations of data retrieval through potential and the number of theoretically possible intragenic deletions textual searches . Hence, the Mammalian Phenotype (MP) Ontology and inversions with the participation of such cRSS . continues to evolve as a standardized, structured vocabulary that Having researched the annotated DNA sequences of 24 chromosomes permits phenotypic representation across different domains and in silico we have discovered 5 .6 mln of 12 bp and 23 bp spacer cRSS species, and supports annotations to individual genotypes (allelic outside the Ig and TCR loci . Their number is 1 .5 times bigger than combination(s) plus genetic background) at varying degrees of the theoretically expected value . On average the discovered structures granularity . Application of hierarchical MP terms fosters new routes make about 6 % of genome DNA . Having analyzed the nucleotide to map molecular functional features of gene products to complex composition of heptamers and nonamers we have discovered that phenotypic descriptions, and facilitates semantic interpretation and 5696 cRSS have a high recombination potential . 88 and 2383 of them data mining from either a genotype or phenotype standpoint . Likewise, are located in exons and introns of 2207 genes that code proteins and use of the Human Disease Vocabulary Browser, a dynamic set of RNA . With the use of 12/23-bp spacer rule we have found out that disease terms from OMIM (http://www .ncbi .nlm .nih .gov/entrez/query . such cRSS can theoretically participate in the formation of deletions of fcgi?db=OMIM), optimizes access to human disease data for which exons in 70 genes and in the formation of inversions in 86 genes . 23 Mendelian inheritance is suspected or proven . Links to OMIM entries genes can suffer from both type of damage . We are planning further to are used to harness associations between observed mouse phenotypes check the existence of the assumed gene damage in vivo . and orthologous human gene mutations or disease syndromes for which distinct mouse genotypes phenomimic the human condition . Supported by NIH/NHGRI grant HG00330 .Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 61 P1190. Development of a screening tool to validate gene sets algorithm that is a feature of our Assign-ATF software that improves obtained from global screens the accuracy of automated base calling and also enables semi R. Salowsky1, R. Wittig2, A. Poustka2; quantitative applications of automated DNA sequencing . Our system 1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2German Cancer Research Cen- exploits the reproducible nature of re-sequencing . If the same position tre, Heidelberg, Germany. is sequenced in different individuals the relative peak heights of the During the last decade, different approaches had been developed to same bases at the same positions are almost identical . Our approach identify prognostic or diagnostic marker genes . Especially microarray normalizes the sequence data and represents the peaks relative based expression analysis led to the definition of gene sets, the to what is expected for a homozygous peak at each position . This expression patterns of which were predictive for certain disease results in homozygous peaks being the same height as each other phenotypes . A synergy between these advances and the development and heterozygous peaks being 50% of the homozygous peaks . Our of screening tools, which allow a rapid, reliable, and reasonably priced software also dynamically calculates and subtracts the background . screening of marker gene expression represents an important step Together these algorithms dramatically improve heterozygous base towards an improved treatment strategy . For a rapid and reliable calling and minimize base call errors . We have used this approach to semi-quantitative expression analysis of eleven candidate genes sequence DNA pools to simultaneously screen for and compare the for drug resistance in melanoma, we combined a multiplex RT- frequency of SNPs between different populations and to detect low PCR (mRT-PCR) approach with subsequent microfluidic fragment level mutants in HIV drug resistance genotyping . analysis . The functionality of this approach was demonstrated by low inter-experimental variations of amplicon quantities after endpoint P1193. Living cell irradiation and double-strand breaks analysis . Applied to RNA samples derived from drug-sensitive and R. Ugenskiene1, W. Polak2, O. Veselov2, J. Lekki2, Z. Stachura2, M. Zazula1, W. -resistant melanoma cell lines, the multiplex RT-PCR delivered Dabros1, J. Stachura1; results qualitatively concordant with data obtained from Northern 1Jagiellonian University, Medical College, Pathomorphology Department, Kra- blot- and array-analyses . Further tests using an automated on-chip kow, Poland, 2H. Niewodniczański Institute of Nuclear Physics, Polish Academy electrophoresis platform indicate the applicability of this approach for of Sciences, Krakow, Poland. high throughput measurements . In conclusion, we developed a rapid Keywords: microprobe, protons, double-strand breaks, fibroblasts. and reliable screening tool to validate gene sets obtained from global Single-particle microbeam facilities with their abilities to irradiate a screens . single, well localized cell (or even cell compartments) with a defined number of particles are an excellent tool in radiation biology research . P1191. Deletion/Duplication screening of the DMD gene in 98 They give the possibility to analyze the end points as well as the individuals using mLPA technique underlying mechanisms . The aim of the study was to analyze the cell P. Jorge, S. Brás, L. Rodrigues, E. Vieira, J. Oliveira, R. Santos; damage induced by proton irradiation . Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal. Human skin fibroblasts were seeded into specially designed Petri MLPA, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification, is now dishes, with a 3 x 3 mm2 SiN irradiation window (to insure the protons 3 4 widely recognized as a reliable method to detect both deletions and passage), 1 day before the experiment . Cells were irradiated at duplications in several genes, including DMD [MIM 300377] . Mutations Krakow microprobe facility with 2 MeV protons from the Van de Graaff in this gene are responsible for one of the most common neuromuscular accelerator with three different doses: 1 Gy, 6 Gy and 10 Gy . Following disorders - the allelic Duchenne and Becker Muscular Dystrophies (D/ a standard immunohistochemistry procedure, cells were blocked with BMD) [MIM 310200 and 300376] . H2A.X monoclonal primary antibody and alexa fluor 488 secondary In our laboratory, the commonly used multiplex PCR reactions, antibody at a concentration 1:500 for 1h at r .t . Double strand breaks Southern blot and hybridization techniques have been used in the (DSBs) foci were scored under the fluorescent microscope. The results routine molecular diagnosis of D/BMD . In total, there were 373 unrelated showed a 4 .2 fold increase in DSBs formation at 1 Gy, 8 .3 fold at 6 Gy, referrals, including cases later seen to have been misdiagnosed, and 11 .5 fold at 10 Gy samples in comparison to the control . The DSBs presenting defects in other genes (ex: sarcoglycans, CAPN3) . These formation correlated positively with the dose increase . The obtained methods enabled the characterization of DMD deletions in 137 patients results strongly suggest further continuation of these studies . of which 45% involved exons 45-52, 13% exons 3-19 and 16% a single This study was supported by the project CELLION of the EU 6th exon (either 44 or 45) . Framework Programme, No MRTN-CT-2003-503923 . We used MLPA assay to screen for mutations in 68 unrelated patients (partially retrospective study). All 21 deletions were confirmed, and P1194. GeneExpress: a design study for a pan-European a further 15 duplications were detected (8 undocumented changes), research infrastructure dedicated to gene expression mapping two of which were already suspected based on routine screening of early human development results. Additionally, carrier status was ascertained and/or clarified in M. Muiras1, D. Vouyiouklis1, M. Scott1, A. Andras1, K. Taylor2, S. Woods2, R. some families, also enabling determination of de novo versus familial Baldock3, M. Atkinson4, J. van Hemert4, S. Lindsay1; mutations in sporadic cases, as well as the detection of gonadal 1Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Policy mosaicism . Ethics and Life Sciences, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3MRC Hu- The authors highlight the added value of complementing routine man Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4National e-Science Centre, methods with the MLPA technique in the molecular diagnosis of D/ Edinburgh, United Kingdom. BMD, considering that gross deletions and duplications comprise the Characterising gene expression patterns is a crucial part of majority of mutations in the DMD gene . understanding the molecular determinants of development and the role of genes in disease . However, this exciting area suffers from P1192. improving the accuracy of mutation detection by DNA fragmentation of efforts across Europe, from difficulty of sourcing and sequencing using novel approaches to base calling and data maintaining suitable collections of material, and in developing expertise representation in both biological and informatics areas . Moreover, due to the special D. M. Goodridge, H. Hogan, D. C. Sayer; nature of the material involved in the field of human development, it is Conexio Genomics, East Fremantle, Australia. essential that ethical aspects are carefully considered . A critical factor for the detection of mutations or heterozygous sequence In April 2005, the University of Newcastle was granted the coordination by automated DNA sequencing is the accuracy of automated base of GeneExpress, an EU-funded project in framework programme 6 . calling . Automated base calling accuracy is compromised by the The Euro2 .2m Design Study aims to evaluate the most effective ways variable incorporation rates of di-deoxynucleotides and subsequent of overcoming challenges faced by the community of scientists involved variation in sequence peak heights . In some cases one of the peaks in the analysis of gene expression in early human development . at heterozygous positions may be so low it cannot be discriminated GeneExpress will build on European strengths in grid technology from background and maybe miscalled . Importantly this small peak and developmental gene expression studies . Currently, there is no is usually approximately half the height of a homozygous peak of the international infrastructure to bring these two very different fields of same base at the same position . We have developed a base calling expertise together .Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 6 GeneExpress multidisciplinary team will define the organisational and organization of its exons are immediately given . By a code color, it collaborative structures, the ethical framework and the molecular and is then possible to determine which exon can be skipped while the genetic technologies and informatics technologies necessary for a transcript remains within the correct reading frame in order to produce new research infrastructure . a functional truncated protein . A link on the protein reference source gives access to its complete description on NCBI site . Each record P1195. EGFR mutation to quinazolin inhibitors response using of a gene is linked to the GENATLAS database and to its associated cheminformatics tools phenotypes . The researchers thus have a fast tool for pre-selection of K. Sabitha, K. Jamil; the candidate genes for the exon skipping technique in order to apply Bhagwan Mahavir Hopital And Research Cenre, Hyderabad, India. this new therapeutic approach . Mutations of the EGFR gene have been identified in specimens from patients with non-small lung cancer who have a response to quinazolin P1197. Towards an SNP-based human profiling across inhibitors such as CI1033, Geftinib, and Erlotinib . Substitution mutation population studies G719S was reported, this mutation is located in the GXGXXG motif I. Pietrangeli1, P. Asili2, I. Predazzi1, P. Marsala2, L. Gabriele2, C. Pipolo2, O. of the nucleotide triphosphate binding domain (P-loop) . This mutation Ricci2, A. Spinella2, G. Novelli1,3, E. Giardina1; mediates oncogenic effects by altering downstream signaling and 1Department of Biopathology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Direzione antiapoptotic mechanisms . This glycine residue is mutated to Serine Centrale Polizia Criminale, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Cardiovascular Medi- residue by using in silico technique . The 3-D structure of the mutant cine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United EGFR (G719S) was built by using crystal structure coordinates of States. SYK (1XBC.PDB). Then the model structure was further refined by Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are likely in the near future energy minimization and molecular dynamics method . The active site to have a fundamental role in forensic fields and human population of the mutant EGFR structure was analysed and compared to EGFR studies . Forensic DNA analysis is routinely performed using polymorphic crystal structure (1M17 .pdb) with respect to structural difference . The short tandem repeat (STR) markers, however SNPs could be more surface area of mutant EGFR and WT EGFR active sites are 657 .73 successful for degraded/minute DNA samples . Basically, a number of A0 .2/U .C for 466 .36 A0 .2/U .C . respectively . The interaction energy four SNPs is required for each STR polymorphism to reach the actual of the quinazolin inhibitors with each individual amino acid in the Pd (power of discrimination) . active of EGFR is calculated by the advanced program Affinity. The We have selected a panel of 50 SNPs aimed to the development of a overall binding affinity of the ligand molecule was slightly affected, but SNP-based human identification system suitable for forensic purposes. surprisingly the mutated serine residue is found have better interaction The SNPs have been selected from the dbSNP (http://www .ncbi .nlm . with ligand molecule except Erlotinib . The measured values are nih .gov/) . Selection criteria were mainly focused on allelic balance and improved for electrostatic and vanderwaal’s interactions . The values specificity. Frequencies of the selected markers are being estimated are given in the table . on a sample of 700 European (Italian) individuals, 200 Africans and 200 Asiatic, the most of them already typed by traditional STR- WT EGFR Activity Mutated EGFR Activity based profiling kit, and compared to the frequencies reported by the HapMap project (http://www .hapmap .org/) . All the samples are being (GLY_695) (G695S) typed using the Real Time PCR technology (Applied Biosystems), and results confirmed by direct sequencing. Interestingly, some of the frequencies in the Italian population showed discrepancies from CI1033GeftinibErlotinibCI1033 Geftinib Erlotinib those reported by HapMap as demonstrated by the SNP rs675236 which showed a highly significant difference in allelic and genotypic frequencies (p-value of 0 .0007) . These data reveal that frequencies Electrostatic 0 .184* 0 .066 -0 .139 -0 .193 0 0 .176 available by HapMap project could show significant differences across (E ele) the populations considered as the same ethnical group suggesting that generation of population specific frequencies is mandatory for medical genetics and forensic studies . Vanderwaal’s Work supported by EU grant n° 500804-2 (NACBO) -1 .061 -0 .23 -0 .812 -1 .311 -1 .31 -0 .962 (E vdw) P1198. taqman® Low Density Array: Gene Expression Analysis using Human Immune Profiling and Human Endogenous Control Total (E Total) -0 .877 -0 .161 -0 .951 -1 .504 -1 .314 -0 .786 Gene signature Panels K. Y. Lee, G. Concepcion, K. Lee, K. Shelton, N. Tuason; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. *---values are measured in Kcal mol - The TaqMan® Low Density Array allows for rapid screening of many samples with 10s to100s of TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays . The P1196. A bioinformatic tool for the medical research researcher can move from gene lists and single assays in tubes to large scale real-time PCR gene expression profiling without the the need for S. Dumesnil1, K. Tanin1, M. L. Chauvet1, C. Turleau1, N. Poizot1, J. Frézal1, M. liquid handling robots . Of particular concern to researchers is assay Le Merrer1, C. Mugnier2; performance on the Low Density Array relative to plates, as well as the 1Inserm U781 Hopital Necker, Paris, France, 2DSI Université René Descartes, precision within arrays, across arrays and between manufactured lots . Paris, France. To compare performance between plate and Low Density Array, we GENATLAS is a database which provides information including the looked at data generated from > 3000 TaqMan® Assays that were run structure, expression and function of human genes, their mutations in parallel on TaqMan® Low Density Arrays and 384-well plates . These and the corresponding genetic diseases . Recently, a new therapeutic data show that assays on the array can discriminate 2-fold change approach for the Duchenne muscular dystrophy gave good results on with similar sensitivity as on plates . We used data from multiple the mouse . It is based on the exon skipping technique and consists manufactured lots of the Human Immune Profiling Gene Signature in removing at the mRNA level the exon which is responsible for the Panel to determine assay reproducibility and found that across arrays disease, allowing the production of a shorter but however functional reproducibility was very good; across manufacturing lots the standard protein . We developed at GENATLAS, in partnership with the AFM, an deviation increased but was well within the QC standards set for innovating data-processing tool to search for other candidate genes for within array reproducibility . In these studies we show the performance this gene therapy . It makes it possible to carry out a research on the parameters of TaqMan® Arrays and the results of 32 tissues run on whole genome by associating different criteria of selection for the exon the TaqMan® Low Density Human Endogenous Control Array Gene skipping technique, like the length of the mRNA transcript, the number Signature Panel . of exons, the localization, the function of the protein in the organism . For each gene matching, a short description and a visualization of the Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 6 P1199. copy number determination using the sNPlex™ gene mutations respectively, and that the differential expression can genotyping system be measured also at the peripheral level . M. Wenz1, F. De La Vega1, R. Koehler1, A. Tobler1, T. Karlsen2, A. Franke3, S. Total RNA was extracted and amplified with two sets of TaqMan probes Schreiber3, J. Hampe3; respectively for the 5’ and 3’ of the each gene . 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Institute of Immunology, RNA analyses identified: Rikshospital et University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Institute for Clinical Molecu- 1 . In the paediatric patients (<18 years old) either with FBN1 or lar Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany. TGFBR2 mutations, the expression values of both genes are from 10 Genome copy number changes (CNPs) are far more frequent than up to 60 times fold higher respect to the adults (affected or unaffected) originally expected, and many of them affect gene copy numbers . and 5 to 20 times fold higher respect to unaffected young . Several genetic disorders are the result of CNPs, however because of 2 . In the FBN1 patients harbouring PTC mutations in the 3’ of the gene technical limitations, the extent to which such contribute to phenotypic (from exon #50 to exon #65) the mRNA levels are as in unaffected variations is still poorly understood . We recently introduced the patients . SNPlex™ Genotyping System to address the need for accurate 3 . In FBN1 patients harbouring mis-sense mutations the expression genotyping data, high sample throughput, study design flexibility, and levels is pretty variable, according to the mutation location . cost efficiency. The system uses oligonucleotide ligation/polymerase 4 . In TGFBR2 patients with mis-sense mutation, the mRNA levels are chain reaction (OLA/PCR) and capillary electrophoresis (CE) to 4 to 8 times higher with respect to unaffected controls analyze single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotypes (Tobler et We suggest that differences in normal FBN1and TGFBR2 expression al . J . Biomol . Tech . 16(4), 2005) . Here we demonstrate the feasibility could contribute to elucidate the mechanisms of the clinical variability of an adaptation of the SNPlex Genotyping System, to analyze CNPs seen in thees families with MFS . by comparing the intensity ratios of OLA reactions in test and reference regions . We will present the copy number analysis of DNAs with P1202. methylation-sensitive microarray cGH detection system known chromosomal duplications. Specifically, we studied 88 genomic for genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation DNAs, 7 of which contained duplications of the chromosomes 9, 13, N. Sosonkina1,2, N. Miyake3, D. Starenki1,2, T. Ohta1,2, N. Niikawa4,2, N. Matsu- 18 or X . On each duplicated chromosome we analyzed at least 10 test moto5; OLA reactions, and differences in intensity ratios confirmed all known 1The Research Institute of Personalized Health Sciences, Health Sciences chromosomal duplications. The assay further identified male (XY) and University of Hokkaido, Tobetsucho, Hokkaido, Japan, 2SORST, Japan Science female (XX) DNA samples due to their copy number difference of the and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Japan, 3Department of Medicine, Program X chromosome . in Genomics, Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, United States, 4Depart- In addition to identifying known chromosomal duplications, we ment of Human Genetics, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical analyzed copy numbers changes of the RCCX module of the human Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan, 5Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City MHC complement gene cluster . University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan. Difference in DNA methylation is an essential element in several P1200. Identification and functional characterization of novel epigenetic regulations. Allele-specific gene expression dependent factors regulating cellular cholesterol metabolism on parental origin that is called genomic imprinting is associated with H. Runz1,2, D. Gilbert3, U. Wirkner2, S. Wiemann4, J. Zschocke1, R. Pepperkok2; differentially methylated regions (DMRs) - chromosome loci, where 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Germany, 2EMBL, methylation status differs between paternal and maternal alleles . In the Heidelberg, Germany, 3Institute of Zoology, University of Heidelberg, Germany, present research, we applied genome-wide, BAC-based microarray 4DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany. for the analysis of DNA methylation in different tissues and for the Hypercholesterolemia is an important risk factor for atherosclerosis determination of novel DMRs in human . We designed a methylation- and coronary heart disease . Current pathophysiological models of sensitive detection system, and, to estimate its efficiency, developed hypercholesterolemia assume a tight association of environmental custom microarray covering imprinting control centre at the Prader- as well as genetic factors, many of which a yet unknown . For the Willi syndrome/Angelman syndrome region at 15q11-q13 . The system identification of genes predisposing for hypercholesterolemia, we successfully identified BAC clones corresponding to the reported here present progress on the establishment of a combined expression DMRs . Then, we screened the human genome for novel DMRs using profiling and microscope-based functional screening approache that genome-wide microarray (2178 clones spaced 1 .4 Mb in average) will allow us to systematically identify new candidate genes which are and DNA from tissues of complete hydatidiform mole (androgenesis) regulated by cholesterol and fatty acids and themselves are involved in and benign ovarian teratoma (parthenogenesis) . Both tissues are regulating cellular lipid metabolism . Central feature of our approach is uniparental diploidies; therefore complete hydatidiform mole and the use of microscopic cDNA- and RNAi-based functional cell arrays, benign ovarian teratoma are presumably keeping only paternal and only a high-content screening microscopy platform and automated image maternal primary imprints, respectively . DNA extracted from placenta, analysis software . Altogether, this technology allows gain-of-function lymphocytes and sperm served as controls . As a result of hybridisation and loss-of-function studies in cultured cells with a high throughput experiments, we obtained general methylation patterns for different and up to a genome-wide scale . Our study aims towards a more tissues. We have also confirmed the results of microarray analysis in comprehensive understanding of the molecular basis of cellular sterol several clones that cover regions with different methylation status in regulation, with our methodology being suitable for addressing a wide experimental tissue samples . Methylation-sensitive microarray CGH range of biological and medical questions . system detects difference in DNA methylation among tissues; this could help to identify novel DMRs in human genome . P1201. Peripheral expression variability of FBN1 and tGFBR2 genes in genotyped patients with marfan syndrome. P1203. microRNA expression analysis in trisomy 21 and normal E. Porcu1, A. Brega2, N. Marziliano1, M. Grasso1, E. Disabella1, M. Tagliani1, G. individuals Tocco1, C. Lucchelli1, C. Malattia3, M. Pasotti4, E. Arbustini1; C. Borel, M. Gagnebin, S. Deutsch; 1Center for Inherted Cardiovascular Diseases-IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medi- Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Università degli cal School, CH, Geneva, Switzerland. Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 3Pediatrics Department-IRCCS Policlinico San Down Syndrome or Trisomy21 is a disorder due to an extra copy of Matteo and University ov Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 4Department of Cardiology-IRCCS chromosome 21 . Our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis is Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. remarkably poor since it is not clear how the extra copy of HSA21 FBN1 (MIN *134797) and TGFBR2 (MIN +190182) mutations can leads to a wide range of phenotypes . We investigated a new class of cause Marfan syndrome (MFS) . One of the unexplained features of functional sequences: microRNAs (miRNAs), that act primarily as post- MFS is the pathogenic mechanism that leads to marked inter- and intra- transcriptional repressors of target genes through 3’UTR interactions . familial clinical variability, and also a variable disease penetrance . We We have used quantitative real-time PCR to accurately measure the tested the hypothesis that FBN1 and TGFBR2 genes are differentially expression of miRNAs . Due to their small size (~22nt) and the absence expressed in patients diagnosed with MFS carriers of FBN1 or TGFBR2 of poly(A) tail, a specific assay was designed to reverse transcribe Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 6 each mature miRNA with specific stem loop primers. We analysed the using Ct-1 with repeat-containing probes were less reproducible than o expression of 3 HSA21 miRNAs (miR-125b, miR-let7c, miR-155) and for sc probes . Systematic error in the design of genomic hybridization 5 miRNA non-HSA21 in lymphoblastoid cell lines from 14 normal and experiments was mitigated either by use of sc probes alone or by 14 trisomic unrelated individuals . substitution of synthetic repetitive elements present in probe sequences Our results show a significant variability in miRNA expression among for Ct-1 . o normal and trisomic individuals, suggesting a potential regulatory influence of the genetic background. The average values obtained P1206. increasing the mutation detection rate in DNA for the normal versus the trisomic lymphoblastoid population were diagnostics by rapid implementation of mLPA using synthetic not different for the non-HSA21 miRNAs. Surprisingly, no significant probes overexpression was found for the HSA21 miRNA in the lymphoblastoid L. H. Hoefsloot, M. H. A. Ruiterkamp-Versteeg, G. M. G. Schobers, I. J. de cell lines of trisomic individuals . Thus, we conclude that in these Wijs, W. M. Nillesen, H. Scheffer, E. A. Sistermans; cell lines the miRNAs may not contribute to any cellular phenotypic Dept Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The difference between the 2 groups . We are currently analysing the Netherlands. expression of these miRNAs in different tissues in order to determine Sequence analysis will stay the golden standard for the identification if their expression is controlled by additional tissue-specific regulatory of genomic mutations during the forthcoming years . However, this mechanisms . technique has a major drawback, since heterozygous (multiple) exon deletions and duplications will not be detected . Recently, deletion/ P1204. Identification of microRNA and mRNA marker genes for duplication analysis for genes such as BRCA1, BRCA2 and MECP2 monitoring Es identity and differentiation in mouse has demonstrated that such changes may be important sources of C. Chen1, D. Ridzon1, C. Lee2, W. M. Strauss2; pathogenic mutations. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2University of Colorado- (MLPA) is a recent addition to routine DNA diagnostics allowing Boulder, Boulder, CO, United States. detection of copy gains or losses in an efficient, low-cost, robust way, A total of 248 microRNAs (miRNAs) were quantified using TaqMan® with a high sensitivity and specificity. MLPA-kits have become available miRNA assays in 13 mouse embryonic stem (ES) cell lines, 30 commercially for several genes with known deletions, including those differentiated embryoid bodies (EBs) and 6 mouse tissues . MicroRNA mentioned above . As we expected that exon deletions and duplications expression profiles can classify ESs, differentiated EBs and adult would be an important source of pathogenic changes in other genes as tissues. We have identified ES- and differentiation-specific miRNAs well, we have developed a system in which we can rapidly implement that could be used as biomarkers to determine ES cell identity and MLPA-analysis for any gene desired by the use of fully synthetic probes . to monitor the differentiation . There exists a highly conserved miRNA Briefly, 5 control probes with different lengths have been designed to expression signature in 13 ES lines . Only ¼ miRNA genes are highly be included in all kits. Additional gene-specific synthetic probes can expressed in ES cells, and during development an increasingly be added to up to 15 fragments in total, each fragment 4 nucleotides elaborate miRNA signature is expressed. The stem cell specific longer than the previous one . To date, we have been successful for expression of a small set of miRNAs is lost in an apparently coordinate the autosomal genes CHD7 , EYA1, LMX1B, EHMT1, and SPG4, and fashion during development and does not reappear in any somatic X-linked CHM, and NDP . Preliminary data indicate that indeed 1-5% lineage . Based on the elucidation of this regulated miRNA molecular of mutations in the autosomal genes is an exonic deletion or insertion . signature, it seems likely that there is a significant role for miRNA For the X-linked disorders, it allowed us the easy diagnosis of female action in the early embryo . Of 33,381mRNAs probed in an AB 1700 carriers with a deletion . microarray, 452 are differentially expressed between ES cell lines and EBs. Identification of these ES differentiation-related miRNA and P1207. Analysis of mOB (tmEm 23) expression in rats under mRNA marker genes could be used to examine ES cell identity and brain experimental ischemia monitor the spontaneous differentiation of ES lines during cell culture . V. G. Dmitrieva1, E. V. Torshina1, L. V. Dergunova1, T. V. Tvorogova2, V. I. Skvortsova2, S. A. Limborska1; P1205. Quantitative microsphere hybridization with single 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian copy probes: more accurate than genomic and expression State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. microarrays It is now well known that ceramide and diacylglycerol (DAG) are signal J. H. Knoll1,2, H. L. Newkirk1, M. Miralles1, P. K. Rogan2,3; molecules of apoptotic and antiapoptotic pathways of cell regulation . 1Laboratory of Genomic Disorders, Children’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, Being element of sphingomyelin cycle sphingomyelin synthase 1 United States, 2School of Medicine, University of Missouri, Kansas City, MO, (SMS1) encoded the MOB (TMEM 23) major transcript controls the United States, 3Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Children’s Mercy synthesis of ceramide and diacylglycerol which relative concentrations Hospital, Kansas City, MO, United States. are responsible for balance between cell death and surviving . It is Genomic copy number can be determined directly by quantitative established that apoptosis is involved in mechanisms of cerebral microsphere suspension hybridization (QMH). Computationally-defined ischemia . To investigate the expression of MOB major transcript in the single copy (sc) genomic fragments were conjugated to spectrally- ischemic brain we took advantage of experimental models of global and distinct polystyrene microspheres and used to quantify homologous focal ischemia in rats . We used semiquantitative reverse transcription sequences in labeled genomic DNA by flow cytometry. Copy number polimerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to assess the mRNA level of MOB differences were determined by comparing the mean fluorescence in the forebrain and cerebral cortex of rats in the permanent bilateral intensities (MFI) of test probes with a diploid sc reference probe in common carotid artery occlusion model of global ischemia and in the patient samples and abnormal cell lines . One, two and three alleles permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO) model of focal were readily distinguishable regardless of chromosomal context: (a) ischemia . Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) the MFI ratios of ABL1 probes were reduced by 0 .59 fold in patients was used as the internal control . In the global ischemia model the with del(9)(q34q34) and increased 1.42 fold in trisomic 9 cell lines; expression of MOB major transcript was significantly decreased only (b) TEKT3 and PMP22 probes detected proportionate copy number after 24 h in forebrain cortex of ischemic rats compared to sham- increases in CMT1a patients with dup(17)(p12p12); (c) a chromosome operated and control animals . In the lesioned cortex of pMCAO animals 15q11.2q13 probe array identified imprinting center and common MOB mRNA level decreased after 24 h compared to control group . At deletions in Prader Willi and Angelman syndrome patients . 48 h after pMCAO the expression of MOB major transcript has tend to Additionally, QMH with Ct-1 DNA was used to compare genomic increase in both lesion cortex and contralateral cortex of ischemic rats . o hybridization to sc probes in the presence or absence of adjacent In addition MOB mRNA level at 48 h after pMCAO was significantly repetitive elements . Contrary to expectation, Ct-1 enhanced higher compared to 24 h after pMCAO and control animals . o hybridization by 2 .2-3 fold to sc probes with adjacent repetitive elements, because Ct-1 is enriched for linked sc sequences that o distort quantification of hybridization to genomic targets. We found that genomic and expression hybridization microarray measurements Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 6 P1208. An evaluation of automated mutation detection using P1210. FINDbase: A relational database for frequencies of softGenetics® sequence data analysis software mutation inherited disease-causing mutations in different populations surveyor™ v2.51 worldwide Y. G. Patel, A. J. Wallace, R. G. Elles; S. van Baal1, G. P. Patrinos1,2; National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom. 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Asclepion Genetics, Lausanne, In order to asses the effectiveness of automated mutation detection of Switzerland. Mutation Surveyor™ in a diagnostic setting, we tested four sets of bi- The National and Ethnic Mutation Databases (NMDBs) are continuously directional sequence data comprising 5 .2Mb in total . The data covered updated mutation depositories, recording extensive information over a broad spectrum of sequencing chemistries, laboratories, sequencing the described genetic heterogeneity of an ethnic group or population . platforms and read lengths . Those resources not only enhance awareness over the various genetic In bi-directional mode, Mutation Surveyor™ is claimed to detect >99% disorders but also facilitate the provision of genetic services, by better of mutations, with sensitivity to the mutant allele extending down to orientating mutation screening, and the elaboration of the demographic 5% of the primary peak provided sequence quality meets a minimum history of human population groups . Here, we report the construction Phred score of 20 . of FINDbase (http://www.findbase.org), a relational database, aiming After excluding all possible explanations for false negative results at recording the frequency of mutations, leading to inherited disorders following visual inspection of the trace data, the bi-directional false in various populations worldwide . Database operates under PHP negative rate ranged from 0 .0-4 .9% depending on data set . Sensitivity and MySQL, is based on data warehousing and provides a simple, was depressed for mosaic mutations and only 62% (33/53) were web-based, and extendable system for population-based mutation detected without visual inspection under default settings . Mutation data collection. In addition, this database significantly contributes Surveyor™ showed decreased sensitivity and an increased false towards NMDB uniformity, as it allows the setup of several NMDBs positive rate on data produced by the Beckman CEQ8000 platform locally and/or centrally, using a single database framework . Database using the CEQ-DTCS chemistry . records can be queried using a user-friendly query interface, providing Mutation Surveyor™ was able to de-convolute 89% (155/175) of instant access to the list and frequencies of the different mutations, heterozygote indel mutations into separate alleles . However separation accompanied by links to the respective Online Mendelian Inheritance into the two alleles did not permit the automated detection of mutations in Man (OMIM) entries . Query outputs can be either in a table or graph downstream of the indel, moreover the software did have difficulty in format, accompanied by reference(s) on the data source . Registered naming frameshift mutations sequenced in the reverse orientation . users from three different groups, namely administrator, coordinator Mutation Surveyor™ can make a significant contribution in helping and curator, are responsible for database curation and/or data entry/ to ease the burden of sequence data analysis . Although we have correction online via a password-protected interface . Database access highlighted weaknesses with the program (used in auto-run mode is free of charge and there are no registration requirements for data with default settings), the user has the facility to increase sensitivity by query . This database can serve as a valuable online tool for molecular altering many of the parameters . genetic testing of inherited disorders . P1209. Rapid and sensitive nanoparticle based assay for gene P1211. the Lebanese National mutation frequency database expression studies A. Megarbane1, E. Chouery1, S. van Baal2, G. P. Patrinos2,3; M. J. Nunes, P. V. Baptista; 1Saint Joseph University, Faculty of Medicine, Unit of Medical Genetics, Beirut, CIGMH/SABT/FCT/UNL, Caparica, Portugal. Lebanon, 2Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Asclepion Genetics, Gold nanoparticles have long been used as biological tags, and more Lausanne, Switzerland. recently, advances in functionalising particles with oligonucleotides The exponential discovery rate of new genomic alterations, leading have allowed for the development of a series of new and practical to genetic disorders, as well as the need for comparative studies of biodetection systems . Gold nanoparticle probes have arisen as novel different populations mutation frequencies necessitates recording tools for specific nucleic acid detection and can be used in biomolecule their population-wide spectrum, in mutation databases . The National detection assays with numerous advantages when compared to more Mutation frequency databases are continuously updated mutation common conventional approaches (1) . depositories, which contain extensive information over the described In the present work, oligonucleotide-gold nanoparticle conjugates genetic heterogeneity of a population or ethnic group . Here, we were employed to enable selective colorimetric discrimination of the report the construction of the Lebanese National Mutation frequency β-globin gene (HBB) expression. The gold nanoparticle surface is database (http://www .goldenhelix .org/lebanese), derived from an functionalised with thiolated oligonucleotides (Au-nanoprobe), and in academic effort to provide high quality and up-to-date information solution typically exhibits a red colour due to the optical absorption on the underlying genetic heterogeneity of inherited disorders in peak around 526 nm caused by surface plasmon resonance . High salt the Lebanese population . Database core engine has been built and concentration induces Au-nanoprobe aggregation in the absence of maintained online using the specialized ETHNOS software (Patrinos et a complementary sequence and the solution turns purple (absorption al ., Hum Mutat, 2005; 25:327-333, Kleanthous et al., Hum Mutat 2006; peak shifts towards longer wavelength); if the probe hybridises in press) and contains brief summaries of the various genetic disorders specifically to the complementary target sequence, there is no Au- prevalent in Lebanon and studied for the Lebanese population, namely nanoprobe aggregation and the solution remains red . The abundance beta-thalassemia, cystic fibrosis, 21-hydroxylase deficiency, GJB2 of the specific mRNA was correlated with values of absorption at sensorineural deafness and familial Meditteranean fever . Additionally, 526nm of a solution containing the probes and total RNA extracted an easy-to-use query interface provides instant access to the list and from MEL cells previously transfected with the HBB gene . This gold- frequencies of the different mutations responsible for the inherited nanoprobe method proved to be sensitive, selective and extremely disorders in the Lebanese population . Furthermore, numerous links easy to perform, taking less than 15 minutes to develop after total to the respective Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) entries RNA extraction, without the need for expensive and time consuming and, where available to various locus-specific databases, fruitfully experimental set-ups . integrate the database‘s content into a single web site . This database (1) Baptista P ., et al . 2005 . Colorimetric Detection of Eukariotic Gene can serve as a valuable online tool for molecular genetic testing of Expression with DNA-derivatized Gold Nanoparticles . Journal of inherited disorders in Lebanon and could potentially motivate further Biotechnology, 119(2): 111-117 . investigations of yet unknown genetic diseases in the Lebanese population .Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 66 P1212. Non-enzymatic labeling of nucleic acids using the lar. IRO/IDIBELL, Hospitalet del Llobregat, Spain, 3AMC, Laboratory of Genetic Universal Linkage system (ULs™) in gene expression DNA Metabolic Diseases, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. microarray applications Peroxisomes are ubiquitously distributed organelles, exclusive A. McGeever, S. Snoeijers, D. Postma, C. Henriet, D. Pappaioannou; from eukaryotic cells and organisms, essential for lipid metabolism Kreatech Biotechnology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. and free- radical detoxification. Loss or malfunction of peroxisomes The Universal Linkage System (ULS™) is a (platinum-based) labeling causes dramatic inherited conditions such as Zellweger syndrome technology to label RNA, DNA and proteins Since ULS labeling is or X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy . We have created a peroxisomal a chemical labeling technology, complete control over the labeling database http://www .peroxisomedb .org with the purpose of gathering process has been achieved . The “no need for enzymes” approach and clarifying all relevant information on peroxisomal genes, proteins, together with a controlled labeling makes the ULS labeling procedure metabolic pathways and diseases, combining molecular biology and very reproducible and robust . genetics, genomics, metabolism and clinical points of view . Using The ULS labeling technology’s key advantage is the ability to directly annotated data derived from online resources and the literature the label nucleic acids in their natural form . For example, ULS is very peroxisomeDB includes the complete peroxisomal proteome of Homo efficient at directly labeling naturally occurring small RNA/miRNA in sapiens (82 genes) and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (56 genes) . The a one step 15 min reaction . Other labeling technologies encounter database is structured in interrelated sections ‘Genes’, ‘Functions’ issues trying to label these small (20-23 nts) non coding RNAs, thus ‘Metabolic pathways’ and ‘Diseases’ and includes hyperlinks to other making ULS a very attractive labeling technology in this field. databases (NCBI, ENSEMBL, UCSC, SNPs…) . The proteins are For gene expression DNA microarray applications, the available amount classified into 51 different characterized metabolic functions. Interactive of mRNA can be limiting. For this reason, linear target amplification graphical depictions of the main peroxisomal metabolic routes and to generate aRNA is typically required . Traditionally, labeling of aRNA updated flow charts for diagnosis are included. The disease catalogue is achieved by introducing modified nucleotides during the linear lists a total of 23 disorders sorted by clinical criteria and linked to amplification step. This is not ideal since it can reduce the efficiency of reference databases such as OMIM, The Human Gene Mutation the enzyme and introduce bias . ULS offers the possibility to label aRNA Database (HGMD) and disease-specific databases. Precomputed generated with unmodified nucleotides, allowing the enzyme to work to BLAST, PSI-BLAST, multiple sequence alignment (CLUSTALW) its maximum efficiency. Avoiding the use of modified nucleotides gives and phylogenetic trees are provided for each human entry allowing much higher yields and better size distribution of aRNA . automated identification of orthologues and spotting of the principal Here data will be presented where the ULS labeling technology domains conserved throughout evolution . We present a powerful was evaluated on several gene expression microarrays platforms . tool for unequivocal in silico peroxisome identification, based on the Furthermore, results will be reported where the ULS labeling technology BLAST search of four peroxisomal markers: Pex3, Pex10, Pex12 and was evaluated for labeling and microarray detection of microRNAs . Pex19 . This will be particularly useful for screening new genomes in the search for the organelle . P1213. High-throughput and comprehensive cHiP-based resequencing of the mitochondrial DNA in patients with P1215. the evolutionary origin of peroxisomes: an ER- OXPHOs disease peroxisome connection. H. J. M. Smeets1,2, R. Van Eijsden1,2, M. Gerards1,2, A. Hendrickx1, P. Lindsey1, A. Schlüter1,2, R. Ripp2, S. Fourcade1, J. Mandel2, O. Poch2, A. Pujol1; R. De Coo3; 1Centre de Genètica Mèdica i Molecular. IRO/IDIBELL, Hospitalet del Llobregat, 1Genetics and Cell Biology, University Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, Spain, 2Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire. CNRS/IN- 2Research Institute GROW, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3Neurology, Erasmus SERM/ULP/Collège de France, Illkirch, France. University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. The peroxisome is an essential eukaryotic organelle, crucial for lipid Mitochondrial disorders are often fatal multisystem disorders, metabolism and free radical detoxification, development, differentiation associated with abnormalities of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) . and morphogenesis from yeasts to humans . Loss of peroxisomes Because of its dual genetic control, defects in OXPHOS can be due invariably leads to fatal peroxisome biogenesis disorders in man to mutations in either the mitochondrial (mtDNA) or nuclear DNA . (PBD). The evolutionary origin of peroxisomes remains unsolved; Although OXPHOS disorders have common characteristics, there is proposals for either a symbiogenetic or cellular membrane invagination considerable clinical variability among patients, even in those having events are unconclusive . To address this question, we have probed the same genetic defect . Also, clinically indiscernible conditions can with a peroxisomal proteome, an ensemble of 19 representative be caused by different mutations in a number of genes . Therefore, eukaryotic complete genomes . Molecular phylogenetic and sequence we applied a new CHIP-based platform for rapid resequencing of the comparison tools allowed us to identify 4 proteins as peroxisomal mtDNA . We found a complete match with classical resequencing in 3 markers for unequivocal in silico peroxisome detection . We have samples. Two samples were mixed to generate artificially heteroplasmy then detected the Apicomplexa phylum as a first group of organisms at 11 positions in the mtDNA sequence . Ten were detectable as devoid of peroxisomes, in the presence of mitochondria . Finally, we such and one gave a no-call . Analysis of mixed amounts of different deliver evidence against a prokaryotic ancestor of peroxisomes: a) mtDNAs indicated that a mutation load of ≥10% should be detectable. The peroxisomal membrane is composed of purely eukaryotic bricks Although the platform is not optimal for the detection of small deletions and is thus useful to trace the eukaryotes in their evolutionary paths; or insertions, we were able to identify two samples with a single b) The peroxisomal matrix protein import system shares mechanistic nucleotide insertion as a heterozygote call . Screening of 20 patients similarities with the endoplasmic reticulum/proteasome degradation suspected for mitochondrial disease revealed 171 different mutations: process (ERAD), indicating a common evolutionary history . 90 SNPs, 5 known pathogenic mutations and 71 unknown variants (5 of which were heteroplasmic) . Our conclusion is that the resequencing P1216. Unattended screening of genetic polymorphisms by CHIPs are a very promising tool for rapid and comprehensive mtDNA- automating microfluidic on-chip electrophoresis screening . Especially for genomes like the mtDNA, where it is possible C. Buhlmann, R. Salowsky; to generate the template with a single PCR, and in which the vast Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany. majority of the point mutations are nucleotide substitutions, it will In the “post-genome era”, there is an ever-growing demand for high- become the method of choice . throughput DNA analyses . Especially in the context of genotyping and screening for genetic polymorphisms, the number of samples that are P1214. PeroxisomeDB: a database for peroxisomal proteome, processed are steadily increasing, representing a major challenge genes and diseases. for classical DNA analysis techniques . Especially slab gel and PAGE O. Poch1, A. Schlüter2,1, G. Berthommier1, E. Domènech2, R. J. A. Wanders3, J. analysis require long analysis times, are labor intensive and difficult Mandel1, A. Pujol2; to automate . 1Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire. CNRS/INSERM/ Here, we present a new automated microfluidic system that allows ULP/Collège de France, Illkirch, France, 2Centre de Genètica Mèdica i Molecu- the unattended separation, sizing and quantitation of hundreds of DNA samples . The system has been successfully tested to screen for a set of different genetic polymorphisms as deletions, insertions and Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 6 dinucleotide repeats identified in different target genes. Our results ter, Philadelphia,, PA, United States, 3Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, clearly show that sensitivity and sizing accuracy are superior to slab PA, United States. gel analysis and the digital data generated is highly reproducible . We have developed a robust solution for uniform amplification of Due to the automation of all relevant analysis steps, the system is cDNA prior to quantitative, real-time PCR . TaqMan® Preamp Master particularly suitable for transferring human genetic projects from the Mix allows up to 100 gene targets to be pre-amplified simultaneously stage of target identification towards the high throughput screening using TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays as the source of pooled approaches including the screening of thousands of patient samples . gene-specific primers. By incorporating a preamplificaion step into the sample preparation workflow, adverse sample splitting effects on P1217. Pooled DNA genotyping on Affymetrix sNP genotyping binominal sampling are significantly reduced or eliminated. TaqMan® arrays PreAmp Master Mix and optimized cycling parameters enable nearly G. Kirov, I. Nikolov, L. Georgieva, V. Moskvina, M. J. Owen, M. C. O’Donovan; 100% efficient amplification of target sequences. Benchmarking Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. studies comparing TaqMan® preamplification to existing methods show It is now technically feasible to perform genome-wide association that the TaqMan® preamplification method retains the relative copy studies of complex diseases with hundreds of thousands of SNPs . numbers of starting targets more reproducibly and precisely . Also, the However, the cost of such projects remains high . Pooled DNA fold-amplification attainable with TaqMan® preamplification is greater. genotyping offers the possibility of applying the same technologies at Data obtained from the Applied Biosystems 7900 Sequence Detection a fraction of the cost, and there is some evidence that certain ultra-high System demonstrate the wide utility of this process in many gene throughput platforms also perform with an acceptable accuracy . Until expression arenas including the profiling of cells obtained by laser now this conclusion was based upon published data concerning only capture micro dissection . Results using the TaqMan® preamplification a small number of SNPs . of random-primed cDNA are independent of amplicon distance from In the current study we prepared DNA pools from the parents and from the 3‘ end and are amenable to partially degraded RNA samples . the offspring of the 30 parent-child trios that have been extensively genotyped by the HapMap project . We analysed the two pools with P1220. Microfluidic detection of a point mutation in the Affymertix 10K Xba 142 2 .0 Arrays . The availability of the HapMap prothrombin gene by on-chip electrophoresis data allowed us to validate the performance of 6843 SNPs for which H. Brunnert1, R. Salowsky1, M. Andrasfalvy2, E. Kámory3, F. Fodor3, B. Cso- we had both complete individual and pooled genotyping data . kay3; Pooled analysis averaged over 5-6 microarrays resulted in highly 1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2Kromat Ltd. Budapest, Budapest, reproducible results . The average error of predicting the differences in Hungary, 3LabOrigo Molecular Diagnostic Ltd., Budapest, Hungary. allele frequency between the two pools was 1 .37%, and 95% of SNPs Prothrombin plays a key role in blood clotting . A single nucleotide showed an error of < 3.2%. This provides a sufficient accuracy for polymorphism (SNP), i .e . a point mutation in the prothrombin gene, case-control association studies of complex disorders . results in a common hereditary predisposition to venous thrombosis . It remains to be seen if this high quality will be reproduced on the The G20210A mutation in the untranslated part of the prothrombin Affymetrix 500K arrays, which would allow the rapid and affordable gene causes elevated serum prothrombin level and an increased risk conduction of full-genome association studies . for venous thrombosis . Individuals heterozygous for the prothrombin G20210A mutation have a two-to three-fold increased risk for venous P1218. Evaluation of ms-mLPA for molecular diagnosis of thrombosis and an elevated prothrombin serum level . A fast and easily Prader-Willi and Angelman syndrome in a clinical context adaptable method, suitable for the workflow at any standard molecular K. Claes, K. De Leeneer, E. De Baere; diagnostic laboratory, was recently developed . This convenient and Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium. reliable mutation detection is based on a PCR and a subsequent Prader-Willi (PWS) and Angelman (AS) are distinct syndromes restriction digest (PCR-RFLP) . DNA fragments are separated and characterized by developmental impairment, caused by loss of sized by a commercial microfluidic system. The overall performance expression of imprinted genes in the paternal (PWS) or maternal (AS) achieved with this technique is far superior to the conventional chromosomal region 15q11-q13 . Molecular genetic testing is important agarose gel electrophoresis in terms of sizing accuracy, quantitation to confirm the clinical diagnosis and to predict the familial recurrence capability, reproducibility and resolution. These findings suggest that risk which depends on the underlying molecular mechanism [deletion this technique could also be adopted and easily used for further SNP (in 75% of PWS and AS cases), uniparental disomy (UPD), an detection assays . imprinting error or point mutations] . In most diagnostic laboratories methylation-specific PCR or Southern P1221. qBase: relative quantification software for management blot analysis is used . Additional testing (FISH, UPD-analysis) is required and automated analysis of real-time quantitative PcR data to reveal the underlying molecular mechanism . An ideal molecular test J. Hellemans, G. Mortier, A. De Paepe, F. Speleman, J. Vandesompele; should provide information about both parent-specific methylation Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. imprinting on 15q11-q13 and the underlying genetic mechanism . Gene expression analysis is becoming increasingly important in Recently, methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe biological research and clinical decision making, with qPCR becoming amplification (MS-MLPA) became commercially available. This the method of choice for expression profiling of selected genes. technique allows detection of changes in CpG methylation and copy Accurate and straightforward mathematical and statistical analysis of number of chromosomal sequences in a single reaction . the raw data, as well as the management of large data sets remain We evaluated this technique for diagnostic applications in a clinical major hurdles in qPCR based gene expression analysis . Since the setting . Using MS-MLPA we tested a group of 16 patients with software provided with the different detection systems usually does previously confirmed PWS (7) and AS (9) respectively. The molecular not offer an adequate solution for these issues, we developed qBase, diagnosis and underlying molecular mechanism were confirmed in a free program for the management and automated analysis of qPCR all cases . A comparison was made between MS-MLPA and Southern data . blot results . We conclude that MS-MLPA is a powerful technique, qBase is a collection of Microsoft Excel sheets with VBA-code and suitable for molecular diagnostics of PWS/AS in a clinical context . uses a proven delta-Ct relative quantification model with PCR MS-MLPA has important advantages compared to other techniques efficiency correction and multiple reference gene normalization. The as starting from genomic DNA, information about methylation status qBase Browser allows data storage and annotation by hierarchically and underlying molecular mechanism is provided within in a single organizing qPCR measurements into projects, experiments, and runs . experiment, resulting in a shorter turnover time . An import wizard allows easy import of export files from many currently available qPCR instrument softwares . The browser enhances easy P1219. TaqMan Preamplification for Real-Time Gene Expression access to all your data, and exchange of data between users . The Analysis with sample Limited specimens qBase Analyzer converts Ct values into normalized and rescaled J. F. Stevens1, C. Spittle2, S. Stanley1, C. Lee1, J. Wilde1, R. Coudry3; relative quantities with proper error propagation . It contains an easy 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Fox Chase Cancer Cen- run editor, performs numerous quality controls and inter-run calibration, and displays results both tabulated and in graphic format . The program Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 6 allows large numbers of samples and genes, variable number of P1224. Design, validation and public release of resequencing replicates, and multiple runs to be processed together . The possibility primer sets for over 15,000 human genes for analyses of to use up to 5 reference genes allows reliable and robust normalization sequence variation and sNP discovery of gene expression levels . qBase is freely available for download at X. Lin, J. Ni, Z. Zhang, M. Rydland, R. Sanders, P. Ma, A. Lakdawalla, P. Li, E. http://medgen .ugent .be/qbase/ . Spier; Applied Biosystems, Rockville, MD, United States. P1222. A package of programs for quality control of genetic data Increasing attention has been focused upon SNP discovery and I. V. Zorkoltseva1, T. I. Axenovich1, Y. S. Aulchenko2, M. Struchalin3; genotyping in an effort to associate disease/phenotypes with variations 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Erasmus and mutations, and to determine evolutionary relationships, but reliable MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Novosibirsk State Technical University, primer design and data analysis are among the major challenges . Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. A high-throughput, high-quality computational pipeline has been In large data sets obtained in genetic studies the presence of errors developed to design PCR primers for resequencing . Primer design is almost inevitable . Errors may result from imperfect nature of the is driven by the primer3 program and supplementary algorithms process of the entry of the data to the database (e .g . typing errors), developed at Applied Biosystems . All known SNPs in the genomic wrongly specified genealogical relations (e.g. mispaternity) and sequence are avoided during primer design . The resulting primers experimental error (e .g . genotyping and phenotyping errors) . Accurate are QA’ed by two computational tools: the first one checks the primer geno- and phenotypic information is crucial for gene mapping . Both pairs for genomic redundancy using a proprietary version of the e-PCR pheno- and genotyping errors can have large impact on results of program; the second tool, developed using a lab-validated training set linkage and association studies leading to false negative or positive from 200K amplicons, predicts the probability of success of the primer finding. pairs. Project Template files are generated to allow integrated data We developed a package of programs for testing of pedigree structure analysis with the SeqScape® software . and detection of pheno- and genotyping errors. At the first step of the We have attempted designing resequencing sets for all 16334 human quality control procedure, the initial data on pedigree structure (recode_ genes with RefSeq mRNAs . Annotation data from NCBI and Celera ped.pl), genotypes (recodeSNP.pl, affy2mega.pl) and phenotypes have been combined to define the structure of these genes. We have (phenotypicQC.pl) are transformed from arbitrary to the standard achieved average coverage of 92% of all bases (coding exons, UTRs genetic format . Additional correctness of pedigree structure and and 1kb upstream) and 94% within the coding regions . On average 21 consistency of phenotypic data is verified. At the second step, pedigree amplicons are required to sequence a whole gene and 13 to sequence and genotypic data are combined using program pre_pedcheck.pl . The just the coding region . About 800 amplicons were lab-tested, with an resulting file enters the test for Mendelian inconsistency, which allows overall success rate over 95% . identification of genotyping errors. At this stage, the external program To promote the resequencing research, we have deposited the PedCheck (O’Connell and Weeks, 1998) is used to detect errors of complete designs to the NCBI probeDB, and supplemental information inheritance of autosomal markers and our program x_check.pl is used will be freely available at AB’s web site . for X-linked markers . At the last stage, the information on errors is extracted from the output, connected to the initial coding and reported P1225. New approach for whole-genome identification of in table format . The programs can handle large data sets including interspersed repeats insertional polymorphisms tens of thousands of individuals, SNPs and polymorphic markers . The I. Z. Mamedov, A. L. Amosova, E. S. Arzumanyan, Y. B. Lebedev, E. D. Sverd- package is available at http://mga .bionet .nsc .ru/nlru/ lov; Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry RAS, Moscow, Rus- P1223. An integrated custom design tool for PcR resequencing sian Federation. D. Ingber, J. Ni, M. Rydland, Z. Zhang, R. Sanders, A. Lakdawalla, X. Lin, P. Li, A new technique for genome-wide detection of integration sites of M. Nodell, E. Spier; polymorphic retroelements (REs) is described . The technique allows Applied Biosystems, Rockville, MD, United States. one to reveal the absence of a retroelement in an individual genome Increasing attention has been devoted to SNP discovery and provided that this retroelement is present in at least one of several other genotyping in an effort to associate disease/phenotypes with gene genomes under comparison . Since many genomes can be compared variations and mutations, and to determine evolutionary relationships, simultaneously, the search for insertions of polymorphic retroelements but reliable primer design and data analysis remain two of the major is very efficient. The technique includes two whole genome selective challenges to overcome. Development of a flexible design tool that PCR amplifications of sequences flanking retroelements: one for a allows researchers to select dependable PCR-sequencing primers particular genome and another one for a mixture of about ten different for different genomic targets and with user-defined parameters would genomes . A subsequent subtractive hybridization of the obtained greatly facilitate resequencing . amplicons with DNA of the particular genome as driver results in We have developed an integrated web-based tool which incorporates isolation of polymorphic insertions . The technique was successfully target sequence selection/submission, primer design, and data analysis applied for identification of 41 new polymorphic human Alu Ya5 and Ya8 into a connected workflow. Users can choose genes, transcripts and insertions. Among them, 18 individual Alu elements first sequenced in other identifiers, select any region in the genome, or upload their this work were found to be absent from the available human genome own sequence as well as specify design parameters, e .g . amplicon databases. This result suggests that significant part of polymorphic length, primer Tm etc . The web interface then submits the job to a REs were not identified during genome sequencing and remain to be backend pipeline, which takes advantage of proprietary primer picking detected and characterized . The proposed method does not depend and predictive quality assurance processes that generated Applied on preliminary knowledge of evolutionary history of retroelements Biosystem’s VariantSEQr(tm) primers . All currently known SNP/MNP and can be applied for identification of insertion/deletion polymorphic sites in the genomic sequence are avoided during primer design . The markers in genomes of different species . resulting primers are then checked for genomic redundancy and the probability of success in PCR . An exhaustive search is performed to P1226. miniaturization of Liquid Handling Procedures in High produce the optimal tiling of the amplicons covering the target region . throughput sequencing at the Broad institute The generated primer information is formatted as a tab-delimited file so A. M. Gallagher1, J. Graham2, S. Fisher2, S. Faro2; it can be easily uploaded into oligo vendors’ ordering sites . Template 1Deerac Fluidics, Dublin, Ireland, 2Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United files for automated discovery of variants compatible with Seqscape® States. software are also generated . Utilization of this primer design tool can Deerac Fluidics™ Equator™ products are designed to fit a wide range substantially reduce the effort required to design and optimize robust of applications requiring low volume liquid handling . The products resequencing primers . have recently been installed as part of the high throughput sequencing production process at the Broad Institute in Boston, MA, USA (formerly the Whitehead Center for Genome Research) . The Genome Sequencing and Analysis program at the Broad Institute places emphasis on the Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 6 development of scalable methods employing automated laboratory Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disease procedures and informatics systems . The current rate of sequencing characterized by degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal corresponds to over 40 million lanes per year, deployed in sequencing cord, causing symmetric proximal muscle weakness. SMA is classified the human, mouse, and other genomes . in three clinical types, SMA I, SMA II and SMA III, based on the severity This poster will describe the current process employed by Broad Institute, of the symptoms and the age of onset . About 95% of SMA cases are highlighting where the Equator™ has played a vital role in performance caused by homozygous deletion of the SMN1 gene (5q13), or to its enhancement and cost reduction, enabling the Broad Institute to retain conversion to SMN2 . The molecular diagnosis of this disease is usually its position as the world’s leading genome research institute . carried out by a PCR-RFLP approach able to evidence the absence of both SMN1 copies . However, this approach is not able to identify P1227. A simple and rapid purification method for generating heterozygous healthy carriers, which show a very high frequency in high quality sequence data general population (1:50) . In this study, we used the Multiple Ligation- P. A. Baybayan, M. Harrold, A. Yang, Y. Theelen; dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) approach for the molecular Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. diagnosis of SMA in 19 affected patient and in 57 individuals at risk Removal of unincorporated dye-terminators from sequencing reactions to be healthy carriers . This analysis detected the homozygous SMN1 and efficient desalting of these samples are crucial in ensuring absence in all the investigated cases, and allowed to discriminate maximum high quality basecalls and useable data . Applied Biosystems’ between SMN1 deletion and conversion to SMN2 . Moreover, MLPA new post-sequencing reaction purification kit, currently in development analysis evidenced a condition of heterozygous SMN1 absence in 33 and testing, strives to not only ensure effective dye-terminator removal, out of the 57 subjetcs at risk to be healthy carriers . MLPA analysis but also provides flexible protocols to fit into all types of workflows represents an easy, low cost and high troughput system in the and accommodates low to high throughput levels . Advantages of this molecular diagnosis of SMA, both in affected patients and in healthy novel method include a simple protocol with minimum hands-on time, carriers . improved sample stability, efficient desalting for electrokinetic injection, better recovery of smaller DNA fragments and efficient removal of P1230. incorporation of nanolitre pipetting technology into unincorporated dye-terminators, all crucial to sequencing applications medium and high throughput sNP genotyping platforms at such as resequencing and de novo sequencing . In addition, this KBiosciences. method performs directly in the sequencing plate, with no additional D. Lorenz1, A. Gallagher1, P. Robinson2; plates necessary for capillary electrophoresis . Here, we describe a 1Deerac Fluidics, Dublin, Ireland, 2KBiosciences, Herts, United Kingdom. method that simplifies sequencing workflow allowing you more time to An area of great interest in drug discovery at present is the process focus on your research instead of sample processing of genotyping in order to better understand where genes, and in particular changes in genetic structure caused by single nucleotide P1228. A system for effective and informative quality control of polymorphisms (SNPs), can lead to the determination of targets DNA sequencing in a clinical laboratory associated with various disease states . D. C. Sayer, D. M. Goodridge; In some cases companies are actively pursuing genotyping processes Conexio Genomics, East Fremantle, Australia. in medium and high throughput fashion that will enable a large number Obtaining consistent high quality data is critical to the effective use of of samples to be monitored in a short time frame and with minimal DNA sequencing in a clinical laboratory environment and can only be labour intensity . obtained if appropriate approaches to quality control are implemented . The genotyping process can be costly to run at all levels, especially Consistent high quality data reduces repeat rates and improves the in the consumption of expensive reagents such as PCR mixes . spot- accuracy of automated base calling. We have developed a flexible and on™ nanolitre technology from Deerac Fluidics™ has been incorporated unique QC system that is integrated into our Assign-ATF software that by UK genotyping services company KBiosciences into their high provides an effective and informative QC analysis of sequence data . throughput system, which has enabled cost savings of up to 20 fold on Assign-ATF calculates a quantitative base call score (BSC) for each previous techniques used . base call within a sequence generated by automated DNA sequencers . This poster will describe the current process employed by KBiosciences The BCS is influenced by sequence peak shape, the level of background highlighting in particular where spot-on™ technology has played a and the degree of which a peak overlaps with neighbouring peaks . The vital role in performance and reducing costs, which has enabled mean BCS can be calculated for an entire sequence from a single KBiosciences to become cost competitive in the marketplace in the sequencing primer resulting in a single quantitative quality value for a provision of their service . sequence . Similarly a BCS can be calculated for all sequences from a specific sample producing a quantitative quality value for a sequence. P1231. High through-put targeting induced mutations using Assign-ATF can automatically produce longitudinal plots of BCS for all Applied Biosystems’ 3730 series capillary electrophoresis samples . Such a graphs produce quality control information essential system for the maintenance of a clinical laboratory test . Such data includes D. Baker, L. MacPherson, J. H. Clarke; 1 Sample to sample and sequence run to run variability of sequence John Innes Centre Genome Laboratory, Norwich, United Kingdom. quality Targeting induced mutations in genomes is a strategy used in 2 Rapid identification of changes systematic changes in quality reverse genetic studies to identify series of chemically induced point 3 Setting of performance criteria for the evaluation of new reagents mutations in specific genes. The detection of point mutations exploits and protocols the ability of the CEL1 endonuclease to cleave genomic DNA at mis- 4 Identification of factors that affect DNA quality matched heteroduplexes . Polyacrylamide slab-gel electrophoresis 5 Assessment of interlaboratory concordance and agreement of systems are traditionally used to detect the cleavage products . appropriate sequence quality These methods are labour intensive and not easily automated . We have developed the use of Applied Biosystems’ 3730 series capillary P1229. spinal muscular Atrophy (smA) genotyping by gene electrophoresis system for cleavage product detection and sizing up dosage using Multiple Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification to 1200 bp range in a 5-color dye-set . Following optimization of the (mLPA) CEL1 cleavage reaction, clean-up and capillary run conditions point O. Scarciolla1,2, L. Stuppia1,2, M. V. De Angelis2, S. Murru3, F. Raicu1, R. Giu- mutations could be identified in populations with up to 12 fold pooling. liani1, M. Pace2, I. Antonucci1, A. P. Scioletti1,2, I. Torrente4, P. Grammatico5, M. For high through-put fragment analysis the AFLP Analysis Method in C. Rosatelli3, A. Uncini2, G. Palka1,6, B. Dallapiccola5,4; Applied Biosystems’ GeneMapper® Software v4 .0 was optimized for 1Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università ‘G. d’Annunzio’, Chieti-Pes- effective peak detection and enables accurate cleavage product sizing cara, Italy, 2Aging Research Center, CESI, G. d’Annunzio University Founda- from 1Kb target regions . We present our progress in this method in a tion, Chieti-Pescara, Italy, 3Istituto di Clinica e Biologia dell’Eta Evolutiva, range of organisms and discuss strategies for the development of an Universita degli Studi, Cagliari, Italy, 4CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 5Dipar- automated processing system as well as alternative methods for high timento di Medicina Sperimentale e Patologia, Università, Rome, Italy, 6Servizio through-put detection of induced mutations . di Genetica Umana, Ospedale, Pescara, Italy.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 0 P1232. Identification of transcription factor binding sites Gilan University, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 32 Research Center, Iranian regulating myogenic differentiation by computer-assisted Blood Transfusion Organization, Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. empirical promoter analysis Thalassemia, as the most common monogenic disorder in the malaria- M. S. Hestand, J. T. den Dunnen, G. B. van Ommen, P. A. C. ’t Hoen; prone belt of the world, is still one of the social, economical, physical Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. and mental problems of communities . Having various ethnic groups We have developed a methodology to identify new transcription and suffering from inadequate knowledge of α-thalassemia mutations, factors (TFs) involved in the control of myogenesis . We presumed in particular non-deletional mutations, Iran is one of the Middle East these TFs can be found by searching for their functional binding sites countries with high incidence of both types of thalassemia (α&β) that in promoters of genes differentially regulated during myogenesis . encounters major challenges in PND and pre-marriage counselling . In silico identification of TF binding sites (TFBSs) is difficult due to Herein we tested 50 PND candidate samples, presenting low MCV & their small size (e .g . 6-8 bp) and variation among consensus binding MCH, normal HbA2 levels and no deletional α-thalassemia mutations. sites, resulting in many false positives . To reduce the number of These non-deletional α2-globin gene mutations were analyzed by false positives we only considered homologs with similar regulation ARMS assay . Direct sequencing was administered on the samples that in different species and looked for evolutionary conserved regulatory didn’t reveal any gross deletional or non-deletional mutations . ARMS sequences . Micro-array data sets from differentiating human and primers of -5nt, cd19 (reprted from Iran), cd142 and PA-2 mutations were mouse myoblasts, generated in our and other labs, were queried designed and multiplexed for rapid detection . Direct sequencing was with Perl scripts and the UniGene and HomoloGene databases . We administered on the recovered specific α1& α2 PCR products . -5nt found 14 homologs down-regulated and 30 homologs up-regulated & PA-2 (AATAAA>AATGAA) were the most frequent affected allele in both species . The promoters of these human and mouse genes defined by ARMS-PCR & direct sequencing respectively. Also three were obtained from the CSHLmpd2 database . These were aligned to novel mutations were detected so far; a frame shift mutation (-C) on recognition sequences of vertebrate TFBSs . With this procedure, we the α1-globin gene and two single base substitutions (G>T) on different identified TFBSs that were found at significantly higher frequencies in codons of the α2-globin gene that created a displaced stop codon . promoters of genes differentially expressed during myogenesis than in Pre-marriage genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis centers for genes with constant expression . We are now experimentally verifying β-thalassemia require prompt, precise and perfect identification of these in silico findings using ChIP-(chromatin immunoprecipitation)- suspected α-thalassemia carriers. The robustness and reliability of on-chip with various arrays . The combination of in silico and empirical ARMS-PCR and its efficient use in β-thalassemia mutation detection approaches will assist in the identification of TFs with a role in the has potentially led the method to become a popular method for α- regulation of myogenic differentiation . thalassemia mutation detection . Po09. Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and P1235. Gendia Foundation. Helping to subsidize the cost of public policy genetic testing for patients and families around the world D. H. Hughes; P1233. Genetic counselling in neurological practice in Republic Gendia Foundation, Plano, TX, United States. of moldova The GENDIA Foundation is a non-profit organization, located in the N. V. Serbina1, G. P. Railian1, L. A. Smirnova1, V. C. Sacara2; United States, working to help subsidize the cost of genetic testing 1Scientific Research Institute of Mother and Child Health Service, Chisinau, for people who cannot afford genetic services . The ultimate objective Republic of Moldova, 2National Center of Reproduction Health and Medical of the GENDIA Foundation is to facilitate genetic testing on a global Genetic, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. scale . Since the first introduction of genetic counselling services approximately A major bottleneck in genetic testing is the cost of services, which 40 years ago many attempts have been made to devise a satisfactory are often times unaffordable when not reimbursed by insurance and all-embracing definition. companies . Several decades of intensive research on the genetic In Scientific Research Institute of Mother and Child Health Service have causes of human genetic diseases have resulted in a large list of tests been introduced the genetic counselling in neurological department . that can be offered to diagnose genetic diseases . In many countries, We note that frequency of hereditary diseases of neurological system laboratories have been established that offer genetic tests to patients has been increasing for last 5 years . . The families with increased risk and their families . of hereditary disease passed the three most important steps in genetic Unfortunately, there are huge differences with respect to accessibility, counselling: the establishment of a diagnosis, estimation of recurrence price and quality of the genetic testing in the various countries . The risk and communication of relevant information in a sympathetic spectrum of genetic diseases tested varies from several hundreds in manner . countries with a well-developed service system to only a few in most The most crucial steps in any medical practice are establishing the countries of the world . Moreover, the high prices of many genetic tests diagnosis, and of cause the special diagnosis such as Sd . Dubowitz, are unaffordable to many people when not reimbursed by insurance Lissencephaly Sindrome, Sd . Menkes, Sd . Bardet-Biedl, oculo-auriculo- companies . vertebral dysplosia etc . be able to establish only the medic-genetic . The GENDIA foundation was founded to support genetic testing of These introduction will allow important changes in the principals of those that cannot afford it . the medical consulting: due to the DNA diagnosis, the neurologists The foundation is a non-profit organization that raises funds to pay for have the possibility to detect the carriers of the mutant gene and in genetic tests in selected cases . The GENDIA foundation also offers some cases to start the early treatment, in the presymptomatic phase general information and support on genetics, genetic diseases and of the disease (MDD, Chorcot-Marie -Tooth desease, Wilson Desease) genetic tests . . Plus, the DNA prenatal diagnosis allows esteeming the genetic status of the fetus and helps the prophylaxis of the repeated disease cases in P1236. the prevalence of false results for thalassemia testing the affected family (MDD, SMA, PCU) . reported by peripheral labs in tehran from 2002 to 2005 Thus, the genetic counselling will allow changing the thinking of the A. R. Yazdi, V. Hadavi, H. Najmabadi; neurologist and will dictate the introduction of the modern medical Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic genetics counselling services (molecular genetic achievements) in the of Iran. everyday practice Background: Beta thalassemia, characterized by the deficiency or absence of beta globulin production, is one of the most widespread P1234. molecular study of non-deletional alpha globin genes inherited disorders in the world . In Iran, the prevalence of beta mutation among iranian; reporting three novel mutations thalassemia trait (minor) is high, approximately 5-10% . In order R. Habibi Pour1,2, B. Zarbakhsh1, M. Karimipour1, B. Azimifar1, S. Dehghaniza- to prevent beta thalassemia major, couples are screened for beta deh1, B. Rabbani1, A. Azarkeivan3, S. Zeinali1; thalassemia trait before their marriage . Sometimes, in repeated 1Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic premarital screening tests, significant differences between the Republic of Iran, 2Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Medicine Faculty of recorded results for the first and second samples are found. For this reason, we decided to estimate the prevalence of incorrect laboratory Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 1 results for this screening test that are reported to patients in our P1239. social and ethical issues in research using human region . Methods: The results of mean corpuscular volume (MCV) and embryos: a contribution to the GeneExpress design study HbA2 assays performed in peripheral labs and those from the assays K. Taylor1, S. Woods1, S. Lindsay2; repeated in the referral lab were compared to each other and to each 1Policy Ethics and Life Sciences, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle patient’s phenotype . Results: The comparisons indicated that 5% of upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of New- primary reports for beta thalassemia trait from peripheral labs were castle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. incorrect . Half of these were false positive and half were false negative . The University of Newcastle is coordinating the EU funded GeneExpress Conclusion: Hematology laboratories in Iran should reconsider the project; a Design Study that aims to evaluate the most effective ways efficacy of their instruments, their employees’ skills, the precision of of overcoming challenges faced by scientists involved in the analysis reported results and the quality of their lab management as a whole . of gene expression in early human development . One strand of this project will explore the social, legal and ethical issues associated P1237. Prenatal Diagnosis of single Gene Disorders: iranian with such research, and this is being undertaken by the Policy Ethics Experience And Life Sciences research institute (PEALS); a bioethics “think tank” M. T. Akbari1,2; based within the University, whose aims to are to research, inform and 1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Univer- improve policy, professional practice and public participation in the life sity of Tarbiat Modarres, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. sciences . This article provides an account of the introduction of molecular genetic Cultural and social attitudes to research using early human tissue testing initiated by prenatal diagnosis of Thalassemia, which has grown vary significantly across the EU and so the ethical framework for such to a more comprehensive prevention program for genetic disorders work needs to be carefully considered. Thus, alongside the scientific in Iran .Molecular genetic testing in Iran was initially introduced in components of GeneExpress, PEALS will: 1992 through performing prenatal diagnosis (PND) of β-thalassemia. • Map the current situation by conducting a review of the social science This acted as a catalyst for thalassemia prevention program . When and bioethics literature in this area . we started doing PND inside the country, the need to provide PND • Systematically review legislation and regulatory guidelines in place as the ultimate preventive measure was evident . However, the legal for working with human developmental samples throughout the EU . and administrative frameworks to deal with the aftermath of such a • Explore the requirements for governance and ethics training . diagnosis; i.e. abortion therapy were not in place yet. Nevertheless, β- • Address the policy implications for continued ethical research in this thalassemia with over 15000 registered major cases, many intermedia field. cases, estimate of three million carriers, expensive treatments and Research methods will include qualitative analysis of surveys and stigmas and psychosocial problems was so great that it could not be in-depth interviews with scientists active in research on human ignored. This defect was finally rectified in 1997 and the offer of PND development . PEALS will also organise a forum in which a critical to the at-risk couples was incorporated in the thalassemia prevention exchange of ideas can take place, with a view to developing a program run by the Health Ministry . Adoption of such a policy has governance framework for future research . A longer term aim will be to paved the way for a more comprehensive approach in prevention of include the views of a wider, non-specialist, public . genetic disorders in general . Carrier testing and PND tests have now been made available for muscular dystrophies, hemophiliac and other P1240. Reproducibility and validity of the claus-Extended genetic conditions . The byproduct of such activities have been training Formula in a British cohort of women with a family history of of specialists and technicians in molecular diagnosis, laboratory breast cancer facilities and equipment in private and state sectors and collaboration C. E. Jacobi1, G. H. De Bock2, J. C. Van Houwelingen3, A. Shenton4, D. G. R. between different specialists with clinical molecular geneticists . This Evans4, C. J. Van Asperen5; article elaborates on preventive aspects of clinical genetics in the large 1Leiden University Medical Center, Dept. Medical Decision Making, Leiden, The and populous country of Iran . Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Groningen, Dept. Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Leiden University Medical Center, P1238. the results of questioning of doctors on bioethics points Dept. Medical Statistics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Academic Unit of Medical K. Z. Bakhtiyarova1, R. V. Magzanov1, O. E. Mustafina2, E. K. Khusnutdinova2; Genetics, St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Leiden University 1Baskir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Biochemical and Medical Center, Dept. Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands. genetic Institute of the Ufa Scientific center RSA, Ufa, Russian Federation. Background. Risk estimation in breast cancer families is often We have conducted a social investigation on bioethics points of performed using the Claus Tables . Previously, we constructed a new 200 neurologists, family doctors by means of specially compiled risk estimation method: the Claus-Extended Formula . This uses the questionnaire . 99 percents of the examined stated the necessity of Claus Tables (CT) and information on the presence of bilateral breast medico-genetic consultations for family members with the hereditary cancer (BBC), ovarian cancer (OC), and multiple breast cancer diseases, 70 % for pregnant women and 74% answered, that it is cases (MC) in the family: 0 .08 + 0 .40*CT + 0 .07*OC + 0 .08*BBC + needed only after marriage . Prenatal diagnostics is believed by 82% 0 .07*MC . of respondents as necessary , when mother reaches the age of 35 . Aim. To validate the Claus-Extended Formula using a British cohort of The detection of hereditary abnormality in fetus could lead to abortion families with breast and/or ovarian cancer . by 90 % of respondents . Both parents “opinion (73%) is regarded by methods. We analysed 2156 family histories from a British Family our respondent as the main having weight reason for making such History Clinic . We estimated lifetime risks of breast cancer using the a decision in case of hereditary pathology, 28% are always ready to Claus Model, the Jonker Model, the Claus Tables and the Claus- place responsibility of making decision on the consulting doctor . Extended Formula and considered correlations and agreements . In most doctors” opinion (88%) DNA-testing on exiting mutations in Furthermore, we calibrated the Claus-Extended Formula in order to genes is necessary and recommended to a healthy person, to that evaluate whether this Formula estimates the risks accurately in this suspecting the existence of gene violations because of relatives” other cohort . diseases (48%), to the sick, wishing to find out the nature of his disease Results. The British counsellees had on average 1 .7 breast cancer (31%) and healthy people, who reached 18 (28%) . cases per family (SD 0.8; range 0-6). Spearman Correlations between The wish to entirely posses the information concerning their health from the Claus-Extended Formula and the Jonker Model, the Claus Model 85 % of doctors prevailed over some possible negative consequences and the Claus Tables were 0 .768, 0 .679, and 0 .770, respectively . of the DNA-testing results (stress, depression and so on) . The Agreements were 73%, 33%, and 63%, respectively . The calibration of information concerning DNA-testing should be strictly confident as the formula showed no clinically relevant differences . regarded by 98 % of respondents . This for the improvement of the conclusion. We found that the Claus-Extended Formula provides specialist preparing in the field of medical genetics the introduction of accurate lifetime risks of breast cancer, compared to estimates by bioethics points into programm of study in universities is required . the Claus model and the Jonker model . The Formula is easily applied in clinical practice . We, therefore, conclude that the Claus-Extended Formula is a valuable risk estimation method for clinical practice, both inside and outside the Netherlands .Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  P1241. Genetic testing in italy, year 2004 year are performed in Finland with a population of 5 m, only about B. Dallapiccola1,2, I. Torrente1, A. Morena1, F. Dagna Bricarelli3, R. Mingarelli1; 12,000 are performed in Portugal with a population of 10 m and at a 1IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, relatively high price level in comparison with other countries . 2Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University “La Sapien- There is as yet no consensus within the scientific how to measure za”, Rome, Italy, 3A.O. Galliera, Department of Human Genetics, Genoa, Italy. clinical validity and clinical utility of genetic testing . Therefore further Italy is the only European country which has settled a comprensive investigations are strongly needed and standards are to be developed and long range monitoring of genetic testing on a nation-wide basis, to give general guidance . starting form 1987 . The data collected by the last census of year 2004, on the behalf of the Italian Society of Human Genetics included the P1244. consanguinity among the israeli Arab community: is the activities of 88 clinical centres, 160 cytogenetic and 183 molecular pattern changing? genetic laboratories, hosted by 256 structures, 16% of which were R. Sharkia1, M. Zaid2, A. Zalan2; private. Only 42% of them fulfilled the requirements of current Italian 1Beit-Berl college, Beit-Berl, Israel, 2Triangle R&D center, Kfar -Qari, Israel. legislation . Genetic tests included 283,601 cytogenetic analyses . In the Israeli Arab community the prevalence of consanguinity There had been 120,238 invasive prenatal samplings, 84% of which is relatively high, which is associated with high rates of inherited were amniocenteses . This study has also surveyed 190,610 molecular disorders leading to high frequency of morbidity and mortality in this genetic tests . On the total 420 different genes have been investigated, community . Data on consanguinity between couples were received 10 of which accounted for three quarter of all this activity . In general, during two periods (1980-1985 and 2000-2004) in relation to socio- the demand of genetic tests has increased by a figure of about 10% economic status in four selected villages .Two of them (A and B) are each year, starting form 1997 . Only 16% of cytogenetic and 12 .5 of known to have a high socio-economic status, and the other two (C molecular tests have been accompanied by genetic counseling . and D) are known to have a low socio-economic status . The incidence This survey remarks the need of some basic intervention in the of consanguineous marriages in the four studied villages slightly general organisation of the genetic structures in Italy, which should decreased from 33.08% in the first period to 25.92% in the second be rationalised, in respect of the national guidelines, and the need period. On the other hand, the marriages within the first cousins of continuing training of the general practitioner and education of the showed a more significant decrease from 23.86% in the first period consumer to the appropriate use of genetic testing . to 13 .62% in the second period . The averages of consanguinity rate of the two villages (A and B) during the two periods were found to P1242. chondrodysplasia puncata - a family case report be 22 .31% and 16 .16% respectively, while those of the other two V. Culic1, M. Vucinovic2, B. Lozic1, M. Koch3, G. Mijaljica1; villages (C and D) during the two periods were found to be 42 .33% 1Pediatrics Clinic, Department for Medical Genetics, Split, Croatia, 2Department and 37 .22% respectively . There has been a change in the pattern of for Neonatology, Split, Croatia, 3Center for Human Genetics, University Clinic consanguinity in the selected villages of the Israeli Arab community Giessen and Marburg, Marburg, Germany. during the two study periods . This change was largely affected by the Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDPX) is a condition which includes a socio-demographic status of the villages . Therefore, improving the clinically diverse group of bone and cartilage dysplasias which cause socio-economic status of the villages, as well as, implementation of characteristic epiphyseal stippling . The inheritance is X - linked proper health educational programs are expected to have a positive dominant . The molecular basis of this condition is the mutation in the effect in reducing consanguinity . emopamil-binding protein gene EBP (CDPX2) μαππεδ ον Xp11.23- p11 .22 . P1245. Etiological and consanguinity profiles of disorders CDPX2 patients display skin defects including linear or whorled referred to a genetic counseling clinic in Jordan atrophic and pigmentary lesions, striated hyperkeratosis, coarse H. A. Hamamy1, A. Masri2, A. Al-Hadidy3, M. El-Zaheri1, K. Ajlouni1; lusterless hair and alopecia, cataracts; skeletal abnormalities including 1National Center for Diabetes Endocrinology and Genetics ( NCDEG), Amman, short stature, rhizomelic shortening of the limbs, epiphyseal stippling, Jordan, 2Pediatric department, Jordan university hospital, Amman, Jordan, and craniofacial defects . 3radiology department, Jordan university hospital, Amman, Jordan. We describe a family case, with three female family members affected With 25% of all marriages occurring between first cousins, increasing with chondrodysplasia punctata . Results for EBP-screening showed attention in Jordan is now given to role of consanguinity in the that all affected family members exhibit a point mutation (substitutes occurrence of genetic diseases . An inaccurate message addressed to the glutamine at the position 158 by a stop codon: pQ158X) in the exon the population on the disadvantages of consanguinity could lead to 5 of the EBP - gene (c472C>T) . family and social disruption . The aim of this study is to elucidate the In this paper we discuss complex psychological issues in the three relationship of consanguinity to the variable etiological categories of generations of the family affected with Chondrodysplasia punctata . genetic disorders among 550 families seen at the genetic clinic of the National Center for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Genetics in Amman P1243. towards measurement of clinical validity and utility of over a period of 30 months . genetic testing in Europe Results: Autosomal recessive and dominant inheritances were the P. Javaher, J. Schmidtke; underlying etiology in 35% and 15% of cases respectively . A proportion Medical School of Hannover, Hannover, Germany. of 33% of all cases remained undiagnosed, 82% of which were In recent years a great deal of attention has been paid at the national sporadic . First cousin marriage rates among parents of probands with and international level to develop policies in the field of genetic service autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, X-linked , chromosomal provision . Eurogentest aims at addressing the challenges through an and undiagnosed disorders were 67%, 26%, 28%, 31% and 49% European Network of Excellence (NoE) in genetic testing by involving respectively . experts from across Europe and developing infrastructure, resources, Conclusion: The rate of first cousin marriages was higher among guidelines and procedures that will structure, harmonise and improve families with autosomal recessive conditions and non-diagnosed the overall quality of all European genetic services . conditions than the rate among the general population in the same We examined access to and uptake of as well as funding policies area . In a community where selective termination of an affected fetus and costs of genetic testing in 6 European countries and received has its religious restrictions , prospective genetic counseling to families responses from presidents of human genetics societies from following with segregating recessive genes and premarital testing and screening countries with populations ranging from 5 to 80 million: Finland, whenever feasible remain important measures for prevention and Sweden, Portugal, UK, France and Germany . control of genetic diseases . On the other hand, consanguinity was not The comparison between these countries indicates differences and associated with other etiological categories . Messages to the general similarities, such as a similar increase of DNA-based testing in Germany population regarding consanguinity should be properly phrased and the UK from 1999 to 2002 despite considerable differences in according to evidence based criteria . system regulation . In Sweden, DNA diagnostic and PND cytogenetic testing raised from 1996 to 2003, with PND testing increasing by a factor of 1 .5 . Whereas approximately 21,000 DNA-based tests per Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  P1246. Cystic fibrosis (CF) neonatal screening in the Czech polymorphic clinical phnotype . Among the frequently found anomalies Republic: results of a pilot study are those in the dentomaxillary field. The Genetic Department A. Holubova1, F. Votava2, V. Skalicka3, V. Vavrova3, D. Zemkova3, P. Kracmar2, from ,,Louis Turcanu” Children’s Emergency Hospital investigated M. Libik1, J. Camajova1, T. Piskackova1, M. Macek Jr.1; and observed between 2000-2005, 540 children with different 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University and UH Motol, genetic diseases. We find that 78% of them presented minor or Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics, Charles University and major dentomaxillofacial anomalies . Among the registrated cases UH K. Vinohrady, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Pediatrics, Charles cromosomal syndromes, monogenic diseases, and multifactorial University and UH Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. plurimalformative syndromes were found . The dentistry exam was According to epidemiologic / genetic studies the incidence of CF in often indispensable for the correct dentomaxillar anomalies diagnosis our country is 1:2700 newborns . Thus, given the current birthrate ~35 and highly important, revealing hardly detectable diseases . The early new cases of CF should annually be detected . However, registry data dental exam is necessary in all genetic syndroms, for a correct topic demonstrated that 1/3 of CF patients remains clinically undiagnosed and adequate therapeutical directions . The dentist completes the and that the age at diagnosis has markedly increased (prior to 1998 multidisciplinary team which participates to diagnosis and observing median: 0.58; between 1999-2005: 1.2 years). Therefore, in II/2006 we genetic diseases . started two tier (IRT/DNA) pilot CF neonatal screening project (NSCF) comprising Bohemian regions, representing ~2/3 of our population . P1249. the role of team work in social reinsertion for Down Altogether 45,453 newborns were examined during the initial 9 month syndrome children period . In 545 cases (1 .2%), who had IRT concentration above the M. M. Gafencu, G. S. Doros, M. Puiu, V. Stan, B. Zoica, M. Serban; continuously adjusted cut off level, we examined the most common Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, Ti- CFTR mutations . The diagnosis of CF was established in 5 newborns misoara, Romania. (2x F508del/F508del; 2x F508del/G551D; 1x F508del/R117H-7T - mild Introduction: In the absence of a governmental strategy for Down CF) and these children were subsequently referred to CF Centres . syndrome, the most common chromosomal disease in Romania, the Furthermore, we detected 42 newborns with 1 CFTR allele (35x social inclusion of these children remains to the private initiative of F508del, 2x CFTRdele2 .3/21kb/, 2x N1303K, 1x G551D, 1x I507del NGO’s . and 1x I148T) . Until now 27 follow up sweat tests (ST) were performed Aim of our paper is to focus on the changes in life quality of children (26x <30mmol/L, 1x 30-40mmol/L) . IRT recall was carried out in 14 with this syndrome, after a multidisciplinary approach . children with IRT >200ng/mL and with a detectable CFTR allele - 11 Material: In our NGO partnership (a branch of an international NGO children had negative IRT recall and 1 child was positive (ST negative) . from Romania and a local one) we worked with 32 children and From these results the incidence of CF can preliminarily be adjusted to youngsters affected by 21 trisomy . They participate from 1999 in a 1:9090 newborns . However, these results can be skewed due to lower Down Club organized by young volunteers from our organizations . number of newborns tested, effect of prenatal diagnosis and/or false Results: Children with Down syndrome have interacted with volunteers negativity of NSCF . Supported by MZCR 8236-3, 00000064203 . and benefited by becoming more assertive and by achieving more developmental milestones . Assessment of their progress might P1247. Validation of a synthetic quality control sample in a establish the exact role of communication among the Down Club . The European EQA scheme parents have witnessed important cognitive and behavioral changes S. Berwouts1, A. Corveleyn1, C. A. Rundell2, D. Barton1, J. T. Gordon2, E. De- in their children, facts that at this moment are our only method of queker1; evaluating their progress . 1EuroGentest, Leuven, Belgium, 2Maine Molecular Quality Controls (MMQCI), Conclusions: The health of people with disability and the social Inc., Scarborough, ME, United States. integration can be improved if they have every opportunity to enjoy It is of great importance for public health that results from genetic family life, education, friendship, access to public facilities and freedom services are correct because genetic tests for an individual are usually of movement . Action should be aimed at counteracting helplessness carried out only once in a lifetime . In order to assure high quality and stigmatization . and accuracy of laboratory testing, appropriate control materials are Developing awareness about the needs of children with Down essential . Laboratories mainly use commercially available cell lines syndrome and engaging public in a shared strategy for the development and patient samples as controls . For many genetic tests, however, of genetic services, based on WHO principles ,,health for all in the 21st control materials are difficult to find. Based on this unmet need, century” will ensure a collaborative international approach in sharing of synthetic quality control (QC) samples are being developed . Such expertise and experience . synthetic samples can contain rare mutations, allow many mutations to be detected in one multiplex test and can be designed to function in P1250. Evaluation of informativeness of microsatellite markers distinct extraction methods . for carrier testing of dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in tunisia MMQCI has constructed synthetic quality control blood samples for H. Ouragini1, W. Daoud2, F. Cherif2, S. Chakroun1, C. Charfedine1, S. Bou- Cystic Fibrosis (CF), containing 27 CFTR exons including intronic baker3, A. Ben Osman-Dhahri2, S. Abdelhak1; borders, and carrying different mutations . A thorough evaluation of this 1Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases, Institut Pasteur de Tunis, sample was performed in house by MMQCI for several DNA extraction Tunis, Tunisia, 2Dermatology Department, Hôpital de la Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia, and PCR-based amplification methods, as well as different mutation 3Anatomo-Pathology Service, Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia. analysis methods . In order to assess the value of this synthetic blood Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa (DEB) is a clinically heterogenous sample on a large scale, the European Thematic CF network enclosed blistering disorder of the skin and mucous membranes characterized it as an additional sample in their External Quality Assessment scheme by abnormalities in the anchoring fibrils (AF) and loss of dermal- of 2005 . epidermal adherence . It is inherited in either autosomal dominant or More than 150 laboratories, in 46 countries registered to participate in recessive mode . Mutations within the COL7A1 gene (3p21) which the validation study of this QC sample . The outcome of this study will encodes collagen VII, the major component of the AF, have been identify correlations between the detection of mutations and specific shown to be responsible for DEB . COL7A1 is composed of 118 exons analysis methods used in routine practice . Furthermore, this validation overlapping 32Kb. More than 200 mutations have been identified and should enable assessment of the usefulness and effectiveness of most of them correspond to private mutations . Mutation screening synthetic quality controls for CF testing . is hampered by the size of the COL7A1 gene and by the mutation heterogeneity . Analysis of polymorphic markers may provide a rapid P1248. The importance of the dental exam for identification and and relatively easy method to identify carriers for genetic counselling . diagnosis of genetic diseases Our aim is to evaluate the informativeness of polymorphic markers C. Bortun1, M. Puiu2, L. Sandu1, S. Talpos1; for carrier testing DEB in Tunisian families at risk . For this purpose, 1Faculty of Dentistry, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Phar- six consanguineous Tunisian families with at least one child affected macy V. Babes, Timisoara, Romania. have been analysed . Transmission of the disease within these families Genetic pathology often determines a complex and extremely follows an autosomal recessive mode . All family members were Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  genotyped with five microsatellite markers overlapping the COL7A1 Therefore, these 219 cases were studied according to consanguineous gene . The genetic map of this region is: cen- D3S1568, D3S3629, and non-consanguineous marriages, kind of relationships of the (COL7A1), D3S643, D3S1478, D3S3582-tel . For the two closest parents, patterns of inheritance, and sex, by using SPSS software . markers to COL7A1, D3S643 was fully informative in the six families Out of 496 cases, 4 abnormalities were the most frequent, consisted and D3S3629 was fully informative in 5 families and partially in 1 family . of: deafness 115 cases (23 .2%), hearing loss 53 cases (10 .7%), cleft Taking into consideration the informativeness and distance of these 2 lip palate 12 cases (2 .4%), and isolated cleft palate 5 cases (1%) . markers to COL7A1, we propose the use for carrier testing of DEB in Our results showed that, on the whole, there is a relationship between North African population . ENT abnormalities and consanguinity and the parents of the most affected individuals have consanguinity . P1251. Genetics education for the nursing profession: identifying the needs of educators and practitioners. P1253. the European skeletal Dysplasia Network; a four year E. T. Tonkin1,2, M. Kirk1,2; review 1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, J. Taylor1, A. Zankl2, M. Briggs and the ESDN (www.ESDN.org)3; United Kingdom, 2University of Glamorgan, Pontypridd, United Kingdom. 1c/o North West Genetics Knowledge Park, Manchester, United Kingdom, The NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre 2Queensland Clinical Genetics Service, Royal Children’s Hospital, Brisbane, nursing programme is using the genetics competency framework (Kirk Australia, 3Wellcome Trust Centre For Cell Matrix Research, The University of et al . 2003) as the basis for education needs analyses of educators Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. and practitioners . The European Skeletal Dysplasia Network (ESDN) was established in UK higher education institutions teaching the nursing professions were January 2002 with a grant from the European Commission and a remit invited to participate in a review of current genetics education provision to develop an integrated research and diagnostic network for skeletal [n=81; response rate 48%]. Using a questionnaire, respondents: dysplasias . Skeletal dysplasias are a diverse and complex group of rare genetic disorders affecting the development of the skeleton . Over 1 . considered whether students on pre-registration courses 200 different conditions have been described, ranging in severity from were equipped to achieve the genetics competencies; mild to lethal . The overall prevalance of these conditions is at least 4 per 10,000, suggesting that at least 180,000 people in the 25 EU 2. commented on the teaching methods and resources used; member states suffer from these bone diseases . ESDN links centres of excellence involved in specialist research 3. identified what help they need in order to integrate each and/or diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias; Michael Briggs & Rob Elles competency into their curricula . (Manchester, UK); Geert Mortier (Ghent, Belgium); Michael Wright The data indicate that there is notable variation in teaching levels & Judith Goodship (Newcastle, UK); Jacky Bonaventure, Martine Le across courses even within individual establishments . Although many Merrer & Valerie Cormier-Daire (Paris, France); Leena Ala-Kokko & of the competencies are currently not being achieved, respondents Minna Mannikko, (Oulu, Finland); Bernhard Zabel & Juergen Spranger, are positive about the role that the NGEDC can play in supporting (Mainz, Germany); Andrea Superti-Furga & Sheila Unger (Frieburg, their teaching . Germany) Luisa Bonafé, (Lausanne, Switzerland) and Christine Hall An original approach is being used to canvass the views of non-ge- (London, UK) . netic practitioners, many of whom see genetics as being unrelated to Since January 2002, ESDN received approximately 2000 patient their role . A ‘tear-out’ questionnaire has been developed and piloted, referrals and performed over 1500 molecular diagnostic tests . From for publication in six specialist nursing journals, each being immedi- September 2003 over 400 cases have been referred using the ESDN ately preceded by an article illustrating the relevance of genetics to Case Manager; a secure web-based case management system that patient care within that specialist group . It is anticipated that engaging allows clinicians to submit cases directly to ESDN from anywhere in individuals through their specialty and helping them to reflect on their the world thereby enabling access to expert advice . practice in this way will enhance response rates . In summary, ESDN has successfully demonstrated it can act as a This paper will report on how these studies are helping to direct re- “virtual European centre of reference” for skeletal dysplasias by linking source development and promote genetic literacy across the profes- a multi-disciplinary group of clinicians, radiologists and scientists . sion . P1254. Knowledge and attitude of medical students toward P1252. study on patients with ENt abnormalities among ethical aspects of genetic counseling and selective abortion consanguineous marriages in iran N. Ghasemi, J. Ayatollahi, M. Mosaddegh; A. Ghasempour1, C. Azimi2; Yazd shahid sadoughi medical sciences university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of 1Dept.of Ophthalmology, Rasul Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sci- Iran. ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dept.of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Genetic counselling is a communication process which deals with Imam Khomeini Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Is- human problems associated with the occurrence, or the risk of lamic Republic of Iran. occurrence of genetic disorder in a family . A primary goal of genetic The high percentage of the patients which referred to the ENT clinics, selection is to increase capacity to diagnosis, treat and eliminate has some kinds of congenital ENT abnormalities . Some of them are genetic disorders by selective abortion . In response to growing needs life threaten, the others cause disability and esthetic problems, and on genetics in medicine, it has been proposed that general practitioner has profound consequences for the affected child and the family . should provide a frontline service in clinical genetics . According to The ENT abnormalities usually place stress upon interpersonal importance and delicacy of these issues, present study evaluates the relationships, social isolation, unhappiness and depression . knowledge and attitude of medical students toward ethical aspects of The majority of these abnormalities is genetic and follow AR genetic counseling and selective abortion before and after passing inheritance . genetic course . The geneticists believe that consanguinity increase the probability of The results show the knowledge of medical students before passing occurrence of AR disorders . genetic course is very low, and it is not increased enough after passing The aim of this study was to find out the frequency of all the ENT genetic course . However, they have right beliefs but mercilessness to abnormalities among the consanguineous marriages . abnormal foetus . We studied all the 3503 pedigrees of patients which referred to us for In conclusion, medical genetics progresses very fast and in the early genetic counseling during the years 2003 and 2004 . future could eliminate some of genetic disorders, therefore education From 3503 files, 206 files had ENT abnormalities, and out of them 157 and justification of the medical staffs will be very important. files were with consanguineous marriages. Among these 157 pedigrees 496 cases were the result of consanguineous marriages, and 219 cases were affected with ENT abnormalities .Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  P1255. Ethical issues in genetic services in islamic context This study did for determining the attitude’s professionals towards M. A. F. El-Hazmi; ethical issues in conducting of genetic counselling . College of medicine and King Khalid University Hospital, King Saud University, Material & methods: The group used questionnaire and face to face Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. interview for data gathering . For data analysis, researchers applied The scientific and technical developments in human genetic research the descriptive analysis . gave rise to a vast spectrum of ethical and societal believes . The Results: Eighty four percent agree with the parents’ right to choose consequences of the scientific findings on different aspects of the life, genetic counselling and screening . A majority of participants (83 .3%) necessitates development of appropriate dealings with the relevant believe that counselling about performing screening decreases scientific findings and its outcome. disability in the new generation . most of volunteers (71 .0%) disagree The Islamic communities hold strong and prevailing traditions within with increasing an emotional trauma into mothers . About 52% of them the framework of their faith, including the patterns of marriages, said that counselling of the result of genetic screening, persuade large family size and interlinked life style among family members . mothers into terminating pregnancy and abortion before ensoulment These encounter challenges of scientific applications in health field period, but eighty one percent disagree that we don’t use this diagnosis particularly those linked to the prevention of human genetic disorders . test because of failing fetus in prenatal screening . And, seventy four These situations recommended the need to establish framework of percent disagree that labeling individuals as being at risk of a disorder legal and ethical principles that govern the applications of the resultant cause anxiety and invulnerability . information in diagnosis, prevention and health care . Conclusions: We face a positive attitude of all respondents to the This paper outlines the feature of the relevant ethical framework in benefits of genetic counselling. This study is part of a series in which the Islamic communities, taking into consideration religion, social and we have attempted to gather and report the opinions of the scholars legal aspects in the broader term of ethical principles . and religious thinkers in Iran regarding the bioethical considerations of genetic counselling . P1256. Production of Certified Reference Materials (CRMs) for the analysis of the human Factor ii (prothrombin) gene G20210A P1258. Genetics education through patient-based scenarios: mutation Raising ‘genetic awareness’ in the dietetics profession as part of D. Gancberg1, P. Corbisier1, C. Klein1,2, C. Mannhalter3, J. Marki-Zay1, H. a national genetics education strategy Schimmel1; R. Newton1, C. Bennett1, K. Whelan2, H. Burton1, P. A. Farndon1; 1Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements, European Commission, 1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, BIRMINGHAM, Joint Research Centre, Geel, Belgium, 2European Centre for the Validation of United Kingdom, 2King’s College Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, London, Alternative Methods, Institute for Health and Consumer Protection, European United Kingdom. Commission, Joint Research Centre, Ispra, Italy, 3Klinisches Institut für Med. & In the UK, dietitians work within the National Health Service (NHS) Chem. Labordiagnostik, Molekularbiologische Diagnostik, Allgemeines Kran- to provide dietary advice for patients, both in hospitals and in the kenhaus Wien Medizinische Fakultät, Austria. community . For dietitians, relevant genetics includes understanding The availability of reference materials (RMs) for genetic testing is gene-environment interaction in a clinical setting . This is in contrast crucial to ensure that diagnostic laboratories can demonstrate the to the ‘traditional’ risk assessments for chromosomal and single gene quality of the measurement services, and currently only few CRMs disorders needed by most clinical health professionals . for clinical genetic testing are available . In collaboration with the The NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre Scientific Committee of Molecular Biology Techniques (C-MBT) in (NGEDC) has produced a strategy for integrating genetics across Clinical Chemistry of the IFCC, the European Commission- Joint dietitians’ career stages, including the development of competences Research Centre, Institute of Reference Materials and Measurements for practicing dietitians to inform pre-registration training . Genetics has developed, produced and characterised plasmid CRMs for the ‘champions’ from the dietetics community met at NGEDC in December analysis of the G20210A mutation in the human prothrombin gene . A 2005 to discuss the present and future impact of genetics on dietitians 609 bp gene fragment that spans all primer annealing sites published and to develop a strategy for raising the profile of genetics within the until today was selected . Both the wildtype and the G20210A mutated profession . alleles of this gene fragment were cloned into the pUC18 plasmid and Participants identified scientific advances in nutrient-gene interactions two plasmid RMs were produced . In addition, a third RM consisting of a and nutrigenetic testing as key educational topics for the future . To mixture of both plasmids in equal quantities was produced, mimicking ensure the relevance of genetics education and to ground education the heterozygous situation . The homogeneity, short-term and long- in clinical dietetic practice, patient-based scenarios were identified as term stability of the three CRMs stored at different temperatures were an educational tool . analysed, showing stability of the material for more than 6 months at Small working groups are producing clinical scenarios on topics - 20 °C. Moreover, the fitness for purpose of these reference materials including obesity, coeliac disease, familial hypercholesterolaemia was investigated by 7 laboratories* with expertise in genetic testing, and and interpretation of nutrigenetic test results . The scenarios will be the materials performed with excellence, thus being fit for purpose. interactive, with audience responses recorded using an electronic *Acknowledgements: Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis, Zagreb, voting system . They will be presented at a dietitians’ continuing HR; University of Pecs, H; Ctr. Study Haemostasis & Thrombosis, professional development event in May 2006 . University of Ferrara, I; Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München, The questions posed during the clinical scenarios will provide feedback DE; Sheffield Haemophilia and Thrombosis Centre, UK; Allgemeines about the current genetics-related knowledge, skills and attitudes of UK Krankenhaus Wien, Medizinische Fakultät der Universität Wien, A; dietitians and provide a platform on which to base future educational Krankenhaus der Stadt Wien Lainz, A . interventions . www .geneticseducation .nhs .uk P1257. Bioethics, Genetic counselling: Aspect of theologians, Physicians and Geneticists in iran P1259. Genetics and healthcare professional education in the M. Saniee1, E. Jafari Mehr1, S. Sayar1, S. Shahraz1, L. Zahedi1, A. Melati Rad1, UK: challenges identified by a national genetics education R. Sherafat Kazemzadeh1, A. Shekarchi2, M. Zali1; centre 1Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shaheed Beheshti P. A. Farndon, C. Bennett; University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, BIRMINGHAM, of Socialogy, Shaheed Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. United Kingdom. Introduction: Genetic counselling sessions are rich and complex Two challenges are presented to healthcare professionals by sites of accounting practices for decision-making in which clinicians advances in genetics - to use current clinical applications to provide a are meant to facilitate rather than control the decisions made by their quality service for patients, and to understand and use future changes . clients . Counsellors engaged in genetic counselling are ethically The English Department of Health has established an NHS National obligated to provide prospective parents with the basis for an informed Genetics Education and Development Centre to try to meet these decision for childbearing . challenges .Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 6 But before devising a programme of educational delivery it is important prioritised topics related to identifying and referring appropriate to identify and understand the drivers of and blocks to professional families, and the subsequent implication of results . This contrasts with learning . For instance, NHS professional groups are at different stages specialty trainees who prioritised topics related to the genetics and in their acceptance and understanding of genetics, many appearing management of particular diseases relevant to their specialty . to be at the level of “unconscious incompetence” . Mapping existing Knowledge of these views and attitudes will help in raising awareness knowledge and skills, and determining attitudes are therefore helpful of the relevance of genetics to non-genetics specialties’ clinical practice first steps in devising educational strategies which are responsive and in ensuring that the genetics education provided is appropriate to to the individual needs of different professional groups, the societal the target group . Involvement of specialty trainers in the development values in which they work and their ethos of learning . Initiatives also and delivery of genetics education may help to address the issue of need to be grounded in clinical practice to demonstrate the relevance recognising the relevance of genetics . of genetics . www .geneticseducation .nhs .uk To accommodate different perspectives and learning styles, a range of resources are required . The NHS National Genetics Education and P1262. Association between the hemochromatosis gene (HFE) Development Centre website has therefore been organised to support mutations and rheumatic diseases. those learning genetics, teaching genetics, developing genetics I. Putova1,2, M. Cimburova3, K. Jarosova1, J. Vencovsky1, J. Horak4; services, and applying genetics in practice by providing information on 1Institute of the Rheumatology, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Cell Center of Bio- resources and learning support materials for each group . medical Sciences, Department Cell and Molecular Biology, Third Faculty of As well as encouraging educational initiatives, an increasing role for Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Cell Center of Biomedical Sciences, De- genetics in mainstream medicine may have implications for service partment Cell and Molecular Biology, Third Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech organisation and funding if competences in genetics are included in Republic, 4Department of Medicine I, Third Faculty of Medicine, Prague,, Czech existing or new clinical roles . Republic. www .geneticseducation .nhs .uk The objective of this study was to establish the frequency HFE gene mutation in the general population of the Czech Republic and P1260. Genetics Education- experience in a genetic service among patients with hemochomatosis and with rheumatic diseases . M. Puiu, M. Gafencu, G. Doros, D. Mihailov, D. Muntean; Patients and methods: The HFE gene mutations (C282Y, H63D and University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. S65C) were screened for by restriction enzyme analysis performed Medical Genetics department of University of Medicine and Pharmacy on PCR amplified products. These mutations have been assessed in “Victor Babes” Timisoara and Genetics Department of Children Hospital 32 patients with hereditary hemochromatosis (HHC), 120 patients with “Louis Turcanu” have started several years ago a project which aim polymyositis (PM) or dermatomyositis (DM), 246 patients with juvenile was to realize a rapprochement between genetics and community . idiopathic arthritis (JIA), 184 patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Organizing courses and case presentations, including discussion of 94 patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 120 patients etiology, inheritance, dysmorphology, differential diagnosis of genetic with scleroderma (SCL), and in 481 control healthy persons . Results: diseases investigated and followed-up in Pediatric Clinics leads to a Homozygous C282Y, H63D and S65C mutation was found in 90 .6% better addressability for genetic consult and a more rapid diagnostic, of patients with hemochromatosis, which was significantly different having a real benefit for the patients. Genetic Department has also the from the the control group with 6 .9 % C282Y heterozygotes, 26 .6% initiative of advisory teams organizing, focused on different specialties H63D heterozygotes, and 2 .5% S65C heterozygotes (p<0 .001) . (ophthalmology, orthopedics, surgery, neuropsychiatry, psychology, Heterozygous C282Y mutation was found in 12 .2% of patients with JIA cardiology, kinetotherapy, etc .) . Referring patients to a specialist with a (p<0.05). Insignificantly increased prevalence of H63D heterozygotes vast experience is very important for an accurate diagnostic and also was found in patients with SCL (28 .3%) and SLE (31 .9%) . Numerically for time saving . With family acceptance and presence, patient’s consult higher representation of heterozygotes for S65C mutation was seen was realized by entire multidisciplinary team . This kind of medical in patients with JIA (3 .3%), RA (3 .8%), and SLE (4 .2%) . No difference consult has a special impact on family members: they could discuss was observed in patiens with PM and DM . Conclusions: Heterozygous with all specialists in very short time, avoiding long hospitalization status for C282Y mutation may be a risk factor for juvenile idiopathic and multiple medical consults. Parents were very satisfied with the arthritis . special attention accorded to their child and were able to understand The study was supported by the Research Goal MSM 002 1620814 the difficulties of an accurate diagnostic of rare genetic diseases. of the Third Faculty of Medicine, , by the GAUK 60/220/C and by the Increasing the confidence in medical team, good collaboration between Research Grant of Czech Ministry of Health - 00000023728 . geneticist, general physician, specialist and family represents the goal of our Genetic Department . P1263. clinical genetics of the Hutterite Brethren: a European genetic isolate residing in North America P1261. Attitudes and views of non-genetics trainee medical A. Innes1,2, K. Boycott3; specialists towards training in genetics 1University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 2Alberta Children’s Hospital, Cal- S. E. Burke1, A. Stone2, J. Bedward1, P. A. Farndon3; gary, AB, Canada, 3University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. 1University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Centre for Education The Hutterite Brethren are an Anabaptist sect living in North America . in Medical Genetics, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3NHS National Genetics Although they arrived from the Ukraine, their origins were in the Tyrol Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, United Kingdom. region of Austria . All 30 000 Hutterites originate from less than 100 It is important to understand the views of trainees towards genetics founders . Features of this population including founder effect, large in their clinical practice in order to tailor genetics education initiatives families, meticulous records and high uptake of health care contribute and ensure maximum effectiveness . The attitudes and views of non- to its suitability for genetic research . Over 30 autosomal recessive genetics trainee medical specialists towards training in genetics were (AR) disorders have been described in this population (Innes et al, therefore explored through a survey using focus groups, questionnaires 1999). These include ‘common’ conditions such as cystic fibrosis and interviews . Participants were 143 learners from four medical (CF), limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 2I (LGMD2I) and spinal muscular specialties (general practice, neurology, cardiology and dermatology) atrophy . A large number of provisionally unique AR conditions have in two regions in England (West Midlands and South Western) . been identified. In many cases the responsible genes have been Low levels of specific training in genetics in their training programmes mapped or identified in collaboration with Hutterite families. Examples were reported by both trainee family practitioners and trainee hospital include VLDLR-associated cerebellar hypoplasia, AR Barth syndrome consultant specialists . With the exception of some cardiologists, the (DNAJC19), LGMD2H (TRIM32), Usher 1F (PCDH15) and Bowen- specialty trainees felt that there should be formal training in genetics . Conradi syndrome (12p13 .3) .One Hutterite CF mutation, M1101K, is Overcrowding of the curriculum was an issue for trainees in all rare worldwide, but has been reported in Tyrolean patients with CF . specialties . We anticipate that there should be evidence of other alleles that are All trainees stressed the importance of tailoring genetics education to enriched in the Hutterite Brethren in patients living in Central Europe . be relevant to their daily clinical practice . Family practitioner trainees For example, a severe form of Joubert syndrome has recently been Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  reported independently in the Hutterites (Boycott et al, 2005) and in a Tyrolean family (Janecke et al, 2004) . This paper will review the clinical features and molecular basis of the First Second Third Fourth Total AR disorders we have characterized in this population and will discuss degree degree degree degree (n= the challenges and prospects for delivering genetic services to this (n= 72) (n= 31) (n= 18) (n= 3) 124) population that has contributed significantly to genetic research. P1264. Determinants of the intention to follow a salt-restricted diet in case of genetic vulnerability Mean 2 .12 0 .92 0 .53 0 .09 3 .65 M. Ausems, I. Mesters, I. van de Boogaart; (SD) (2 .33) (1 .36) (1 .40) (0 .37) (3 .59) Caphri, Maastricht, The Netherlands. An important risk factor of heart diseases is hypertension . About 10% of the Dutch population suffers from hypertension . Due to genetic variation in salt sensitivity, the blood pressure between individuals P1266. Non-genetics trainee medical specialists: What genetics varies as a result of salt intake . The aim of this study is to gain insights do they need to know for their clinical practice? in the factors which determine the intention to follow a salt-restricted M. Martyn1, S. E. Burke2, H. R. Thomas2, P. A. Farndon1; diet in case of genetic vulnerability . 1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, Sixty-seven participants completed a written questionnaire, measuring United Kingdom, 2University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. demographics, social influences, attitudes, stages of change, risk Previous needs assessments with non-genetics medical specialty perception, fear and danger control processes, and intention to follow trainees have generated lists of genetic knowledge, skills and a salt-restricted diet . attitudes . In order to be useful for those involved in educating trainees, Half of the respondents had the intention to follow a salt-restricted diet these must be organised into a simple, appropriate framework that in case of genetic vulnerability. Self-efficacy expectations and severity can be targeted to different groups . The UK’s NHS National Genetics of the symptoms were highly related with the intention to follow a salt- Education and Development Centre’s (NGEDC) initial work with restricted diet . About half of the respondents would engage in danger medical professionals has therefore focused on developing core control processes (actions to prevent danger) . Compared with ‘fear concepts in genetics for non-genetics trainee medical specialists and controllers’, ‘danger controllers’ had a higher intention to follow the ways to make them relevant to their clinical practice . salt-restricted diet, and were more often in the action phase . ‘Danger Six broad genetics learning outcomes that medical trainees should controllers’ were more convinced that salt-restricted diets might prevent attain by the end of specialist training have been identified. These were hypertension, more often discussed genetic diseases with their friends, developed building on a web-based Delphi survey of a national sample had higher self-efficacy expectations, were more convinced that of specialty consultants and consultant geneticists who identified key knowing about their salt sensitivity would help them getting medical genetics knowledge, skills and attitudes required by non-genetics assistance, and that knowing about salt-sensitivity was in the interest medical specialty trainees . of their children . Finally, ‘danger controllers’ were more normotensive . Geneticists have been consulted on these learning outcomes for The results of this study show that health education should focus on delivering genetics education to non-genetics trainee medical improving self-efficacy expectations and skills when promoting a salt- specialists . They considered the learning outcomes and sub-topics to restricted diet in case of genetic vulnerability . be applicable to all postgraduate medical specialties and agreed that they should be taught with reference to specialty-specific conditions in P1265. Uptake of predictive genetic testing in hypertrophic order to emphasise the relevance of genetics to clinical practice . A list cardiomyopathy of relevant conditions has been developed for cardiology, dermatology I. Christiaans1, I. M. van Langen1, E. Birnie2, G. J. Bonsel2, A. A. M. Wilde3; and neurology and work with other specialties is underway . 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The These learning outcomes provide a useful framework for geneticists Netherlands, 2Department of Social Medicine-Public Health Epidemiology, Aca- involved in educating non-genetics medical specialty trainees, demic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Department of Cardiol- identifying educational priorities and conditions that can be used to ogy, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. ground core genetics concepts in clinical practice . Introduction: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an autosomal http://www .geneticseducation .nhs .uk dominant disease occasionally associated with sudden cardiac death (SCD) at young age if untreated . Genetic counselling and cascade- P1267. Organization of the medical-genetic assistance in screening for HCM starts with a proband . After the detection of a Bashkortostan Republic of Russia pathogenic mutation the proband informs the relatives, by means of S. S. Murzabayeva1, A. K. Mardanova2, E. K. Khusnutdinova3, R. V. Magzha- a family letter, about the aims and possibilities of predictive testing . nov1; Carriers of a disease-causing mutation are referred for cardiological 1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Republic Perinatal screening and regular follow-up aiming at reduction of SCD . Centre, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Aim: This study focused on the family members’ uptake of genetic Russian Federation. counselling and predictive testing and the relationship between SCD In Bashkortostan Republic of Russia several stages health care system in a first degree relatives and uptake. is established. At the first stage all the patients are investigated. The Results: In 34 families with the 2373insG Dutch founder MYBPC3 gene goal of the first stage is revealing of all cases with hereditary diseases mutation, on average 2.12 first degree relatives attended for genetic and individuals at risk . The goal of the second stage is medical counselling in the first year, corresponding with 40.9% of all eligible first genetic counselling of families with hereditary diseases . As a result degree relatives . This number declines in more distant relatives (Table medical aid appealability for prognosis for health increased on 70% . 1) . All family members who attended genetic counselling proceeded The screening of newborn children for phenylketonuria is carried out with presymptomatic DNA-testing . There was a trend towards a higher from 1988 and for congenital thyreoid deficiency is carried out from uptake in families in which SCD had occurred (odds ratio 3 .27, 95%CI: 1993 . The screening is held in 99% of all cases . Infant mortality in [0 .68-15 .82]) . Bashkortostan Republic significantly decreased during the last 5 years Conclusion: Less than half of the eligible relatives opted for genetic on 32 .9% . Mortality caused by congenital malformation decreased on counselling . Research into the determinants of the uptake, including 30% for the same period . the process of invitation, is needed . Table 1: Average number of family members who attended genetic counselling in the first year by degree of relationship to the proband.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  P1268. Exploring the current and anticipated role of genetic 1Central Manchester and Manchester Children’s University Hospitals NHS practice by midwives in Australia Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2The Neurofibromatosis Association, S. A. Metcalfe1,2, M. Bishop1,2, Y. M. Bylstra1, F. Cullinane3, C. Gaff4,5; Kingston on Thames, United Kingdom. 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 2Dept Paediat- Personal Health Records (PHRs) are client-held records . Their rics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 3The Royal Women’s primary aim is to empower individuals and their families, giving them Hospital, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 4Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, information about and ultimately more control over their health . PHRs Vic, Australia, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United exist for diabetes, heart disease, and cancer, as well as for antenatal Kingdom. care, and to monitor child growth and development, and these records Developments in genetic diagnosis around pregnancy have affected have been positively received by both patients and clinicians . Our not only parents, but also the health professionals that are involved in project involves developing PHRs for a range of common genetic their care . In Victoria, Australia, midwives are an essential component conditions, beginning with Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (Nf1). of the prenatal and postnatal care of women, yet their role in genetics Nf1 is a relatively common autosomal genetic disorder, which is has not been described, recognised or supported . Using a qualitative variable and unpredictable . There is a lifelong risk of developing approach we explored how genetics is incorporated into the current and serious complications, so patients need regular reviews and targeted anticipated role of midwives by conducting focus group discussions and screening at specific ages, and may be under the care of several semi-structured interviews . A total of nine focus groups were conducted specialists . with midwives (n=50) and 11 interviews with organisational managers The PHR has been developed by a local consensus group, comprising; and educators from seven maternity hospitals across Victoria . Two consultant geneticists, genetic counsellors and a Specialist Nf Advisor . focus groups were also held with prenatal and neonatal genetic The record contains; contact details, targeted background information, experts (n=10) . Midwives discussed their experiences in dealing with pages to record clinical details, pointers to further sources of information genetic issues, while managers and experts were asked about their and support, as well as space for patients to make their own notes . opinions on midwives’ practice, and what they anticipate their role to The Nf1 PHR will be piloted locally and its usefulness evaluated by entail . Transcripts of focus groups and interviews were analysed and questionnaires and focus groups . The Nf1 PHR has been designed major themes identified. Both managers and midwives recognised that to be as generic as possible, so it can be used as the basis for the midwives care primarily for normal or low risk pregnancies . Experts other PHRs we intend to develop . In the long term, we hope that PHRs supported autonomy in regards to discussing prenatal and neonatal for individuals with genetic disorders will be recognised and accepted screening tests, whilst managers saw midwives essentially as resource across all health care sectors as a gold standard in patient care . and information providers . Midwives reported that their role in regards to genetics includes information provider, counsellor, and support P1271. Detection of glycine substitutions in the amino end of person . Perceived boundaries with other health professionals was type I collagen by biochemical screening of fibroblast collagen also discussed . Genetics appears to be a component of the midwife requires supplementation by direct sequencing for osteogenesis role through the whole continuum of pregnancy, with their role defined imperfecta probands. by organisational practice, patient demographics as well as personal W. A. Cabral, S. Milgrom, A. D. Letocha, E. Moriarty, J. C. Marini; experience and knowledge . NIH/NICHD/Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, Bethesda, MD, United States. P1269. Genetic testing in families of patients with germline The biochemical test for osteogenesis imperfecta detects structural MutYH mutations: is it cost-effective? abnormalities in the helical region of type I collagen as delayed M. Nielsen1, F. J. Hes1, H. F. A. Vasen2,3, W. B. van den Hout4; electrophoretic migration of alpha chains synthesized by cultured 1Center of Human and Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, fibroblasts on SDS-Urea-PAGE. The sensitivity of this test is based 2Department of Gastroenterology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3The on overmodification of alpha chains in helices with a substitution of Netherlands Foundation for the Detection of Hereditary Tumours, Leiden, The an invariant glycine residue in a Gly-X-Y triplet . Biochemical testing Netherlands, 4Department of Medical Decision Making, LUMC, Leiden, The is most sensitive for structural changes in the carboxyl end of a chain Netherlands. because helices fold in the carboxyl to amino direction . Although the Introduction: MutYH associated polyposis (MAP) is an autosomal biochemical test has been used for 2 decades, the limits of detectability recessive disease, patients with bi-allelic germline mutations in the are unreported . We compared the electrophoretic migration of normal MutYH gene (MAP patients) are prone to develop between ten and type I collagen with collagen from 30 OI patients (types III or IV) hundreds of adenomas at a mean age of 45 years and in 60% of cases and known mutations in the amino half of the α1(I) and α2(I) chains. also colorectal carcinoma . In the general population about 1,5 % is Sensitivity differed for each chain, was greater on 5% than 6% PAGE, a heterozygous MutYH mutation carrier . Children of MutYH mutation and in intracellular than secreted collagen. In α1(I), substitutions in carriers have an increased risk of inheriting two MutYH mutations as the first 100 residues were undetectable; 7% of cases in the current compared to the general population and thereby an increased risk for Mutation Consortium database are in this region. α1(I) substitutions colorectal carcinoma . between residues 100-230 were variably detectable while those after Methods: Using data from literature review and our own group of MAP- residue 232 were all detected. In α2(I), variability of detection extended patients (n=40) we constructed a Markov model to perform a societal through residue 436 . About a third of cases in the Consortium cost-utility analysis of family screening (testing children after the database are located in the combined variable detection region . There spouse has been tested positive) . was no correlation of substituting residues and biochemical sensitivity . Results: In absence of FOBT population screening, the cost-utility Complete testing of probands with normal type I collagen biochemical ratio of testing families of MAP patients, as compared to no genetic results requires supplementation by direct sequencing of cDNA or screening, was estimated at €19,000 per quality adjusted life year gDNA in the amino regions of the alpha chains . (QALY) . The presence of FOBT population screening only slightly increased this cost-utility ratio to €20,000 per QALY. For testing P1272. Paternity testing requested by private parties: ethical and families of heterozygote MutYH carriers, cost-utility ratios were about deontological problems raised over the last few years twice as high . L. Caenazzo, A. Comacchio, E. Ponzano, P. Benciolini; Conclusions: The costs per QALY for testing families of MAP patients Dept. Enviromental Medicine and Public Health-Legal Medicine, Padova, Italy. are acceptable according to international standards . The conclusions This study regards the major problems encountered over the last few of our analysis were sensitive to several of the parameters in the years by our Unit concerning requests for paternity testing by private model, including the assumed €640 per genetic assessment. parties . Paternity testing based on DNA analysis have been adopted as the P1270. the development of a personal health record for most important method, to objectively prove paternity legally and neurofibromatosis type 1 otherwise . It supplies information of great importance in order to satisfy P. M. Griffiths1, R. Abbott1,2, S. Huson1, E. Howard1, J. Clayton-Smith1, K. Met- the need for biological truth . calfe1, G. D. Evans1, S. Harrison1, M. Kenny1, S. Collitt1, B. Kerr1; In the Italian judicial system biological proof is no longer understood to be an exceptional means of proof but is understood to be part and Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  parcel of investigations “which have probatory value equal to that of P1275. carrier diagnostics and prevention of other proof” . This has been the cause of a perceptible increase of not hemoglobinopathies in early pregnancy in the Netherlands: a only judicial expert surveys but also extra judicial requests . pilot study If, however, in the judicial arena, the laws today permit a clear framing P. C. Giordano1, A. Plancke1, C. A. Van Meir2, C. A. H. Janssen2, P. J. M. J. of the cases in point in which it is possible to carry out an investigation Kok2, I. H. Van Rooijen-Nijdam2, B. C. Tanis BC2, J. C. M. van Huisseling2, F. G. without running the risk of abuse of or damage to other interested A. Versteegh2, C. L. Harteveld1; parties, there still exists no regulation of extra judicial investigation 1Human and Clinical Cenetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Groene Hart Hospital, requests, nor is there any clear judicial opposition .We propose to Gouda, The Netherlands. identify the problem areas so as to aid in determining whether to We have offered, for the first time in The Netherlands, accept investigation requests as made by private parties under various Hemoglobinopathies (HbP) carrier diagnostics to 139 randomly circumstances . This assumes greater importance in the private arena selected early pregnant women . The aim of this study was to because, since there is less legal protection there, citizens have an establish whether carrier analysis would be welcome by the public even greater right to be protected . and feasible at the outpatient level . Carrier diagnostics was accepted The requests are evaluated and an attempt is made to highlight the by 136 women (97 .8%) . The population consisted for 31% of recent typologies that may pose problems or reflections of an ethical nature. immigrants and 69% of native Dutch . One carrier of HbS and one of β-thalassemia were found, both among the group of the recent P1273. An electronic preconception checklist on internet: www. immigrants . In both cases partners were controlled excluding a couple zwangerwijzer.nl at risk. In addition, five carriers of α+-thalassemia were diagnosed at E. H. van Vliet-Lachotzki1, E. A. P. Steegers2; the molecular level, one of them in the native Dutch population . Basic 1Erfocentrum, Soestdijk, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus University Medical Center, carrier analysis was done both at the Hospital Laboratory and at the Division of Obstetrics and Prenatal Medicine, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Reference Laboratory . No discrepancies were found . This pilot study During the last few decades perinatal and maternal mortality rates shows that 1) as predicted the prevalence of risk related HbP and of have stabilised or have even increased. The first trimester of the α+-thalassemia is high in the immigrant population . 2) The compliance pregnancy is essential concerning the etiology of birth defects as well with carrier analysis in both native Dutch and immigrant is virtually as disturbances in early placental development resulting in pregnancy total 3) Carrier diagnostic in early pregnancy and partner analysis in complications in later pregnancy such as preeclampsia . Hospital Laboratories is possible and is an effective tool for primary Initiating care before conception, preconception care, could prevention of the Hemoglobinopathies in The Netherlands . therefore be the most effective strategy to improve the outcome of the pregnancy. Identification of risk factors is a main component of P1276. European proficiency testing study on the competence of preconception care . Self-administered questionnaires have been laboratories to recognise rare mutations resulting in unexpected proven to be accurate screening tools . We have adapted these genotyping results questionnaires into an automated electronic checklist on the website, J. Marki-Zay1,2, D. Gancberg1, C. L. Klein1,3, H. G. Schimmel1, L. Dux2,4; www .zwangerwijzer .nl . It is online since January 2004 . It is being used 1Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements, Geel, Belgium, 2Depart- by parents to be for their own information as well as a screening tool, ment of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged, Szeged, facilitating the implementation of programs of preconception care in Hungary, 3European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods, Institute The Netherlands . for Health and Consumer Protection, European Commission, Joint Research Zwangerwijzer focuses on identifying risk factors, supplies information Centre, Ispra, Italy, 4QualiCont Kht., Szeged, Hungary. about health promotion gives advise for additional preconception Common genetic variations are tested using assays designed to counselling in necessary . Zwangerwijzer had 42 .157 visitors between detect a mutation of interest and not intended for mutation screening . June 1st, 2004 and May 25th 2005 . Anonymous data are recorded after However, SNPs close to this mutation have been reported to result in informed consent . 47% of visitors completed the whole questionnaires . atypical genotyping results on some test systems . Testing laboratories Among female participants, 65,8% of them took folic acid supplements, should recognise these cases, to avoid misdiagnosis and inadequate 21,5% smoked and 16,9% took medication . Zwangerwijzer will make treatment . it possible to acquire risk profiles of subpopulations such as ethnic In order to assess the competence of testing laboratories to recognise minorities. Although Internet has limitations as a scientific tool, we and report such SNPs, four proficiency testing materials were have found similar data as in other surveys . Zwangerwijzer will be an processed for the analysis of the human factor II (prothrombin) gene important instrument for the further implementation of preconception G20210A mutation . Two of the four materials contained mutations care in the whole of The Netherlands . giving atypical genotyping results using some methods . These samples were sent to 283 laboratories through 3 EQA P1274. Premarriage counseling organisers, 189 from these laboratories participated to the study . T. R. Khater; Mutations C20209T and [T20175G+20179-80 del AC] resulted in Nasser Insitutue Hospital for Research & Treatment, Cairo, Egypt. atypical genotyping results in 65 and in 85 laboratories, respectively . Premariage Checkup Center In Nasser Institute Hospital (PCC-NIH) Eighty-three (55 .3 %) from these results were reported as one of the Aimed Sector for the checkup are cases of: expected genotypes, 31 (20 .7 %) were described as atypical results 1 . Youth of both gender going to be married for full premarital checkup and only 36 (24 %) were recognised as another variant in the gene . and genetic counseling . In the cases, when samples gave a typical result with the method 2 . Pregnant mothers that have a risky pregnancy to get babies with used, the error rate was 4,7 % . Detailed results showed that more inherited diseases . To do prenatal diagnoses tests . . then 60 % of the false results were reported from only 8 laboratories . 3 . Couples had a child with inherited disease for diagnosis and Furthermore, allele-specific amplification based PCR had a much treatment; and do genetic counseling for assessment of recurrence higher error rate then other methods (16 .7 % vs . 3 .4 %) .Results of this risk rate in next pregnancy . study indicated that majority of the false results could be prevented by 4 . Couples had general health problems that may affect the marriage improved training and careful selection of the method used . for advice and treatment . Our Mission: P1277. Quality Assurance in European genetic laboratories 1 . Decrease the Handicapped Children rate in our country . A. Corveleyn1, N. Nagels1, C. Gaudebout2, D. Bishop1, S. Berwouts1, F. Thuil- 2 . Decrease the rate of divorce in new families that has been reached lier2, B. Urbero2, S. Aymé2, E. Dequeker1, M. Morris1; 34 .5% . 1EuroGentest, Leuven, Belgium, 2Orphanet, Paris, France. Our Goals: Testing for genetic diseases has moved progressively from a Prevention predominantly research context into specialized clinical genetic Education . laboratories . Concomitantly, there has been a greatly-increased attention to issues of quality control (QC) and assurance (QAu), particularly with respect to EQA and accreditation .Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 0 Existing initiatives collecting information on or providing support for 1- RPL in 2-3 generations (12%) QAu in genetic testing services are fragmented, and their continuity is 2- ≥ 2 familial marriages with RPL (15%) not assured . The EU Network of Excellence EuroGentest is bringing 3- ≥1 other dispersed pregnancy loss in pedigree (61%) together many initiatives to develop the necessary infrastructure, tools 4- Negative pedigree for pregnancy loss (12%) and resources to improve and harmonize the overall quality of genetic There were other cases of RPL in 109 pedigrees (54 .5%) from 1- 7 . services throughout Europe . High rate of familial marriage was seen in involved couples (59%) . Although a number of public websites provide lists of genetic testing Chromosomal abnormality was found in 15 .8% of among 120 laboratories and tests that are available, public information about QAu couples . is sparse or absent. As a first step, we surveyed the current status Conclusion: Previous investigations have demonstrated that the of accreditation, certification and participation in EQA in European aberrant regulation of cellular process such as immunological, laboratories . The survey was distributed to more then 2000 contacts metabolic, vascular and endocrine may lead to PL and can be in 35 countries . To ensure the highest possible quality of the data, influenced by genetic factors. The presence of inherited disorders with the collected information will be peer-reviewed prior to dissemination low viability within a family can also be associated with RPL . Familial to laboratories and consumers via a European QAu database . The pedigree and inheritance pattern have a key role in genetic evaluation results will be presented .With the new awareness of the central role of couples with RPL . of QAu, making this information available will benefit consumers, by facilitating informed choice of laboratory partners for performing tests, P1280. Predictors of accuracy in recall of genetic cancer risk and genetics services, by facilitating selection of partners for referral of M. Pöyhönen1,2, P. Absetz3, M. Schreck3, M. Rautalahti2, A. R. Aro3,4; tests which cannot be performed locally and by valorizing their efforts 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, and investment in QAu. This survey will provide the first overview of 2Cancer Society of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3Dept of Epidemiology and Health the status of QAu in European genetics laboratories . Promotion, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept of Public Health, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. P1278. Quality management and accreditation of genetic testing Genetic counseling for cancer aims to increase information about services cancer and genetics, improve accuracy of risk perception, enhance E. Dequeker, R. Hastings, D. Barton, S. Berwouts, C. Brady, P. Corbisier, informed decisions and risk management, and to help coping with threat A. Corveleyn, R. Elles, B. Fowler, D. Gancberg, F. Le Calvez, P. Litynski, M. of cancer . This study investigates predictors of accuracy in genetic Macek Jr, U. Malburg, G. Matthijs, M. Morris, C. Müller, N. Nagels, B. Quell- risk recall with the objective of informing future counseling strategies . horst-Pawley, A. Stambergova, K. Vickers, J. Cassiman; It is based on genetic counseling for cancer in two Cancer Society EuroGentest, Leuven, Belgium. offices from April 2000 to February 2002. The counselor notified about Molecular genetic, cytogenetic and biochemical genetic services in the inherited cancer risk according to predefined categories of ’not Europe, while based on high quality scientific know-how, suffer from increased’, ’moderately increased’, and ’markedly increased’ risk . a high level of technical errors and poor reporting . In response to this, Notified versus recalled genetic cancer risk was studied in a survey EuroGentest (EUGT) intends to structure and harmonize the overall pre-counseling (T0), and 2 (T1) and 12 weeks (T2) post-counseling quality of these services . Within EUGT, the Quality Management Unit (n=46) . In addition to perceived/recalled risk, knowledge, perceptions, will improve the organization and harmonization of EQA schemes, social support, mood, anxiety, dispositional optimism, health behavior, facilitate the development of guidelines, disseminate QAu (Quality perceived health, sociodemographics, and family history plus other assurance) information through a database and encourage services experience of cancer were measured . Five clients got not increased/ to attain and maintain accreditation . In order to assist laboratories low risk notification at counseling; 21 moderately increased risk; and preparing for accreditation, EUGT is also reviewing suitable quality 20 markedly increased/high genetic risk . Based on recalled risk the control materials (QCM) and providing documentation or SOPs on new subjects were divided into three groups: accurate recall (T1:n=26 / T2: technologies . n=20), under (n=16/19) and overstated risk (n=4/6) . DISCRIM analysis Since EUGT was funded in January last year, progress has been made was used to find factors best discriminating the groups. Both at T1 and to disseminate information on accreditation requirements through T2 family history of cancer, optimism and social support were predictive the organization of two international workshops . EUGT distributed of accurate risk recall, and at T2 also higher better knowledge of a survey to review the current status of QAu in European genetic genetics and cancer, and higher social status . Higher number of testing services . Furthermore, research on the current situation of children was predictive of over statement at both time points: and EQA providers and EQA schemes in Europe was carried out . Several better self-perceived health of under statement at T1 . forums for national and European EQA providers started discussing harmonization of EQA schemes and addressed the minimum quality P1281. Aging in patients with Sanfilippo type B syndrome standards for cytogenetics. A first European symposium was organized U. Moog1,2, A. M. J. Schoonbrood-Lenssen3, P. J. van Haren3, A. M. A. Wage- to set priorities for the development of QCMs . In order to start validation mans4, C. Norg5, H. M. J. van Schrojenstein Lantman-de Valk3,6; of several methods and technologies, a core service of accredited 1University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Maastricht Uni- laboratories was set up and the first expert groups were established. versity, Research Institute Growth & Development (GROW), Maastricht, The All these initiatives will finally improve the quality of the management Netherlands, 3Institution for People with Intellectual Disability Pepijn, Echt, and provision of genetic services for the benefit of the patient. The Netherlands, 4Institution for People with Intellectual Disability Maasveld, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 5Institution for People with Intellectual Disability P1279. inheritance pattern in repeated pregnancy loss St. Joseph, Heel, The Netherlands, 6University Maastricht, Maastricht, The S. Seyedhassani1,2, A. Aflatoonian1, S. Kalantar1, H. Fazli1, M. Hooshmand2; Netherlands. 1Research and clinical center for infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, Sanfilippo B syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis IIIB, MPS IIIB) is 2National institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic caused by deficiency of α-N-acetylglucosaminidase, a lysosomal Republic of Iran. enzyme involved in the degradation of heparan sulfate . Accumulation Introduction: pregnancy loss is the most common complication of of the substrate in lysosomes lead to neurologic degeneration, pregnancy . About 1% to 2% of couples experience three or more behavioural problems, and mental decline . Compared to other types consecutive spontaneous pregnancy loss, suggesting some underlying of MPS, somatic features are relatively mild in Sanfilippo B. It is the operative mechanisms . Among them genetic factors can include single most common subtype of MPS in the Netherlands and probably gene defects as well as parental chromosome abnormalities and underdiagnosed in adult persons with mental retardation . polygenic or multifactorial disorders . We report the clinical data of 16 patients with Sanfilippo B. 13 of Material and methods: 200 consecutive cases were studied by them derived from 2 large families and could be followed for several genetical analysis . Genetic counseling, clinical, paraclinical, and decades, and 3 were sporadic adult patients followed for a period of cytogenetic studies were done for each couple . 10 years . 7 of 16 patients had died at ages 15 to 69 years, mainly from Results: There was positive familial pedigree of pregnancy loss in 176 pneumonia and cachexia . The others were 37-62 years of age and all couples (88%) . They were divided by pedigree patterns in 4 groups: lived in institutions . Apart from the youngest, they had lost ambulancy, Therapy for genetic disease 1 at 36 to 62 years . Most had developed physical problems, in particular latest treatment by health professionals . Therefore, more diseases will in the late 4th to 6th decade: cardiac disease (cardiomyopathy, atrial be prevented and lower global mortality will be achieved . fibrillations), arthritis, skin blistering, swallowing difficulties requiring feeding by a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube, and seizures . P1284. The first case of genetic counseling for a compound Most of them showed or had shown restlessness and behavioural heterozygous girl with Wolfram syndrome problems with hitting and extreme screaming which was difficult to M. O. Mkheidze; prevent or to treat pharmaceutically . Adequate care and treatment Medical Academy for postgraduate training, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. plans of these challenging problems and of the medical complications The first case of genetic counseling for a compound heterozygous girl will be illustrated . with Wolfram syndrome . Wolfram syndrome (WS) is a rare autosomal recessive P1282. transition of medical care in persons with mental neurodegenerative disorder characterized by diabetes insipidus, retardation: the maastricht model diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness (DIDMOAD, OMIM C. T. Schrander-Stumpel1, A. Wagemans2, L. M. G. Curfs1, J. J. P. Schrander3; #222300) . This results in the majority of the cases from mutations in 1Research Institute GROW, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands, the WFS1 gene located on 4p16 .1 . The author reports on a girl with 2Centre for intellectual disabled, Maasveld, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3De- WS who presented with juvenile-onset diabetes mellitus when she partment of Pediatrics, Academic Hospital Maastricht, The Netherlands. was 9 9/12 years old . Optic atrophy was found at 10 years of age . No Healthcare transition in an essential part of healthcare provision, other abnormalities typical to WS were observed . Mutation analysis referred to as the shift from one type of healthcare to another . was performed by German colleagues . The proband was found to be Nowadays, many children with childhood onset diseases and/or compound heterozygote . 4bp deletion in exon 8 and 16bp deletion in genetic syndromes and/or mental retardation survive into adulthood . exon 4 of the WFS1 gene were identified. Analysis in the parents has These children are at risk not being provided with coordinated and disclosed 4bp deletion in exon 8 to be paternal and 16 bp deletion in adequate healthcare as they reach adulthood . exon 4 to be maternal . Genetic counseling included consideration of With respect to healthcare transition, the paediatrician may hand over problems of medical management and prognosis for the proband, for the care for the patient to a general practitioner . Hence, in case of her parents and her semi sibling male twins . any healthcare problems, the general practitioner usually will refer the patient to a (sub)specialist . This may result in many hospital visits Po10. therapy for genetic disease to many different doctors . Fragmentation of the patients’ healthcare may develop due to a lack of central coordination of care . For mentally P1285. A novel strategy for β-globin gene targeting retarded patients living in institutions, good coordinative healthcare is H. Khanahmad, B. Rabbani, R. Bagheri, M. Khalili, F. Tavangar, S. Zeinali; provided for these patients by a doctor for mentally retarded patients . Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Re- In Maastricht, the Netherlands, we developed an outpatients’ ward . public of Iran. This ward is primarily aimed at providing healthcare coordination, when β thalassemia is one of the common autosomal recessive disorders. It needed, for adult patients with an intellectual disability and/or a genetic is characterized by the reduced or absent of β-globin chain in affected syndrome . The prime goals of this outpatients’ ward are coordination ones . Transplantation of genetically corrected autologous human stem of healthcare, continuation of healthcare, providing good quality cell is an attractive approach to cure the disease . In this study we of healthcare and providing age- and developmentally appropriate had developed a new strategy to correct the mutant gene by means healthcare . The consultations are held by a clinical geneticist and of homologous recombination. A specific gene construct for β-globin a doctor specialized in patients with an intellectual disability . Other gene targeting was designed and constructed . This construct consist (medical) specialists can be consulted . During the appointment, not of two homologous stems including 2 .2 kb upstream (USHBG) and 2 .5 only medical issues are discussed, but also psychosocial aspects kb downstream regions of β-globin gene (DSHBG), 2.1 kb β-globin concerning the patient. We present our first experiences with this gene (HBG) as the target gene, hygromycin, neomycine resistant model . genes as positive selection markers and thymidine kinase genes (TK1, TK2) as negative selection markers. All segments were amplified by P1283. initiatives to enhance the role of Public Health care and PCR and cloned into pTZ57T/A cloning vector and then subcloned into Genetics on disease control pBGGT vector in the following order: TK1-USHBG-HYGROMYCIN- A. Fishta; HBG-NEOMYCINE-DSHBG-TK2 . This construct was linearized and International Humanitarian Assistance, Jena, Germany. transfected to cos-7 by lipofection . Positive and negative selections Introduction: Public Health (PH) and Genetics are often considered as were preformed on these cells . Then PCR was preformed on DNA of two independent subjects of health care . PH looks simultaneously at the selected cells . The authenticity of cloning and subcloning steps the control of epidemiological diseases and malnutrition in community- was checked by PCR, restriction analysis and finally by sequencing. based populations which is a problem predominantly in developing The results showed that only three clones of cells remained at the countries . Meanwhile, in developed countries the increasing incidence end of the selection . DNA of the selected cells was analyzed by PCR of diseases such as cancer, diabetes etc . is considered a critical and sequencing regarding to homologous recombination . The result of problem . While Genetics deals with the micro-level of health, PH looks sequencing confirmed the occurrence of homologous recombination in at populations at a macro-level . However, both aim improving the these cells . Therefore, a novel strategy gene replacement was done in quality of health and decreasing the morbidity and mortality . one step and by using one construct . Methods: Public Health Genetics (PHG) programs should be proposed and applied for each country . Analysing of PH and Genetics’ data, P1286. Partial dystrophin correction in exons 30, 37 and 60 by identifies the diseases with highest incidence, possible causal gentamycin-induced translational readthrough or contributing factors, the aetiology and history of the diseases, P. S. Lai, P. P. Lim, Q. M. Chin, S. K. H. Tay, P. S. Low; relevant treatment protocols as well as cost of tests and therapies . National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. Evidence-based results will suggest innovative preventive programs Defective expression of the dystrophin gene leads to Duchenne based on recent genetic findings. Important is the costs-analyse each muscular dystrophy (DMD), a severe X-linked neuromuscular disorder disease-management, whereby the country-specific legal and ethical that is fatal by the second decade of life . About 15% of all DMD cases influences should not be overlooked. Country-based PHG strategies arise from premature stop codon mutations . Aminoglycoside-induced with innovative disease-management protocols should be proposed . readthroughs of nonsense codons have been reported in several genes Discussion: PHG will propose innovative disease-management like ATM and CFTR . Our study investigates the use of gentamycin schemata. Application of cost-effective mechanisms will be possible; for dystrophin repair of nonsense codons in exons 30, 37 and 60 consequently, the population at risk will be identified and offered to which were identified from our DMD patients. Cell extracts from the undergo genetic screening tests, vaccination or therapy . Educational patients carrying UAG, UAA and UGA premature termination codons programs about PHG for the public and health professionals will (PTCs) were treated with gentamycin at concentrations of 0, 2, 10, 20, change the health behaviour of people at risk and will provide them 100, 1000 and 2,000 μg/ml for 2 hours for in vitro protein synthesis Therapy for genetic disease  assays and 48 hours for reporter expression . Restoration of reading was demonstrated with ERT, with a mean reduction of 15-20 g/m2 .7 frame was measured by mRNA analysis, in vitro protein synthesis in left ventricular mass in the second year . This was accompanied and reporter expression . The treated cells exhibited varying levels by a significant improvement in cardiac function (midwall fractional of restoration with synthesis of corresponding dystrophin fragments shortening) after 1 and 2 years of treatment (p<0.05). Significant of 52 .9 kDa, 12 .5 kDa and 52 kDa in relation to each of the three improvements in HR-QoL (p<0 .05) and neuropathic pain (p<0 .05) premature stop codons . These fragments correspond to the normal were also demonstrated with ERT . protein synthesized from the cDNA segments carrying the PTCs in Conclusion Analysis of FOS clearly demonstrates the clinical benefits exons 30, 37 and 60 respectively . Partial restoration of dystrophin of long-term ERT with agalsidase alfa in patients with Fabry disease . translation was thus demonstrated from the in vitro studies in our DMD patients . It is believed that aminoglycosides can correct translation P1289. Life expectancy in type 1 (non-neuronopathic) Gaucher from nonsense codons by ribosomal interference and the complexity disease of readthrough regulation warrants further investigation since varying S. vom Dahl1, P. Deegan2, P. Mistry3, G. Pastores4, K. Kacena5, N. Weinreb6; results have been previously reported from different studies using 1St. Franziskus-Hospital, Cologne, Germany, 2Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cam- gentamycin to correct PTCs . bridge, United Kingdom, 3Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States, 4New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, United P1287. Fabry disease: clinical manifestations in a cohort of 723 States, 5Genzyme, Cambridge, MA, United States, 6University Research Foun- females. dation, Hollywood, FL, United States. D. P. Germain; Objective: Investigations were conducted to estimate life expectancy Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France. at birth of patients with type 1 (non-neuronopathic) Gaucher disease Fabry disease (FD) is a lysosomal storage disorder due to the (GD), the most frequent lysosomal storage disease . methods: The GD deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme α -galactosidase A leading to population included all patients with type 1 GD registered in the ICGG severe multi-organ dysfunction and premature death in hemizygous Gaucher Registry, who were diagnosed after 1991 . Life expectancy males . Enzyme replacement therapy (agalsidase beta) has been shown was calculated according to the standard life table method by Palmore to clear the vascular endothelial accumulation of glycosphingolipids and Gardner, 1996 (method 1); and by using the assumption that risk and to decrease the incidence of significant clinical events in treated of death prior to Gaucher diagnosis was the same as the reference patients . Although the inheritance is classically considered as an X- population (method 2) . The reference population (World Population linked recessive disease, it is increasingly apparent that heterozygous Prospects, 2002, UN) was and approximately 40% of GD patients females may frequently present with features of the disease despite came from the U .S . The life expectancy of the reference population having measurable α -galactosidase A activity. The Fabry Registry was similar to that for developed nations (as defined by the UN). (www.FabryRegistry.com) was analyzed to determine presenting The gender distribution in GD was similar to that of the general symptoms, age at diagnosis, and age at clinical events in 723 population . Results: The type 1 Gaucher population of 2,201 patients heterozygous females for FD . had 90 reported deaths . The average life expectancy of the Type 1 The median age at diagnosis was 33 yrs. (N=610; 24 yrs. in males). GD population was 66 .6 years for method 1, and 67 .3 years for First symptoms were presented at a median age of 13.0 yrs. (N=344; method 2 . The life expectancy of the reference population was 77 .1 9 .0 yrs . in males) . At presentation, the most common symptoms were years . Discussion and conclusion: The ICGG Gaucher Registry dermatological (18%), ophthalmological (19%), gastroenterological represents the largest dataset on GD patients worldwide . The current (20%) and pain (39%) . Cardiac events (myocardial infarction, life expectancy at birth of people with type 1 GD is about 10 years less arrhythmia, angina, congestive heart failure or significant cardiac than the reference population, confirming that type 1 GD is not a benign procedure) occurred in 18% at median age of 47 yrs . (24% in males) . disorder . Additional analyses on causes of death and a possible impact Cerebrovascular events (strokes) occurred in 8% at median age of 42 of enzyme replacement therapy on life expectancy are underway . yrs . and renal events in only 3% at a median age of 38 yrs . (15% in males) . P1290. Recombinant expression of vitamin K-dependent Whether Fabry disease should be considered as an X-linked dominant coagulation-factors disorder needs additional data and follow-up . Awareness of the A. Fregin1, S. Rost1, J. Oldenburg2, C. R. Mueller1; common presenting signs and symptoms in females may lead to 1Dept. of Humangenetics, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Institute of Experimental improved recognition and outcome for symptomatic heterozygotes . Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Bonn, Germany. Vitamin K serves as a cofactor for the post-translational modification P1288. treatment outcome of agalsidase alfa in Fabry disease by gamma-carboxylation of several proteins with regulatory function, M. Beck1, A. Linhart2, A. Mehta3, G. Sunder-Plassmann4; the group of Gla-proteins . Vitamin K-dependent proteins include the 1Department of Paediatrics, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Second coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X and proteins S, C and Z, illustrating Department of Internal Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, the therapeutic importance of vitamin K-metabolism . Inhibitors of the 3Department of Haematology, Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom, coumarin-type like warfarin reduce coagulation activity by interfering 4Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Department of Medicine III, Medical Uni- with the vitamin K 2, 3-epoxide reductase enzyme complex (VKOR) . versity Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Mutations in the VKORC1 (VKOR-component 1) -gene lead to Background Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder combined deficiency of vitamin-K-dependent clotting factors type 2 caused by the absence or deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme (VKCFD2; OMIM: 607473) or warfarin resistance. α-galactosidase A. The disorder is characterized by mulitsystemic The production of vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors like factor disease that, untreated, progresses to multiple organ failure . The Fabry IX which is being produced for treating Haemophilia B is challenging, Outcome Survey (FOS) - an international database of patients with because a significant amount of the recombinantly expressed protein Fabry disease - was established to monitor the safety and outcome is undercarboxylated . The supernatant of HEK-293-Cells which of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with agalsidase alfa in patients recombinantly express hFIX-cDNA driven by a CMV-promotor has an with Fabry disease . FIX-activity of 28% compared to normal blood-plasma . Interestingly Methods Data from FOS were analysed to determine the outcome when comparing the antigen concentration by Western blot-analysis of agalsidase alfa treatment on renal function, cardiac size, pain and the supernatant shows a much stronger signal than plasma . These health-related quality of life (HR-QoL) . data indicate that the recombinant FIX is insufficiently gamma- Results Of the 752 patients enrolled in FOS at the time of the carboxylated . Since VKORC1 is the essential key-protein for gamma- analysis, 436 (60% male) were receiving ERT, some 180 of whom had carboxylation, we are trying to coexpress the coagulation factors II, been treated for more than 3 years . Renal function, as assessed by VII, IX or X in combination with VKORC1 to improve carboxylation and estimating glomerular filtration rate (GFR) using the modification of diet thereby enhance the functionality of the expressed proteins . in renal disease method, remained stable for the duration of treatment in patients with an estimated GFR between 30 and 90 ml/min/1 .73 m2. Significant regression of left ventricular hypertrophy (p<0 .05) Therapy for genetic disease  P1291. Osteogenesis imperfecta in children, effects of therapy disease is a heterogeneous disorder that varies with respect to age at with pamidronate onset and rate of disease progression . M. Kocova1, E. Sukarova-Angelovska1, I. Stefanovska2, A. Galicka3; methods: To gain a better understanding of the natural course of 1Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Ortho- Pompe disease, a global, observational Registry was developed to pedic Clinic, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 3Department collect anonymous, longitudinal data on Pompe patients . of Medical Chemistry, Medical University, Bialystok, Poland. Preliminary Data Overview: As of January 11, 2006, 150 patients Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a genetic disorder due to the have been enrolled of which the majority (54 .0%) is of Caucasian decreased amount or abnormal structure of the collagen . Several ethnicity . 18 .0% of the reported patients have infantile-onset Pompe forms with different symptoms affecting bones, teeth, sclera and disease (IO: symptoms onset typically before the age of one year) . growth are described . The median age of IO diagnosis is 6 .3 months . 54 .0% of the reported Here we analyze symptoms in 9 children with OI (age 1 month-12 years patients have late-onset Pompe disease (LO: symptoms onset often at the diagnosis) and the response to therapy with bisphosphonates . after the age of one year) . The median age of LO diagnosis is 31 .4 Multiple fractures were the major presenting sign except for 1 patient years . The (median) range of time from symptoms onset to diagnosis where the bowing of the lower legs was the presenting sign . The is 6 .7 months for IO patients and 7 .5 years for LO patients . Out of 45 number of fractures before therapy was 2-22 (6 .7+3 average) . The LO Pompe patients investigated for genotype, in 32 (71 .1%) the IVS1- most severe form of the disease appeared in a newborn and in a baby 13T>G mutation was found . of 4 months, both with multiple fractures . summary: The Pompe Registry attempts to increase the understanding One patient where the OI was accompanied with empty sella showed of this rare disease and to potentially improve patient management . only bowing of the legs without apparent fractures, the fact probably Preliminary data show that the (median) range of time from symptoms due to the GH therapy applied due to the GH deficiency. Two of the onset to diagnosis is similar to published literature, suggesting the children had a familiar form of OI, mother being affected in both . need for greater disease awareness . Biochemical studies and collagen studies confirmed OI type I in 3, OI type III in 4 and OI type II in 2 children . P1294. Bioaminergic deficits in Rett syndrome : from Therapy with i .v . disodium pamidronate 1 mg/kg/month was conducted pathophysiology to therapeutic intervention. for 20+4 .6 months . There were only 2 fractures during the total period J. C. Roux1, E. Dura1, V. Saywell1, A. Moncla1,2, J. Mancini2, L. Villard1; of 95 months of therapy in all children . Two babies with the form II of 1Inserm U491, Marseille, France, 2Hopital d’Enfants de La Timone, Marseille, the disease died due to severe infections . Seven are in a very good France. health with normal DEXA findings. Rett syndrome is a severe X-linked neurological disorder, in which Treatment with bisphosphonates is successful in OI especially in forms most patients carry a mutation in the gene encoding methyl-CpG I and III . binding protein 2 (MECP2) . The clinical course of the disease consists of normal in utero and neonatal development followed by a period P1292. the individual approach in the Phenylketonuria treatment of regression showing signs of neurodevelopmental defects (arrest N. Usurelu1, V. Tsourea1, V. Sacara1, V. Gordiichiuk1, O. Usurelu2; of brain development, loss of acquisitions such as speech and walk, 1State University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova, apparition of behavioural troubles) . 2ARC-PKU, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. Twenty six percent of deaths in Rett girls occur with sudden respiratory Phenylketonuria(PKU) is an inborn poly-enzymatic multi- arrhythmia . system pathology of the metabolism, its primary block being the We investigated breathing dysfunction in Rett syndrome using an Phenylalanine(Phe) hydroxylation that leads to clinical and biochemical animal model for the pathology deficient for the Mecp2 gene. We polymorphism . Low Phe diet usually used to treat PKU children can’t performed experiments on wild-type and Mecp2-deficient mice to insure amino acid balance, being not so efficient. understand the role of the Mecp2 gene in respiration and bioaminergic Method: 28 children with classical PKU were investigated for: systems. We showed that adult mice deficient for the Mecp2 gene have erratic breathing with highly variable respiratory rhythm and frequent 1 . the level of amino acids in blood and urine through apneas, reduced norepinephrine content and a drastic reduction liquid chromatography based on amino acid ana- of tyrosine-hydroxylase expressing neurons in the medulla . We are lyzer Novo AAA339, Czech origin . currently investigating the stimulation of noradrenergic metabolism in the same animal model using specific noradrenaline reuptake 2 . biochemical examination of blood and urine (espe- inhibitors . Preliminary results show that we can improve both the cially Copper, Zinc, ceruloplasmin) . respiratory rhythm of the mutant animals and increase significantly Based on the investigation results, these children received individual their lifespan . These results open new perspectives for the treatment Low Phe diet and metabolical correction treatment, including drugs of the respiratory phenotype of Rett syndrome children . directly influencing the amino acids metabolism. Results: of the investigations: disbalance in the transformation of Phe P1295. siRNA induced inhibition of MRP1 expression and into Tyrozin; Phenylalaninuria; troubles in the metabolism of Methionine, reversal of resistance in human promyelocytic cell line Tryptophan, Histidine, Copper; functional troubles of the ornithine and M. Golalipour; Kori cycles . The application of drug metabolical correction, along with NIGEB, Teheran, Islamic Republic of Iran. a Low Phe diet by indicating the smallest quantity of protein led to Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a complex phenomenon in which many improvement of children’s intellectual development . The IQ of PKU different genes regulating drug transport, cellular repair, detoxification children who started such treatment from birth was > 85% . and drug metabolism will activate . Nevertheless, in most drug resistant Conclusions: PKU is a pathology of the whole metabolism and not a cell lines and cancer patients, up-regulation of ABC-transporter genes deregulation of one amino acid- Phenylalanine . The drug metabolical such as multidrug associated protein gene (MRP1) could be at the correction and Low Phe diet are prescribed individually according to basis of the resistance phenotype . We aimed to decrease the MRP1 the results of the examination of free amino acids in blood and urine . expression at mRNA level to modulate drug resistance phenotype The screening test determines the fluctuation only of Phe in blood and in resistant HL-60 cell line . So we designed a small interfering RNA can’t be used in the individualized approach of the PKU treatment . (siRNA) molecule against MRP1 and used in HL-60 cell line in 0 to 72 hours time range . siRNA P1293. the Pompe Registry: centralized data collection to could specifically inhibit gene expression at 40 to 44 hours up to 90% outline the natural course of Pompe disease. at the mRNA level when MRP1 mRNA quantified by real time RT-PCR.. A. Tylki-Szymańska; siRNA treated cells demonstrated four-fold reduction of methotrexate Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. compared with untreated cells . The data indicate that this approach Background: Pompe disease is a rare, progressive, and fatal may be applicable to cancer patients to reverse resistant tumors with a muscular disease. The underlying pathology is a deficiency of acid MRP1 dependent MDR phenotype back to a drug-sensitive one . alpha-glucosidase (GAA) that hydrolyzes lysosomal glycogen . Pompe EMPAG Plenary Lecures  EmPAG Plenary Lecures A cluster randomised controlled trial of 55 General Practitioners (GPs) was conducted to explore whether a decision aid, when compared to EPL01. informed decision making in the context of prenatal a pamphlet, assists women’s prenatal testing decision making . GPs screening were randomised to one of two arms: providing women with a decision M. van den Berg, D. R. M. Timmermans; aid or a pamphlet . Primary outcomes, informed choice and decisional VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. conflict, were measured at 14 weeks gestation using questionnaire This study aimed to construct a measure of informed decision making data . that includes knowledge, deliberation, and value-consistency, and to Both arm of the trial had a response rate of 77% (N= 337) . Women assess the level of informed decision making about prenatal screening, had a mean age of 31 years, 37% were primigravid and 87% born and differences between test acceptors and test decliners . in Australia . 68% had a ‘good’ level of knowledge in the decision aid Women attending one of 44 midwifery and gynaecology practices group compared to 48% in the pamphlet group (Adjusted OR 2 .38 were asked to fill out postal questionnaires before and after the 95% CI 1 .23 to 4 .58) . The odds of women making an informed choice prenatal screening offer . The principal outcome was the level of was almost twice as large in the decision aid group compared to the informed decision making . For this purpose, knowledge about prenatal pamphlet group and after adjusting for confounders this approached screening, deliberation about the pros and cons of the alternatives, statistical significance (95% CI 0.99 to 3.71, p = 0.06). Mean decisional test uptake, and attitude towards having a prenatal screening test were conflict scores were very low in both groups (decision aid 1.70; measured . pamphlet 1.64): not a statistically significant difference. There were no 84% of the participants were sufficiently knowledgeable about prenatal significant differences in measures of depression, anxiety or attitudes screening, 75% of the decisions were deliberate, and 82% were value- to the pregnancy/fetus . consistent . 51% of the participants made an informed decision . Test Use of a tailored made information resource can produce an acceptors made less informed decisions as compared to test decliners . improvement in women’s knowledge about the complexities of prenatal This difference was mainly caused by the lower rate of deliberation in genetic testing . This resource can potentially play an important role in this group . improving women’s informed decision making . It appears from this study that prenatal screening decisions are often not informed decisions . This is inconsistent with the main objective EPL04. Psychological consequences of receiving a positive of offering screening, which is to enable people to make informed screening outcome decisions . Decision makers should be encouraged during the J. H. Kleinveld, D. R. M. Timmermans, M. van den Berg, J. Visscher, L. P. ten counselling to deliberate about the various alternatives . Kate; VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. EPL02. Decision-making for invasive prenatal testing: the role of The aim of this study was to gain more insight into how women look ambivalence back upon their pregnancy when they had received a (false) positive B. B. Biesecker1, T. Marteau2; screening outcome and how they feel about having been offered a 1National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, prenatal screening test . In the Netherlands it was not allowed to offer 2Kings College, London, United Kingdom. prenatal screening tests, a special license was obtained to perform A central goal of prenatal genetic counseling is for clients to make this study . optimal decisions about invasive testing . An optimal decision can Data were used of women who received a false-positive screening be operationalized as an informed choice; understanding relevant result in the context of a larger study in which women were offered information, choosing a course of action consistent with one’s a prenatal screening test and filled in several questionnaires during attitudes, and resulting in minimal decisional conflict or regret. Dual and after pregnancy . At random, 13 of the 25 women who received a processing theories offer a robust framework for studies into prenatal positive screening outcome, were selected to be interviewed, a year testing decision-making by addressing two types of information after delivery . Data of both questionnaires and interviews were used . processing, rational and experiential . Experiential processing has Before they had the screening test done, hardly any of the women had been largely ignored in studies of prenatal decision-making . We thought about what they would do when the screening outcome would hypothesize that since decisions about prenatal testing involve new be bad . They all assumed that the outcome would be that the child and unfamiliar choices with significant potential gains and losses, was fine. In the period between receiving the increased test result and experiential processing may explain a greater degree of the variance the negative diagnostic test outcome, women took more distance from in predictors of decisions . Attitudes toward testing have been shown their pregnancies . After they received the negative (good) diagnostic to be strong predictors of decisions. When attitudes are in conflict, test outcome, most women were relieved . However, in some women ambivalence toward prenatal testing exists and unveils an opportunity doubts remained, because they still attached meaning to the outcome for interventions aimed at prioritizing conflicting values or beliefs. We of the screening test which had shown something was wrong . demonstrate ambivalence in a qualitative study of 36 women facing Despite the negative experience, most women were positive about the decisions about prenatal testing . Quantitative data from a larger cohort fact that they had been offered a prenatal screening test . of women ascertained from five US clinics also reveals ambivalence. Given the prevalence of ambivalence felt by women facing prenatal EPL05. Confidentiality versus duty to inform - An empirical study decisions, interventions aimed at engaging experiential processing on attitudes towards the handling of genetic information. can be tested for their promise in making optimal decisions . K. Wolff1,2, K. Nordin3,2, W. Brun1,2, G. Berglund3,2, G. Kvale4,2; 1Department of Psychosocial sciences, Bergen, Norway, 2The Bergen Psycho- EPL03. Does a decision aid for prenatal testing of fetal social FUGE-project, Bergen, Norway, 3Department of Public Health and Car- abnormalities improve women’s informed decision-making? ing Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Department of Clinical Psychology, Bergen, Results from a cluster randomised trial Norway. C. Nagle1,2, S. Lewis1, J. Gunn2, R. Bell3, B. Meiser4, S. Metcalfe1,5, O. C. Ukou- To our knowledge there are heretofore no empirical studies looking at munne6,5, J. Halliday1,5; whether potential relatives want to be informed about the existence of 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department of hereditary conditions within their family, and under which conditions General Practice, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Women’s they want healthcare providers to breach confidentiality in order to Health Program, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Monash Univer- be informed . The purpose of the following study was to investigate sity, Melbourne, Australia, 4Department of Psychiatry, The University of New attitudes towards these issues among the general public . It was South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 5Department of Paediatrics, University of Mel- hypothesized that willingness to be informed would be influenced by bourne, Melbourne, Australia, 6Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Royal characteristics of the disease and the individual . Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia. Three survey studies where undertaken in Norway and Sweden . Women’s informed prenatal testing decision making has never been Surveys were administered to a Norwegian random sample (N=2400) more important with the development and increasing utilisation of first to a Swedish random sample (N=1200), and to a Norwegian student trimester tests . sample (n=607) . Participants were asked to imagine that they had a EMPAG Plenary Lecures  relative with an unspecified hereditary disease. Eight different disease biological child is now more transparent; framed by legal processes, scenarios were constructed, systematically varying three disease rights and guidelines . This encourages more open communication characteristics: fatality, penetrance and availability of treatment . within the family and with the outside world . Contraception and the Individual characteristics were measured by the following scales: availability of social abortion have made hidden pregnancies less General-Self-efficacy, Attitude-toward-Uncertainty, Penn-State-Worry- common . However egg donation raises differing issues for families Questionnaire . at risk of genetic conditions . Recent changes in the law in the UK, Results show that a majority of participants wishes to be informed allow children born using eggs donated after April 2005 to trace their about the existence of a hereditary disease within their family . biological mother when they reach 18 years . As geneticists and genetic Significantly more participants want to be informed for treatable counsellors we need to be mindful that for some families the taking of compared to non-treatable diseases . Neither fatality nor penetrance a family history and the offering of genetic testing may have far wider did by themselves influence wishes to be informed. However the implications than was predicted . number of participants accepting breaches of confidentiality is greatest for the disease that is treatable, highly penetrant, and fatal . Regarding EPL08. An exploration of the attitudes and educational needs of individual characteristics results show that wishes to be informed and people considering cystic fibrosis carrier screening in Victoria, acceptance of breaches of confidentiality are predicted by uncertainty Australia. avoidance and age, but not by self-efficacy or worry. M. Aitken1,2, M. B. Delatycki1,2, V. R. Collins1,2, B. J. Dawson1,2; 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2University of Mel- EPL06. Open family communication is positively associated with bourne, Melbourne, Australia. the well-being of individuals opting for genetic susceptibility 20 children are born with cystic fibrosis each year in Victoria. In most testing for BRcA1/2 or HNPcc cases there is no family history of CF, hence the importance of a CF I. Van Oostrom1, H. Meijers-Heijboer1, H. J. Duivenvoorden1, A. H. J. T. Brock- carrier screening program . Evidence from national and international er-Vriends2, C. J. van Asperen2, R. H. Sijmons3, C. Seynaeve1, A. R. Van Gool1, groups demonstrates that both providers and consumers have positive J. G. M. Klijn1, A. Tibben2; attitudes regarding genetic carrier screening for cystic fibrosis. 1Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Nether- This study explores the attitudes of stakeholders to a cystic fibrosis lands, 2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3University genetic carrier screening program in Victoria, Australia . Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Nether- Non-random, purposive sampling was used to recruit participants lands. for focus groups of key stakeholders: preconception individuals, Objective of the study was to evaluate family communication, family pregnant women, health professionals and cystic fibrosis experts. The functioning, differentiation to parents and support from relatives as discussions were audio taped and transcribed and thematic analysis predictors of psychological distress and adverse consequences for was facilitated by the qualitative data management software, “nVivo” . family relationships in individuals undergoing genetic testing for a Participants expressed mixed attitudes towards genetic carrier cancer susceptibility . screening for cystic fibrosis. Consumers’ attitudes were influenced by The family system characteristics were assessed in 271 applicants for an awareness of family history, the opinions of health professionals and genetic testing of a known familial mutation in BRCA1/2 or a HNPCC their partners and, their own values and beliefs . Providers’ attitudes related gene before genetic test result disclosure . Hereditary cancer were influenced by time constraints in practice and concerns for the distress and worry were assessed before, one week after, and six psychosocial outcomes of patients . months after result disclosure . The prevalence and nature of adverse Participants discussed the different settings in which screening may be consequences on family relationships were assessed six months offered and were most strongly in support of preconception screening after result disclosure . Regression analysis procedure backward however, the practical barriers to offering screening at this time were elimination was used to identify the predictive qualities of family system recognised . Participants proposed that screening be offered when characteristics . people are “ready” to be screened, ie offering screening at different Hereditary cancer distress over the study period was associated with life stages . inhibited communication about hereditary cancer in the nuclear family Whilst attitudes to a genetic carrier screening program for CF are and the family of origin . A minority reported unwanted changes in family mixed, community interest is growing . Consultation with stakeholders relationships (19%), problematic situations in the family (13%) or family is vital to inform the development and implementation of successful conflicts (4%). Adverse effects consisted of feelings of guilt towards genetic carrier screening programs . children and carrier siblings, imposed secrecy and communication problems . Predictors of adverse consequences on family relationships EPL09. comparison of the psychosocial support offered to were inhibited communication about hereditary cancer with relatives, breast cancer patients and healthy family members. and disengaged-rigid or enmeshed-chaotic nuclear family functioning . H. G. Van Spijker, T. Brouwer; Our data support the need to stimulate open family communication Dept. of Medical Genetics, UMC Utrecht, The Netherlands. in genetic counseling, because absence of open communication is Psychosocial support for genetic testing in the Netherlands is offered associated with genetic testing related distress and familial adverse by social workers in medical genetics departments in the university effects . hospitals . Initially, this support in relation to DNA testing in hereditary breast cancer focused on healthy family members at risk, but it soon EPL07. Non-maternity: issues for the family and the genetic became clear that breast cancer patients are also a vulnerable group . counsellor They, too, are confronted with the consequences of the genetic V. Wiles; diagnosis: knowing the risks of a second breast cancer, of ovarian Department of Clinical Genetics, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Founda- cancer and for their children and close relatives . It is now recognised tion Trust., Cambridge, United Kingdom. that a diagnosis of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) has Non-maternity is a rare occurrence in clinical genetics, compared to the many consequences, for both patients and healthy family members . not uncommon experience of non-paternity. Most people are confident We present an overview of the need for professional psychosocial about who their mother is or isn’t, but for women, concealing the true support in HBOC patients and healthy family members . We collected biological maternity of the child they raise, is fraught with pitfalls . data from 125 counselees (40 breast cancer patients and 85 applicants Three cases of reported non-maternity are explored and the complex for predictive testing) on their need for professional psychosocial issues raised examined . In one family the ‘child’ had lived their life support, the treatment plans and the types of interventions we under the mistaken belief that the woman who brought them up was used . We compared data from the literature with the results from their birth mother . Subsequent genetic investigations led to a disclosure this study . Emotional support in coming to terms with the diagnosis, of the truth by the ‘mother’ with traumatic results for the family .In other decision counselling, and coaching in family communication are families the truth is known within the family and not disclosed to those the most frequent types of help, while task-centred therapy, family- outside unless there is a need to do so . focused interventions and psycho-education are examples of common Adoption laws have changed and the process of legally raising another’s interventions .EMPAG Plenary Lecures 6 The results show that the distinction between predictive and diagnostic obtain health information . testing is artificial and is not an indicator of the individual’s need for In those with access to Internet, health related Internet use decreased professional support . However, there are similarities and differences with age but increased with the educational level, among those with in the issues presented by counselees and the interventions offered a health-related occupation and among those with a low probability by the social worker . (<25%) of a BRCA1/2 mutation being identified (table) . The opinions about the visited websites were positive (24%), negative EPL10. interdisciplinary genetic counselling for families at risk (32%) or both (11%); 33% had no specific opinion. Patients reported of HNPcc: impact on psychosocial outcome in affected and difficulty to understand detailed medical website information and would unaffected participants have preferred to be given a specific address to consult. C. Schroeter1, R. Jost1, H. Sattel1, C. Jung2, M. Tariverdian3, M. Kloor4, M. DiscUssiON Health-related use of Internet by French cancer patients Keller1; seems to be one of the lowest reported so far in cancer patients . 1Divison of Psychooncology, Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, Univer- Almost 1 out of every 3 women were dissatisfied of this source of sity Hospital Heidelberg, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University information . Hospital Heidelberg, Germany, 3Department of Surgery, University Hospital Predictors of health-related Internet use in women with access to Internet Heidelberg, Germany, 4Divison of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Pathology, (N=272) University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany. Health-related internet use among Purpose: Genetic counselling and testing is offered to families with those with access suspected Hereditary Non-polyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC) Yes (n=136) No (n=135) since 1999, funded by the German cancer AID . In this study, the impact of a comprehensive counselling protocol is explored, with regard to chi² test P adjusted 95% n (%) n (%) Odds Confidence counsellees’ psychological distress, beliefs specific to HNPCC and Value Ratio* interval family communication . Since little information is available about affected cancer patients’ psychosocial status with regard to HNPCC, Age <0 .001 the response to genetic counselling of affected and unaffected > 60 4 (19) 17 (81) 1 participants is compared . 41-60 85 (47) 95 (53) 3.9 1 .2 12 .8 methods: Multidisciplinary counselling consists of three consecutive <=40 47 (67) 23 (33) 7.8 2 .2 27 .8 sessions, provided by a geneticist, a visceral surgeon and a Education <0 .001 psychotherapist . Risk assessment based on clinical criteria Lower or equal to (i .e .Amsterdam/Bethesda) is conveyed to participants . Distress and 48 (46) 56 (54) 1 high school beliefs specific to HNPCC were assessed using standardised as well as investigator-derived measures, completed before and 8 weeks after College (1-3 years) 33 (38) 54 (62) 0 .7 0 .3 1 .2 counselling. The final sample size comprises 379 participants (141 affected, 238 unaffected) . College (>=4 years) 54 (69) 24 (31) 2.1 1 .1 4 .1 Results: After counselling, a significant reduction in general anxiety Health-related (HADS) and distress specific to HNPCC (IES, DHD) was demonstrated, 0 .002 occupation in both affected and unaffected subjects . Distress declined regardless No 97 (46) 116 (54) 1 of what clinical risk they were assigned . Their perceptions of cancer- related threat declined while confidence in effective surveillance Yes 37 (70) 16 (30) 3.0 1 .5 6 .0 increased . Enhanced family communication with regard to HNPCC Probability of a was reported by one third of the counsellees . Affected patients’ distress BRcA1/2 mutation 0 .027 exceeded that of unaffected subjects at both time points . being identified conclusion: The results are suggestive of a beneficial effect of >=25% 65 (44) 82 (56) 1 comprehensive genetic counselling, even when high risk information is conveyed . Clinically relevant distress in a substantial minority of <25% 71 (58) 52 (42) 2.2 1 .3 3 .8 affected patients is indicating the need for appropriate counselling . * Logistic regression analysis predicting health-related Internet use EPL11. internet use among cancer patients attending breast EPL12. Evaluation of clinical genetics services - a qualitative cancer genetic clinics study identifying outcome measures J. Mancini1,2, C. Noguès3, C. Adenis4, P. Berthet5, V. Bonadona6, A. Chom- M. McAllister1,2, K. Payne1, S. Nicholls1, R. Macleod3, H. Middleton-Price1, D. pret7, I. Coupier8, F. Eisinger9,10, J. Fricker11, M. Gauthier-Villars8, C. Lasset12, Donnai3, L. Davies4; A. Lortholary13, T. N’Guyen14, P. Vennin4, H. Sobol9,10, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet8, C. 1Nowgen (North West Genetics Knowledge Park), Manchester, United King- Julian-Reynier1; dom, 2Clinical Genetics, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 1Inserm, UMR379, Marseille, France, 2Méditerranée University, Marseille, 3Academic Unit of Medical Genetics, University of Manchester, St Mary’s Hos- France, 3René Huguenin Centre, Saint-Cloud, France, 4Oscar Lambret Centre, pital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Health Economics Research, University of Lille, France, 5François Baclesse Centre, Caen, France, 6Léon Bérard Center, Manchester, United Kingdom. Lyon, France, 7Gustave Roussy Institute, Villejuif, France, 8Curie Institute, Pa- Outcome measurement in clinical genetics has been a long-standing ris, France, 9Inserm, UMR599, Marseille, France, 10Paoli-Calmettes Institute, challenge . To date, much research investigating outcomes has focussed Marseille, France, 11Paul Strauss Centre, Strasbourg, France, 12Léon Bérard on the benefits of genetic counselling. The outcome attributes used Centre, Lyon, France, 13Paul Papin Centre, Angers, France, 14Jean Godinot were commonly developed by providers of the service or adapted from Institute, Reims, France. measures used in other areas of healthcare . However, unlike other iNtRODUctiON The rates of Health-related Internet use by cancer areas of medicine the ‘patients’ in clinical genetics are usually healthy; patients vary between 8% and 50% in the literature . often no specific pharmacological or surgical treatment is offered. There Objective: To present baseline data on the access to Internet by French is an argument that services should be evaluated on the basis of how breast cancer patients attending at genetic clinics and to examine well they alleviate the effects of disease, from a patient perspective . factors affecting these patients’ rates of Internet health-related use . The first step, therefore, is to identify what those effects are. This mEtHODs This multi-centre (N=11) survey included affected women presentation will describe findings from focus groups and interviews attending at breast cancer genetic clinics and who were offered conducted with clinicians, patients and patient representatives . The BRCA1/2 genetic testing . Self-administered questionnaires collected approach differs from previous outcome research in clinical genetics, sociodemographic details and information about Internet access and by using combined methods to identify firstly what the effects of genetic use . diseases on individuals and families are, and then to assess what REsULts Among the 560 respondents (response rate=87%), 272 genetics services can do to modify these effects . A series of social and (48 .6%) had access to Internet and 136 (24 .3%) consulted Internet to emotional effects of genetics diseases were identified, and these will be described along with interventions identified that can help alleviate EMPAG Plenary Lecures  some of these effects . The presentation will include some discussion EPL15. Do clinical characteristics affect the impact of an of how and why findings differed between focus groups and individual uninformative DNA-test result? course of worry and distress of interviews. The “outcome attributes” identified in this research will be test applicants for breast cancer. used in the evaluation of existing outcome measures used in clinical S. van Dijk1, D. R. M. Timmermans2, H. Meijers-Heijboer3, A. Tibben4, C. J. van genetics, and may be used in the longer term to develop robust Asperen4, W. Otten5; measures of outcome for clinical genetics services . 1Leiden University Medical Center, Dpt. Medical Decision-Making, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Free University, Dpt. Social Medicine, Amsterdam, The Nether- EPL13. A ten year follow-up study of predictive testing for breast lands, 3Erasmus Medical Center, Dpt. Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, The Neth- / ovarian cancer in two generations of five large BRCA1-linked erlands, 4Leiden University Medical Centre, Dpt. Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The families Netherlands, 5Leiden University Medical Centre, Dpt. Medical Decision-Making, G. Evans1, A. Binchy1, A. Shenton1, C. Eng2, C. Benjamin3, P. Hendy-Ibbs4, P. Leiden, The Netherlands. Hopwood5, B. A. J. Ponder6, D. Craufurd1; introduction A DNA-mutation test result for breast cancer is usually 1Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetic Service, Manches- uninformative given that there has been no mutation detected within ter, United Kingdom, 2Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, family members previously . However, few data are available on the OH, United States, 3Royal Liverpool Children’s Hospital, Liverpool, United King- psychological impact of this common type of result . Moreover, the dom, 4Ormskirk District General Hospital, Ormskirk, United Kingdom, 5Christie clinical heterogeneity within this group has not yet been considered . Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6University of Cambridge, Cambridge, The current study provides prospective data about the course of cancer- United Kingdom. specific worry and distress for different groups of test applicants. We report the uptake and long-term outcomes of offering BRCA1 pre- methods All DNA-test applicants (n=238) completed three symptomatic genetic testing to 100 individuals in 2 generations of 5 questionnaires: before, and respectively one and seven months after large BRCA1 families for the first time. Initial testing was offered with disclosure of a DNA-mutation test . With repeated measures analysis linkage and then subsequently with mutation analysis . Uptake was of variance, differences were assessed between BRCA1/2-positive significantly higher in the first generation, who were directly offered women (n=42), BRCA1/2 true-negative women (n=43), and women testing, and much higher in females; 31/42 (74%) of unaffected with an uninformative result (n=153) . women in the first generation proceeded to testing compared to 13/31 Results On group level women with an uninformative result seemed (42%) of men . This decreased to 7/16 (44%) of women in the second to be reassured after disclosure (P< .001), but to a lesser extent than generation and (0/11) males (p=0 .0004) . GHQ scores decreased in those women who received a true-negative result . However, not all the year following the mutation result in all groups, but mean scores women with an uninformative result reacted similarly: Higher levels rose at the 10-year point, although this did not appear to be associated of worry and distress could be explained by relatively straightforward with cancer worry . All responders (76%) to a 10 year questionnaire clinical variables, namely a personal history of cancer (P< .001) and indicated that they were pleased they had undertaken the predictive a higher pedigree-based risk (P< .005) . Furthermore, these clinical test, and all but 2 were highly satisfied or satisfied with the whole variables determined whether these women were either comparable process. Benefits of testing were reported by both mutation carriers to women who received a true-negative result or to BRCA mutation and non-carriers . These results suggest that long-term outcomes of carriers . offering genetic testing are very acceptable . conclusion Women with an inconclusive result form a heterogeneous group of test applicants . The subpopulation of those with both a personal EPL14. cognitive and Behavioural adjustments two years after history of cancer and a relatively high pedigree-based risk expressed an inconclusive genetic test result in a cohort of HBOc affected the highest levels of worry seven months after DNA testing . women C. Cypowyj1,2, F. Eisinger3,4, M. Morin1,2, H. Sobol3,5, C. Julian-Reynier1; EPL16. the impact of predictive genetic testing for hereditary 1Epidemiology and Social Sciences Unit (INSERMU379), 13006 Marseille, nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPcc) - three years after France, 2Psycho-social Laboratory (LPS), Aix-Marseille 1 University, 13260 Aix- testing en-Provence, France, 3UMR 599, Paoli-Calmettes Institute, 13006 Marseille, V. Collins1, B. Meiser2, C. Gaff3,4, O. Ukoumunne5, J. St John4,6, J. Halliday1; France, 4Oncogenetic Department, Paoli-calmettes Institute, 13006 Marseille, 1Public Health Genetics, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, France, 5Oncogenetic Department, Paoli-Calmettes Institute, 13006 Marseille, Australia, 2Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 3Genetic Health Ser- France. vices Victoria, Melbourne, Australia, 4Familial Cancer Centre, Royal Melbourne Little is known about how women who receive an inconclusive result Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 5Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics Unit, from BRCA1/2 testing interpret their result . No long term prospective Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 6National Cancer study is available on cognitive and behavioral adjustment they develop Control Initiative, Melbourne, Australia. to cope with this uncertainty . This Australian longitudinal multi-centre study assessed the impact of Our objective was to explore affected women’s cognitive and behavioral predictive genetic testing for HNPCC on psychological wellbeing and adjustments to an inconclusive BRCA1/2 test result and to what extent preventive behaviours . Questionnaires were sent prior to (baseline), these adjustments were linked . and two weeks, four months, one and three years after receiving This study was carried out on 83 women with personal and familial genetic test results . Psychological measures were included at each breast/ovarian history of cancer, who received inconclusive result to time and preventive behaviours assessed at baseline, one and three genetic testing two years before . Self-administered questionnaires years . were prospectively collected . Here we present a qualitative analysis of At three years, 19 carriers and 54 non-carriers (n=73) responded open written commentaries obtained on risk perception and diffusion - 64% of baseline . Of non-responders, 2 had died and 5 developed of information and when relevant, of corresponding closed questions . cancer. Non-responders had significantly higher mean cancer-specific 61 .4% women made commentaries on genetic predisposition . There distress than responders at baseline but mean depression and general did not differ for socio-demographic characteristics from those who did anxiety scores were not significantly different. Similar proportions of not . We observed three types of reactions to inconclusive result : 11 each group were carriers . women coped with the uncertainty of the result , 9 women turned out Mean depression and generalised anxiety scores did not differ between the meaning of the “negative result” into a certainty and considered they carriers and non-carriers, and at 3-years, were similar to baseline . were not at a higher risk anymore, last group (6 women), continued to Adjusting for age, gender and baseline score (ANCOVA), carriers be convinced to be at-risk, given the personal history of cancer . In had higher mean cancer-specific distress scores than non-carriers at every group, behaviours they declared to adopt towards diffusion of one-year (p=0 .021) and three-years (p=0 .088) . Carriers showed an information to family and preventive strategies will be presented . increase in mean score of cancer-specific distress at 2-weeks with a Our findings show the precautions that practitioner must take to ensure decrease by 4- and 12-months and a slight increase again at 3-years that women with inconclusive results understand that their family (not significant). Non-carriers showed a sustained decrease after remains, most of the time, at a high risk of developing breast/ovarian testing . cancer . All carriers and 7% of non-carriers had colonoscopy and 69% of 13 EMPAG Plenary Lecures  female carriers had gynaecological screening in the previous two EPL19. Reproductive decision-making in women with marfan years . Prophylactic surgery was rare . syndrome This is the first report of long-term data after predictive testing, on T. Clancy1, L. Ormondroyd1,2; carriers and non-carriers of HNPCC mutations . These results indicate 1Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, Manches- appropriate screening, improved psychological measures for non- ter, United Kingdom, 2Psychology Research Group, The Institute of Cancer carriers and no evidence of undue psychological distress in carriers . Research, Sutton, United Kingdom. Marfan syndrome is a dominantly inherited connective tissue EPL17. Reproductive decisions in asymptomatic carriers of the disorder . The cardiovascular, musculoskeletal and ocular systems are Huntington-mutation. commonly affected . In pregnancy, women with Marfan syndrome face M. Decruyenaere1, G. Evers-Kiebooms1, A. Boogaerts1, K. Philippe1, K. Demyt- an increased risk of cardiac complications - such as aortic dilation/ tenaere2, J. P. Fryns1; dissection - in addition to the 50% chance of having an affected 1Center Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Psychiatry, Univer- child . Semi-structured interviews were used to explore the process of sity Hospital, Leuven, Belgium. reproductive decision-making in seven women with a clinical diagnosis When genetic testing became available for HD, new possibilities of Marfan syndrome . The women tended to minimise the impact of regarding reproduction emerged for couples having an increased risk the condition on themselves; even so, their perceptions of the severity of HD in the fetus . The aim of this study is to describe reproductive of Marfan syndrome were influenced by family members’ experiences decision making in asymptomatic carriers of the HD-mutation . which contributed to a belief that the condition would worsen over time . Methods: Psychological counselling has been systematically offered at Having Marfan syndrome had not stopped any of the women having 1 week, 1 month, 1 year and 5 years after predictive testing . Moreover, children, although in most cases conception of the first child had either several tested persons had additional follow-up sessions . During all been unplanned or had occurred when the women were in a state of follow-up sessions, data on reproductive decisions were collected by denial or avoidance of the condition. The birth of their first child led to means of (clinical) interviews . The follow-up period in this study was women moving from a state of denial or avoidance of the condition 1 to 16 years . to one of taking control, by becoming informed and participating in Results: In the period 1987-2004, 245 individuals received a test medical surveillance. A number of factors were influential when the result in Leuven . Eighty-nine of them were carriers and 7 received an women were considering whether to have further children: their concern equivocal result . For 46 carriers and 2 persons with an equivocal result, about their future health, mortality and morbidity; their feelings about reproductive decisions was one of the motives for predictive testing . passing on Marfan syndrome to their children; their current health; During the follow-up period in this study, nearly half of the carriers had and, the concerns and/or opinions of other family members . Many of children born after either prenatal diagnosis (PD), either preimplantation the women believed that having Marfan syndrome had or would limit genetic diagnosis (PGD) . About 1 in 3 carriers had decided to have no the size of their family . own children after the test . Further details on reproductive decisions will be presented . We also present some qualitative data on perceived EPL20. targeted testing in prenatal diagnosis: the best way to advantages and disadvantages of predictive testing, PD and PGD; deal with problematic findings? decision conflicts; moral pressure; technological imperative, … . M. C. B. Zwieten, van1, D. L. Willems1, N. J. Leschot2; The results show that reproductive decision making is a complex 1Academic Medical Center, dept. General Practice, Amsterdam, The Nether- process with rational and emotional aspects, as well as irrational and lands, 2Academic Medical Center, dept. Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, The unconscious elements . Implications for psychological counselling will Netherlands. also be formulated . Besides being a rapid way of prenatal testing, targeted testing also provides the option to exclude testing results which are considered EPL18. the experiences of men and their partners during too problematic to counsel . To assess if this new method of testing is pregnancies at genetic risk the obvious way to deal with problematic findings, these findings were K. Roberts1,2, L. Kerzin-Storrar1, C. Wright1, D. Craufurd1, D. Donnai1; systematically examined . 1Regional Genetics Service and Academic Unit of Medical Genetics, University Providers from several disciplines were asked, individually and in focus of Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Clincial Genetics, Nottingham City Hospital, group discussion, about their experiences with various testing results Nottingham, United Kingdom. in general, and problematic results in particular . Clients were asked Men rarely feature in literature on genetic risk and its impact during about their expectations and experiences regarding the same matter . pregnancy . Drawing on data from a prospective study of 49 pregnancies Providers’ and clients’ experiences were compared and analysed to at high genetic risk, we present qualitative data from 10 individuals (5 search for themes related to problematic testing results . women and their 5 male partners) whose pregnancy was at risk from a Problematic results arise because providers, wishing to avoid known parental translocation . underreporting, also report results of mild or unknown clinical Prospective data was collected at 3 points: by interview soon after significance. In a context where only two choices, i.e. continuing or a pregnancy was confirmed, 6 months later by questionnaire and by terminating the pregnancy, are available, these results may lead to interview after a further 6 months . big dilemmas . Because in the end, the decision about pregnancy is This unique data set allowed the impact of genetic risk and testing considered the clients’ responsibility, clients are more troubled by during pregnancy to be examined from gender and time perspectives . problematic results than providers . Interviews were taped and transcribed, and analyzed using qualitative The burden for clients would be diminished in a targeted testing techniques . scenario where providers decide which problematic results would be Key themes identified include timing of emotional attachment to excluded, more than in a scenario where clients would decide about this . pregnancies, guilt and blame, and pregnancy related support . For From the perspective of a fair distribution of responsibilities between example, attachment developed later for the men than the women, providers and clients, targeted testing would be the obvious way to with some men reporting attachment only after a child was born . deal with problematic findings in prenatal diagnosis. Consequently, the Draper’s concepts of ‘biological exclusion’ and ‘blurred boundaries’ providers would need to answer the morally laden question of which inform our discussion of this . Issues of guilt and blame were raised testing results should be excluded from prenatal diagnosis . independently by the three male carriers of a translocation, but not by the two men whose partner was the carrier . While some men illustrated their own need for support, all adhered to normative roles of the ‘provider of support’ during a pregnancy. These findings from a small sample cannot be generalized, but they add insight into the impact of pregnancies at genetic risk on men and their partners, and give support to the need for further research in this area .EMPAG Plenary Lecures  EPL21. Presymptomatic testing in myotonic Dystrophy type EPL23. Emotional experiences and representations associated i and Facioscapulohumeral muscular Dystrophy : 6-year with the psychological development of pre-symptomatic experience individuals with Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy, type i (FAP C. Colas1, P. Laforêt2, B. Eymard2, M. Gargiulo2, J. Feingold1, M. Babonneau1, AttRV30m) - Portuguese, Andrade M. Jeanpierre3, H. Radvanyi4, D. Héron1; M. Branco1,2, A. Leite1, S. Lêdo1, J. Sequeiros1,3, M. Fleming1,3; 1Département de Génétique, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Institut 1IBMC - CGPP, Porto, Portugal, 2HGSA, EPE, Porto, Portugal, 3Instituto Ciên- de Myologie, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Service de Biochimie et cias Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Porto, Portugal. Génétique, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 4Service de Biochimie et Génétique, Individuals who live in a psychological environment threatened by Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France. the disease/loss/death of a parent organize their reactions to psychic We report a 6-year experience of presymptomatic testing in 131 suffering and emotional expression, according to their life experiences candidates for Myotonic Dystrophy type I (DM1) and 50 candidates during childhood . Our aim was to understand the experiences and for Facio-Scapulo-Humeral muscular dystrophy (FSH) with a protocol representations associated with some aspects of psychological characterized by multistep procedure in a multidisciplinary team . We development of individuals who come for presymptomatic testing of compare characteristics and outcomes of theses subjects with previous FAP-ATTRV30M . reported data about Huntington’s disease and autosomal dominant We interviewed 91 individuals at risk (44 men, 47 women), aged cerebellar ataxias. This is the first detailed report and the largest series 18-66yrs (mean 29) . Items analysed included: own evaluation of reported concerning candidates for presymptomatic testing in DM1 childhood and memories, diseases, dreams and graphic expression; and FSH, whatever their attitude towards the testing procedure . psychomotor development; breast-feeding; separations/changes, The characteristics of applicants were similar in DM1 and FSH, revealing relationships . a predominance of women, a high rate of favorable results (64% for DM1 Most (76%) claimed to have had “normal/good” childhoods; few (11%) and 62% for FSH), and family planning as the most frequent reason for recalled “bad/difficult” memories of that period; 57% referred family seeking presymptomatic testing (31% for DM1 and 28% for FSH) . For (mostly parents) when mentioning childhood memories . Moreover, FSH, we observed a low rate of completing the presymptomatic testing they also mentioned the disease/death of a parent; 24% described program (58%) . For DM1, the rate of completing the presymptomatic symptoms of somatic expression during childhood . The majority testing program was higher than in others previously studied diseases did not remember their dreams (55% for past, 52% for present (87%) . Despite equivalent socioeconomic characteristic DM1 cannot dreams), or remembered only dreams with a threatening content; be compared to others diseases in term of comportment face to the 76% acknowledged having been breast-fed; almost all initiated a presymptomatic testing protocol . Problems of congenital form, cardiac stable relationship in late adolescence, and usually got married quite risk and anticipation lead to a feeling of emergency and an incentive to soon (98% had a stable relationship, 64% referred having had few do PT with familial and medical pressure over at risk subjects . These relationships) . observations enhance the importance of counselling in multistep and FAP possibly leads these families to develop strong cohesion multidisciplinary teams to clarify stakes and motivations for each mechanisms that give them the perception of proximity/support/ subject and to anticipate consequences of an unfavourable result . safety, which generates the idea of a “good/normal” childhood . They do not explicitly express psychological suffering . Repression of oniric EPL22. Genetic testing for familial cardiovascular conditions expression and a tendency to somatize suggest a blockade of symbolic in minors; their perception of the implications of their carrier activity . The probability of these individuals later suffering from FAP status. may lead them to anticipate relationships, marriage and other life T. M. Meulenkamp1, E. M. Smets1, E. D. Mollema1, P. J. M. Romer2, I. M. van aspects . Langen1, A. Tibben3; 1Academic Medical Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Nether- EPL24. Genetic risk and gender: current understanding and lands, 2Institute for Bioethics, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3Leiden University clinical implications Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands. S. D. Taylor; Predictive genetic testing for familial cardiovascular conditions such as Central Queensland University, Rockhampton, Australia. Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH), the Long QT syndrome (LQTS) There is increasing evidence that men and women experience genetic and Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) has become possible in risk and engage with predictive genetic testing differentially . Current families in which the causative mutation has been identified. The research literature suggests that at-risk women are significantly more most devastating possible consequence of these diseases is sudden likely than their male counterparts to undertake predictive testing death, sometimes in minors . Carriers can reduce their risk by the use with regard to inherited neurological conditions such as Huntington’s of medication and adaptation of life style . The latter may involve diet disease, as well as inherited cancers and other genetic conditions . restrictions or avoidance of triggering situations such as competitive What factors might account for this and what are the implications sports, stress or loud noises . of this phenomenon for clinical practice? Drawing on a range of In the case of minors, the decision to undergo genetic testing lies with theoretical literature and social science and clinical genetics research, the parents . However, testing of minors is a point of (ethical) debate . this paper examines the concept of gender and how it may influence An issue in this debate is how knowledge of their carrier status might the perception and experience of genetic risk and engagement with benefit or harm minors. So far, children’s experiences in this regard genetic testing technology . Gender-based analysis of selected data are unknown . Therefore, a qualitative study was initiated to explore from two Australian-based studies will be presented to further our the cognitive, behavioral and emotional impact of carriership on minors understanding of this issue: firstly, from the Genetic Discrimination (aged between 8 and 18 years) . Project in Australia which investigated the experiences and perceptions We interviewed 35 minors with a positive carrier status from 30 of 904 asymptomatic individuals who had undertaken predictive genetic families . Semi-structured interviews were conducted at the families’ testing for inherited neurological disorders (n=332), familial cancers homes . Minors were interviewed separately from their parents . All (n=481), haemochromatosis (n=45) and other genetic conditions interviews were transcribed verbatim . Two researchers labeled these (n=46); and secondly, from an in-depth interview study that investigated transcriptions independently . Discrepancies between coders were the post-genetic-test experiences of at-risk men and women who negotiated until consensus was reached . undertook predictive testing for a range of genetic conditions . Gender- This presentation will focus on minors’ perception of the identity, based analyses of both quantitative and qualitative data from these causes, consequences, controllability and timeline of their condition studies will be presented and discussed in light of current literature and and how this perception might relate to medication use, adaptations research. The potential implications of these findings within the clinical in lifestyle and worries . Clear differences in perceived controllability genetics context will be discussed . emerged and these appear to be associated with worries .EMPAG Plenary Lecures 0 EPL25. Experiences and attitudes of turkish cypriots in cyprus relate to attitudes towards the use of prenatal testing and termination about testing for thalassaemia carrier status for the condition . Seventy-six people were selected as being likely U. Fahrioglu1, T. Clancy1, H. Middleton-Price2; to represent a diverse range of views about Down’s syndrome, 1St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2North West Genetics approximately half of whom had some known experience or expertise Knowledge Park (Nowgen), Manchester, United Kingdom. related either to the condition or to prenatal testing . The participants Currently, some groups undergo or are offered carrier testing for Q sorted 50 propositions about Down’s syndrome selected to reflect recessive conditions, e .g . beta thalassaemia, that are common in their different views about the condition in terms of its impact on the populations/ethnic groups . This can enable couples to make informed affected person, on families with an affected child, and on society . Six reproductive choices, and may also reduce the number of affected statistically independent accounts of the condition reflecting a range of individuals in subsequent generations . Genetic testing to identify beta attitudes towards, and experiences of, people with Down’s syndrome thalassaemia carriers in the Turkish Cypriot community in Cyprus has were extracted using Principal Components Analysis . The study been carried out for the past 25 years . It is mandatory for couples to be demonstrated that people hold complex and sometimes seemingly tested before a marriage certificate can be issued, though the results contradictory views about Down’s syndrome, and that these are likely of the test have no bearing on whether the certificate is issued or not. to influence their prenatal testing decisions. The current antenatal No previous research has investigated individuals’ attitudes towards setting provides little opportunity for people to discuss and explore and views about compulsory carrier testing in populations where this their views on disability . It is argued that this may affect the ability of happen . some individuals to make decisions that are informed by their own Semi structured interviews with 19 Turkish Cypriots, 11 women and views and values . eight men, who had undergone mandatory testing were carried out to gain an insight into their views about this . Ten of the interviewees are EPL28. The influence of traumatic experience of the cardiac carriers and nine are non-carriers . There were six couples, two of whom arrest and sudden death on perception genetic information and were carrier couples . A number of themes have emerged from this . predictive testing means The interviewees identified that more education about the condition E. V. Zaklyazminskaya; itself and about testing would be helpful . They felt it would have been Russian Reseach Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. important to have had more counselling before and after they were Inherited cardiac channelopathies are heterogeneous group of tested . Also, even though carrier testing was seen as important by diseases with a high risk of life-threatening episodes and cardiac most interviewees, some felt it had been imposed on them . Finally, sudden death (SCD) . a number of interviewees felt carrier testing should have been done Aim: To analyze the factors determining perception of the genetic earlier, and not around the time of their wedding . counseling and needs of the DNA diagnostics in patients with inherited arrhythmias . EPL26. invasive procedure uptake rate among women of Methods: We have been interviewed 40 adult patients and their relatives advanced maternal age in Johannesburg - cultural aspects from 25 unrelated families with Long QT syndrome and Brugada T. Wessels, T. E. Zwane; syndrome . For all individuals genetic counseling were recommended Division Human Genetics, University of the Witwatersrand (WITS) and the because of clinical diagnosis of primary channelopathies or of relations National Health Laboratory Services (NHLS), Johannesburg, South Africa. to affected patients . All individuals were asked about their clinical and A recent review of the amniocentesis uptake rate in a population of family histories, pedigrees, causes of the death in relatives, requests women in Johannesburg, South Africa has revealed a low uptake rate for genetic testing and attitude to predictive genetic testing . compared to other studies . The division of Human Genetics of the Results: We have been subdivided tested persons into two groups: (1) University of the Witwatersrand and the National Health Laboratory patients survived through cardiac arrest or had SCD victims among service provides genetic counselling and invasive testing to women near relatives and (2) patients had mild clinical course of the disease of advanced maternal age (AMA) (>35 years) . A retrospective patient and hadn’t dramatic experience of SCD in their families . About 80% record audit was performed over the period January 2003 to December patients from group (1) noted molecular genetic testing as important 2004 . A total of 696 women were seen during this period, 524 women point of examination and strongly intended to use the results in the were of advanced maternal age only (AMA), and 172 women were next family planning for themselves and for their issue . In the group of advanced maternal age and another indication (AMA P) . The (2) the individuals pointed to lower interest in DNA testing and prenatal population group distribution were; 577 (83%) black, 53 (8%) coloured, diagnostics . 28 (4%) white, 14 (2%) indian, with 23 (3%) not recorded . A total of Conclusion: Personal and family experience of SCD is the most 208 (30%) women chose an invasive test after genetic counselling important factor influencing on decision-making in the inherited (8 had chorionic villus sampling performed). The uptake rates were; arrhythmias patients . Possibility to possess healthy issue is the integral 27% in the black group, 33% in the coloured group, 14% in the indian part of the good quality of life for patients with high risk of SCD . group and 42% in the white group . The reasons women provided for deciding against invasive testing were recorded . The three reasons EPL29. interest in genetic susceptibility testing for lung cancer: stated most often by the women in the black population group were; seeking motivation to quit or an excuse to continue smoking? will not terminate an affected baby, had to discuss with partner/family; C. McBride1, Z. Page1, D. B. White1, J. C. Martin1, I. M. Lipkus2, L. Bastian2, G. and afraid of miscarriage risk . The meaning of these statements within Bepler3; the context of the population and cultural groups in South Africa will 1Social & Behavioral Research Branch, National Human Genome Research be discussed as well as the impact on the current genetic counselling Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Duke service offered to patients . University Medical Center, Raleigh-Durham, NC, United States, 3Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, United States. EPL27. Understandings of Down’s syndrome: a Q Genetic testing for susceptibility to common diseases is expected methodological investigation. to become widely available in the near future, with the potential L. D. Bryant1, J. M. Green2, J. Hewison1; use to motivate individuals to adopt risk-reducing health behaviors 1Institute of Health Sciences and Public Health Research, University of Leeds, (e .g ., cigarette smoking) . Present concerns are that high-risk results United Kingdom, 2Mother and Infant Research Unit, University of York, United may diminish motivation either by promulgating fatalism about the Kingdom. benefits of risk reduction or lower risk results could unduly reassure Despite the development of prenatal tests for a growing number of individuals . Currently, there is little data to inform these discussions . conditions, Down’s syndrome has been, and continues to be, a We explore whether smokers’ interest in a hypothetical genetic test for central focus of prenatal testing technology . With the growing concern susceptibility to lung cancer is associated with their beliefs about the for supporting informed prenatal testing decisions it is surprising potential motivational effect of testing . Data are reported for 264 blood that there has been little examination of how attitudes towards this relatives, ages 18-55, of late-stage lung cancer patients recruited condition influence these decisions. This study used Q-methodology from three cancer centers . Relatives completed a telephone survey to identify how different understandings of Down’s syndrome might assessing a battery of psychosocial variables . The sample is white EMPAG Plenary Lecures 1 (93%); half are female, half are the child of the cancer patient, 19% are medical record . college educated and 60% reported strong desire to quit smoking (7 on We performed a regression analysis to see if premorbid variables a 7-point scale) . 61% of relatives indicated they would take the genetic predict clinical features . susceptibility test . 65% reported an advantage of such testing would be Results: Preliminary results indicate that patients who show more that a high risk result could motivate them to quit smoking (PROMO), rigid and aggressive behaviour were premorbidly more anxious, more 21% reported a low risk result could motivate continued smoking negative about the future and more introverted . Patients with more (NEGMO), and 19% felt strongly that both could be advantages of social-cognitive deterioration were premorbidly more anxious, more testing . In multivariate analyses, perceived PROMO or NEGMO as an introverted, more open to experiences and had less instrumental advantage of testing was significantly associated with greater interest support . in testing (Odds ratios, 5 .1, 2 .2, respectively) . Implications for offering Discussion: In this group and based on retrospective data, there genetic susceptibility testing to motivate behavior change will be seems to be an association between aspects of premorbid personality discussed . and phenotypic variation in hospitalized Huntington‘s Disease patients . Within a life cycle approach our findings may be relevant for support of EPL30. Prevalence of psychiatric disorder in pre-symptomatic individuals and families . HD gene carriers and non-carriers *Timman et al, Nature and development of Huntington disease in a C. Julien1, J. C. Thompson1, G. Turner2, J. Snowden1, D. Craufurd3; nursing home population: The BOSH Rating Scale, Cogn Behav 1Greater Manchester Neuroscience Centre, Hope Hospital, Manchester, United Neurol. 2005 Dec;18(4):215-22. Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, St James’ University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 3Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional EPL32. A qualitative study into the impact of Juvenile Genetic Service, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. Huntington‘s Disease on the family. Psychiatric symptoms are a common feature of Huntington’s disease H. M. Brewer1, J. A. Smith2, V. Eatough2, C. A. Stanley1, N. W. Glendinning1, O. (HD) and often precede the onset of motor and cognitive impairments . W. J. Quarrell3,1; Examining the rate of psychiatric disturbances in pre-symptomatic 1Huntington’s Disease Association, London, United Kingdom, 2Birkbeck Col- individuals may help to determine whether such symptoms represent lege, London, United Kingdom, 3Sheffield Children’s Hospital, Sheffield, United a prodromal manifestation of the disease, or whether they occur as a Kingdom. result of social and psychological adversity associated with a family Objectives: To explore the issues faced by parent/guardian caregivers history of HD . To date, the few prospective studies investigating of young people with Juvenile Huntington’s Disease (JHD) psychiatric symptoms in pre-symptomatic at-risk individuals have Methods: Ten interviews were carried out with parent/guardian only involved small samples of patients or have not used appropriate caregivers . Their experiences of caring for a child with JHD were control groups . explored, particularly focusing on their experiences of information, The present study compared the prevalence of psychiatric symptoms services and support they had received . The interviews were in two groups of at-risk asymptomatic individuals (gene positive and transcribed verbatim and analysed using the qualitative method gene negative) requesting predictive testing for HD between 1987 Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis (IPA) . and 1999 . Lifetime psychiatric histories of 204 at-risk individuals (89 Results: One of the main themes emerging from the analysis of the gene carriers, 115 non-carriers) were obtained using the Composite interviews was the isolation that families felt, which appeared to be International Diagnostic Interview (WHO, 1987) . Lifetime and 12-month due to an engagement in social comparison with a number of different diagnoses were determined according to the DSM-III-R criteria of the groups (e .g ., adult-onset Huntington’s Disease) and a sense of JHD American Psychiatric Association . Neither participants nor examiners as being different . This meant that the child with JHD and their parents were aware of gene status at the time of testing . were unable to normalise their experiences . This sense of isolation A preliminary analysis revealed no difference between gene-positive was exacerbated by a general lack of knowledge and understanding . and gene-negative groups in the lifetime frequency of clinical Other themes describe how parents perceived the natural history psychiatric disorders. However, gene carriers did report a significantly of JHD. For example, parents found specific symptoms, such as higher 12-month prevalence of sub-clinical depressive symptoms . challenging behaviour, particular difficult to cope with. Other themes We will present the results of a further analysis currently in progress presented included a definition of what families perceived to be helpful to investigate the relationship between psychiatric symptoms and and unhelpful support . proximity to onset of HD in pre-symptomatic individuals carrying the HD Conclusions: A number of needs were highlighted by the families, which mutation. The findings have important implications for the underlying have implications for those providing support for families affected by basis of psychiatric disturbances in HD . JHD. There were also specific implications for the provision of support during the period before families receive a confirmed diagnosis, which EPL31. Premorbid aspects of personality as predictors of families often highlighted as a particularly difficult time. Huntington‘s Disease symptomatology L. Van der Meer1, R. Timman2,1, H. Claus3, H. Slingerland4, S. Demeulenare5, EPL33. Predictive genetic testing of minors on parents‘ F. Joemmanbaks6, K. Landa7, A. Tibben1,2; persistent request; to whose advantage following an abnormal 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medi- test result? A pilot study among six families cal Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Verpleeghuis Overduin, Katwijk, The A. M. Schiphorst, M. E. Richard, A. M. Blom, E. M. A. Smets; Netherlands, 4Verpleeghuis Heemhof, Apeldoorn, The Netherlands, 5Home Academical Medical Centre, Unit of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, The Neth- Marjorie, Heist-op-den-Berg, Belgium, 6Verpleeghuis Gulden Huis, The Hague, erlands. The Netherlands, 7Verpleeghuis De Riethorst, Geertruidenberg, The Nether- Dutch clinical genetic centres generally follow the most undisputed lands. criteria for testing minors such as: onset of the condition regularly Background: There is a considerable amount of phenotypic variation in occurs in childhood, (medical) interventions can be offered and / or the Huntington‘s Disease patients . Little is known about the causes of this results will contribute to the counselling of family members . Reasons variation . In this study, we investigate associations between premorbid for not testing minors are based on psychosocial and ethical principles personality and clinical features in hospitalized HD-patients . including insufficient emotional and cognitive development and / or method: We gathered information about premorbid personality, young adolescents not yet being capable in moral reasoning to come psychological and social characteristics of HD patients hospitalized to proper autonomous decisions . in 5 specialized nursing homes in The Netherlands and Belgium . Nevertheless, geneticists may choose to provide tests in children We interviewed contact persons who were close to them before they for non-medical reasons in specific cases, i.e. when severe anxiety became symptomatic and we asked them to fill in questionnaires about in parents probably will harm the children . These parents are unable the patient‘s premorbid personality (NEO-FFI), anxiety and depression to cope with the uncertainty of not knowing and hope for normal test (HADS), expectations about the future (BHS) and social support results for their minors . (SSQ) . The patient‘s illness behaviour was assessed with the UHDRS We ask ourselves: how did families, counselled in our institute, and the BOSH*, additional information was extracted from the patient‘s cope with abnormal test results in their children if no expression of EMPAG Plenary Lecures  the disorder is yet to be expected in childhood and no screening or their family . A few reported changes in priorities with regard to work preventive treatment is indicated? and education after getting the information . Method: a follow-up of previous psychosocial counselling consisting Persons with high-risk estimation reported stronger impact on their of a semi-structured retrospective interview with parents one to seven lives and view of the future, as compared to those with perceived low years after the test result . risk . Preliminary conclusions and recommendations: It can be relevant Conclusion: Most participants were positive to receiving information for parents and their children to have time to cope with the diagnosis about their genetic disposition . However, a minority experienced before the age of possible expression . Psycho-educational support negative changes in their lives . Changes in family relations were according to protocol gives parents the opportunity to explore their relatively common . Assessed variables such as life-style and health anxiety, to reconsider timing of the test moment and to learn about behaviour were seldom related to perceived levels of risk . their communication skills concerning heredity and the disorder . EPL36. the course of distress in women at increased risk of EPL34. Living with Hereditary cancer hereditary breast and ovarian cancer who opt for prophylactic N. Stømsvik1,2, K. Nordin1,3, G. Berglund1,3, L. F. Engebretsen1,2, M. G. Hans- surgery son4,1, E. Gjengedal5; P. J. C. Bresser1, C. Seynaeve1, A. R. Van Gool1, M. F. Niermeijer2, S. van 1The Bergen Psychosocial FUGE-project, University of Bergen, Bergen, Nor- Dooren1, A. N. van Geel1, M. Menke-Pluymers1, J. G. M. Klijn1, A. Tibben3; way, 2Center of Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland Universi- 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Nijme- ty Hospital. Helse-Bergen (HF), Bergen, Norway, 3Faculty of medicine, Uppsala gen - St.-Radboud, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Leids Universitair Medisch University, Department of Public health, and Caring Sciences, Uppsala Science Centrum, Leiden, The Netherlands. park, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Faculty of medicine, Uppsala University, Depart- introduction: Prophylactic mastectomy (PM) and prophylactic ment of Public health, and Caring Sciences, Uppsala Science park,, Uppsala, salpingo-oophorectomy (PSO) are the most effective options to obviate Sweden, 5Department of Public Health and Primary Health Care, University of the increased risk for breast and ovarian cancer, respectively, in case Bergen, Bergen, Norway. of a hereditary predisposition . This qualitative study is a part of a larger study that aims to explore Objectives: The present study investigated the levels and the course how individuals experience living with increased cancer risk, how this of psychological distress before and after PM and/or PSO in 78 situation influence quality of life and to build knowledge about this women with an increased risk for breast and/or ovarian cancer due to patient groups in order to provide optimal care . Different high risk a BRCA1/2 mutation or a hereditary predisposition . groups and patients suffering from cancer were included . An interview methods: The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) guide based upon Griffin focusing on quality of life, the emotional and measured general distress and the Impact of Events Scale (IES) practical implications of this condition, and participating in a clinical assessed cancer-related distress at baseline (2 to 4 weeks before follow-up program was utilized. The first study describes how patients prophylactic surgery), and 6 and 12 months post-surgery . with MEN-1 experience their situation . The data were analyzed using Results: Women who opted for prophylactic surgery had higher Giorgi`s four step phenomenological approach . Four main categories distress levels prior to surgery as compared to the distress levels in and several subcategories were identified; The mixed feelings of being a reference group of women who opted for regular surveillance . The in a follow-up program, the effect of MEN1 upon daily activities, coming levels of distress in women who opted for PM did not significantly to terms with the condition, and uncertainty concerning the future . At differ from the distress levels in women who opted for PSO, at both the time of interview, none of these MEN-1 patients had received baseline and follow-up . However, women who opted for PM showed a genetic counseling. Our findings indicate that a majority of patients significant decrease in anxiety and cancer-related distress after surgery, have adjusted to their situation, describing themselves as being whereas the course of distress in women who opted for PSO showed healthy despite physical and psychological symptoms and treatment . no changes . Finally, a substantial amount of women experienced They report a shift in priorities after developing MEN1 or learning about clinically high levels of cancer-related distress and anxiety one year their personal risk . The participants received decent care in the clinical after prophylactic surgery . follow-up program, - however, greater effort should be put into patient information . EPL37. creating the link. Patient stories promoting engagement These patients might benefit from genetic counseling that aims to in genetics: a web-based resource. achieve empowerment by mobilizing and strengthening the patients’ M. Kirk1,2, B. Williams3, H. Skirton4, K. McDonald1, K. Kaur-Mann1, E. T. resources . Health professionals involved should recognize their Tonkin1,2; potential impact and influence on patient’s ability to adjust to these 1University of Glamorgan, Pontypridd, United Kingdom, 2NHS National Genetics circumstances . Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Genetics Interest Group, The Wales Gene Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 4University of EPL35. Long-term Follow up of lifestyle changes in persons Plymouth, Taunton, United Kingdom. attending genetic counselling for breast, ovarian or colorectal Stories provide common ground on which patients and professionals cancer can engage with real-life problems . ‘Telling stories, understanding A. Roshanai1, K. Nordin1, R. Rosenquist2; real-life genetics’ is a multi-media web-based resource for healthcare 1Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Depart- professionals which will encourage the understanding of genetics, its ment of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden. impact on peoples’ lives, and relevance within non-genetic specialties . Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore long-term changes in Hosted by the NHS National Genetics Education and Development lifestyles and relationships after receiving oncogenetic counselling . Centre, the site will be launched during 2006 with free access . Another investigated aspect was how people felt about the genetic Following ethics approval, recruitment to this educational project has information . been via support groups, community organisations and conferences . Patient and methods: A total of 307 persons who attended genetic More than 60 stories have been collected in written, audio and video counselling at the onco-genetic clinic of University Hospital in Uppsala, formats from patients, carers and practitioners . Minority groups and Sweden (1998-2002) were asked to participate in a long-term follow people under 30 years are currently under-represented . Story content up, 3-7 years later . There were 197 female and 18 male (215 in all) has been mapped to the genetics competency framework (Kirk et al . who answered the questionnaire (including self-reports of life-style 2003), and this approach validates the framework’s development, changes) and 158 who estimated their perceived risk . highlighting areas requiring improved education and training . Results: The majority was satisfied with the information and felt that These stories will be used to enhance a genetics educational ‘tool- the estimation of their risk was not surprising and that it was better to box’ based on the competency framework . Designed to be used by be informed of the risks . The information had changed the majority’s both educators and learners, the resource will be searchable and will view of the future and they felt that now they appreciate the every provide structured teaching and learning objectives . Each story will day life more . Approximately half of the participants reported that the contain links to additional information . This could include notes for information had a strong effect on their lives and on their relations with further explanation; points for reflection and discussion; implications for Reproductive decision making  professional practice; suggested activities to help the reader develop clinical care in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil . Methodology: To collect data was competence, and contact details of relevant support groups . used the ethnographic perspective and Life History intervew: There Initially developed for nurses, midwives and health visitors, it is were total 1200 hours of observations in the genetic medical assistence anticipated that this resource will be of value across the healthcare and 14 women were intervewed . the analisis of the material (pregnant professions, and use by other groups will be encouraged . women dopoiments) was made according to the psychoanalitic and social-cultural approaches . The pregnant women was sent to the prenatal diagnosis service according the following criteria: advanced EmPAG Workshops maternal age; family history of genetic disease and complications in the current pregnancies that sugested a genetic cause . Conclusions: EW1. Narrative workshop: an approach to explore meaning in To most women investigated, the prenatal diagnosis is an experience the context of genetic counselling marked the by afective, legal and familiar helplessness and could J. Rocha1,2, R. Macleod3, L. Kerzin-Storrar3; be seen as an anxiety panoptic . Therefore, the effectiveness of the 1IBMC, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2ISCS-N, Paredes, Portugal, 3Academic medical procedure addopted in the prenatal diagnosis does not lie in Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetic Service, Manchester, United the defective gene cure, but in the possibility of the patient to deal Kingdom. with the genetic risk idea and produce a new meanning about the risk Most definitions of genetic counselling include the aim of helping pregnancy and about the child to be born . counselees adjust to their genetic situation . There is some research evidence to suggest that it is the personal meaning constructed by EP02. Long-term psychosocial impact of familial adenomatous patients that is important in understanding adaptation . polyposis (FAP) This workshop will draw on the cognitive-narrative model as a way of K. F. L. Douma1, N. K. Aaronson1, H. F. A. Vasen2,3, M. A. Gerritsma1, E. P. A. exploring how patient‘s stories can be utilised more fully in the context Janssen1, E. M. A. Bleiker1; of genetic counselling . The theoretical assumptions underpinning the 1Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Netherlands model will be outlined . We will consider what can be learnt from the Foundation for the Detection of Hereditary Tumours, Leiden, The Netherlands, way patients construct and give meaning to their episodes and how 3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. patients can be guided to explore and create new meanings for genetic Background: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a hereditary information . condition characterized by the development of a large number of Case examples will include narrative techniques used by one of the polyps in the colon . Without surgery the large majority of individuals authors (JR) to support women in their adjustment process following will develop colorectal cancer by the age of 45 years . Individuals from termination of pregnancy . There will be the opportunity for participants high-risk FAP families are offered genetic testing from the age of 10 to try some of the techniques that may be particularly useful in genetic years onward . counselling practice including metaphor generation; a creative way Purpose: To investigate the long-term psychosocial impact of FAP on of providing awareness of meaning content and alternative versions individuals from high-risk families and on the family . of a particular event or episode . This exercise is guided through a Patients and methods: This nationwide cross-sectional study will invite structured manual and the authors will address any specific difficulty all individuals from FAP families to complete a self-report questionnaire raised from ongoing exercise . (estimated n=750), followed by a semi-structured interview with The relevance and applicability of this framework is discussed in what a subsample of respondents (n=60) . The questionnaire assesses concerns limitations and adequacy . surveillance behavior, experiences with genetic testing and preventive surgery, physical symptoms, a range of psychosocial measures and EW2. Using meta-ethnography to synthesise qualitative research the perceived need for professional psychosocial support . Additional F. M. Walter; questions assess attitudes toward prenatal diagnosis and pre- Department of Public Health & Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cam- implantation techniques . Partners of individuals with a clinical or bridge, United Kingdom. genetic diagnosis will complete a subset of these questions . Data from Qualitative methods are increasingly used alongside quantitative a pilot study highlighted problems with relationships, sexuality, fatigue, methods in primary research on the grounds that the two sets of data feelings of guilt and psychical complications and long-term effects of can be complementary, but methods for incorporating qualitative surgery affecting daily life . research in systematic reviews are relatively under-developed and Relevance: This study will contribute to our understanding of the under-evaluated . They present a major methodological and practical long-term psychosocial impact of being a member of a family at high- developmental challenge . risk for FAP, and will provide insight into (not) undergoing genetic Objective: This workshop will introduce participants to the principles testing, surveillance, and risk reducing surgery among FAP family and practice of qualitative systematic reviewing and synthesis using members . This information can be used by health care providers for the approach of meta-ethnography . counseling and psycho-education programs for individuals at high risk Content: A short, didactic presentation and handout will provide of developing FAP . an overview of qualitative research synthesis in general, and meta- ethnography in particular . The presenter’s recent systematic review EP03. Prenatal testing - Can we predict or influence on women‘s and synthesis of lay understanding of familial risk of common chronic choices? diseases will be used to illustrate the theoretical framework of meta- A. Mishori-Dery1, I. Shoham-Vardi1, R. Carmi2; ethnography . Extracts from qualitative papers will be provided for 1Dept. of Epidemiology and Health Services Evaluation, Ben-Gurion University participants to practice appraisal and synthesising skills in small group of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer- activities . The small groups will share the results of their work with the Sheva, Israel. larger group, and open discussion will be encouraged to elicit specific Introduction: Utilization rates of prenatal tests vary with the type of test . problems and challenges . Compared to ultrasound scans and maternal serum screening, uptake Prerequisite Knowledge: An interest in qualitative research methods . rates of amniocentesis and carrier screening for genetic diseases are generally lower . Objectives: To identify factors associated with utilization of EmPAG Posters amniocentesis and carrier screening . Methods: The study was conducted in southern Israel in which 596 EP01. the dilemmas of the high-risk pregnant women - assisted Jewish women, who had given birth at Soroka University Medical by a public genetic medical care in Rio de Janeiro/Brazil Center, were interviewed by phone using a structured questionnaire, A. S. N. Marinho; at 5-8 weeks postpartum . Of them, 464 (77 .8%) agreed to answer a Instituto Fernandes Figueira/FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. knowledge questionnaire . The study aimed to investigate the interactions and attitudes of the high Results: Rates of test uptake were 22 .2% and 20 .8% for amniocentesis genetic risk pregnant women facing the prenatal diagnosis in a public and genetic tests, respectively . In a multivariate logistic regression Reproductive decision making  performed on the 464 women who answered the knowledge termination for BMD varied, and were influenced by beliefs about the questionnaire, factors associated with carrier screening were value of life, attitudes to disability, and reflecting on their personal secularism (OR = 3 .032), high levels of knowledge regarding prenatal experiences; whatever their beliefs and experiences, all the men valued tests (OR = 3 .917) and satisfaction with pretest counseling (OR = their own lives . Issues of concern around pre-symptomatic testing 7 .177) . included timing, benefits and disadvantages of testing and potential The same factors were associated with uptake of amniocentesis (ORs differences between the parents’ and child’s outlook . Factors that = 3.834, 2.301, 6.484, respectively), with the addition of age ≥35 years influenced their own reproductive decisions included their daughters (OR = 2 .674), medical recommendation for the test (OR = 2 .822), and having to make difficult reproductive choices, the chance of affected previous termination of pregnancy (OR = 6 .087) . boys in future generations, the physical limitations of the condition, and Conclusions: Accepting a prenatal test is associated with religious the possibility of advancement in medical research . and cultural beliefs, but also with a more informed decision than the declining of one . While religious and cultural aspects of prenatal EP06. making decisions about amniocentesis decisions should be respected by health providers, strengthening M. A. Sahhar1,2, L. Gillam2, S. A. Metcalfe3, J. Hodgson3; lay knowledge regarding prenatal tests and improving professional 1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne. Victoria, Australia, 2The Univer- counseling will allow more informed choices, which might result in sity of Melbourne, Melbourne. Victoria, Australia, 3Murdoch Childrens Research higher uptake of prenatal testing . Institute and The University of Melbourne, Melbourne. Victoria, Australia. Many pregnant women in Victoria, Australia have a Maternal Serum EP04. An evaluation of a shared experience group for women Screening (MSS) test either in the first or second trimester of pregnancy. following prenatal diagnosis and termination for a fetal These screening tests can indicate an individual’s risk of having a baby abnormality. with a chromosomal anomaly or a neural tube defect . A. J. Thornton1, L. Gordon1, S. Lewis2, S. Wake1, M. Sahhar1; Women who receive an ‘increased risk’ result are generally offered 1Genetic Health Service Victoria, Parkville, Australia, 2Murdoch Childrens Re- genetic counselling in order to provide information about their test result search Institute, Parkville, Australia. and the options available for diagnostic testing such as amniocentesis Support After Fetal Diagnosis of Abnormality (SAFDA), is a facilitated or CVS . In these circumstances genetic counselling aims to facilitate shared experience group for women in Victoria, Australia who have informed and autonomous decision-making (Hodgson & Spriggs 2005) had a termination for a fetal abnormality . SAFDA is held at a tertiary but due to a lack of process studies there is currently little known maternity hospital, and five, two-hour groups are held each year with about how women experience this phenomena or indeed how genetic approximately 4-5 persons attending . Partners, other family and counselling might achieve this aim . support people are welcomed . The facilitators are a social worker and As part of a PhD project entitled “Women’s experiences of prenatal a genetic counsellor . genetic counselling” 21 ‘increased risk’ genetic counselling sessions A questionnaire-based study was undertaken between 2001 and 2005 and 15 follow up interviews were audio-taped and transcribed . to evaluate SAFDA. The de-identified questionnaire included questions Thematic and content analysis provided:- relating to the referring professional, participants’, prior expectations a) of the group, preferred group format, and rating of helpfulness of an insight into what actually happens in prenatal genetic counselling participation, length and venue . There was also opportunity for b) participants to comment generally on their experience in the group . rich descriptions of how pregnant women in this cohort experience A total of 85 participants (100% response) completed the questionnaire . being at increased risk for a chromosome anomaly . The main referring health professional was a genetic counsellor Using contrasting individual accounts this presentation explores (64%) . Seventy-one participants (84%) considered it ‘very helpful’ to selected women’s experiences of prenatal genetic counselling . These participate in the group . Seventy-eight participants (92%) considered accounts illustrate differences in the methods and outcomes of decision- that a shared-experience group was the most beneficial format. making processes and highlight the utility of genetic counselling as a Seventy-eight participants (92%) considered that the size of the group means to facilitate informed decision-making in the prenatal setting . was ‘just right’. Comments written by participants affirmed that the Hodgson J & Spriggs M. (2005) Journal of Genetic Counselling. Vol present format of SAFDA was a highly valued opportunity to listen to 14, No 2 pp. 89-97 and share experiences in a confidential small group. This study highlights the importance of providing women who receive EP07. Genetic prenatal diagnosis - Psychological aspects and a diagnosis of fetal abnormality during their pregnancy with an reproductive behavior of families appropriate forum to share their experiences, and provides useful A. V. Shopova1, M. Peev1, S. Shopova1, D. Avjieva1, E. Simeonov1, S. Peeva2; information and insights for health professionals who are considering 1Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2MPHAT, Burgas, Bulgaria. how best to support the women . AIM: study of the influence of the genefic prenatal diagnosis on the emotional state of the patients; significance of medical and informational EP05. Attitudes of men with Becker muscular Dystrophy towards factors on the reproductive decision of the family . genetic testing METHODS: information interview; anxiety questionnaire; grief scale. J. R. Soloway1,2, H. Kingston1, T. Clancy1; MATERIAL: 120 pregnant women: 30 after US screening; 30 because 1Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, Manches- of positive family history, 30 - increased maternal age and 30 healthy ter, United Kingdom, 2NE Thames Regional Genetics Service (Southend Hospi- controls . tal), London, United Kingdom. RESULTS: Women with previous reproductive failure and those who There is a considerable body of research into women’s attitudes had higher educational level proved to be well informed . Most of the towards and experiences of genetic testing . A limited number of studies women have been information by a gynaecologist or clinical geneticist . have focused on men, and few have involved men affected by an High proportion of tested women consider reliable the diagnostic and inherited condition . Semi-structured interviews with ten men affected prognostic potential of the prenatal genetic diagnosis . The type of by Becker Muscular Dystrophy (BMD) were undertaken to gain an procedure influences insignificantly the reproductive decision. insight into their views about women undergoing carrier testing and CONCLUSIONS: prenatal diagnosis for the condition, and on pre-symptomatic testing of 1 .The reproductive decision depends on the quality of genetic at-risk boys . They were also asked about their thoughts about having counseling . children themselves . 2 . The level of anxiety is determined by the kind of procedure and The key themes that emerged with regard to their attitudes to carrier reproductive history . testing and prenatal diagnosis were that they identified the importance 3 . Age, previous loss, the type of the loss are decisive factors for of women being able to make informed reproductive decisions, and coping with the loss . an understanding that women might feel guilt about passing on the condition . Perceived severity of BMD, capacity to cope and individual choice were seen as important factors in reproductive decision-making . Their opinions about the appropriateness of prenatal diagnosis and Reproductive decision making  EP08. Risk perception of pregnant women being offered prenatal amniocentesis. Some had been to ultrasound in first trimester where screening. parameters for chromosomal deviations were assessed . D. R. Timmermans1, J. H. Kleinveld1, M. van den Berg1, J. M. G. van Vugt2, L. A phenomenological-hermeneutical approach has been used where ten Kate3, G. van der Wal1; genetic counselling experience and possible consequences have been 1Department of Public and Occupational Health, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, focused . Genetic counselling and care have been used as theoretical 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, perspective . 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. The woman experienced genetic counselling as positive, relieved Ideally, the decision for or against prenatal genetic screening should and reduced anxiety . At the same time all patients except one did be based on the active decision-making of pregnant women who put forward that the offer, genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis should be fully informed in particular about the risks involved . In testing had an impact on them, increasing ambivalence, dilemmas and a large randomised controlled trial (N=2785) with two groups being difficult decisions of existential nature. offered prenatal screening and a control group, we measured pregnant The studiy results form the basis of underlining the importance that women’s perceived risk of giving birth to a child with Down’s syndrome . counselling has to be imbued with the principles of genetic counselling This was measured with a numeric risk scale and recalculated into and the concept of care has to be an important part of this .Evaluation three categories: (1) a risk between 1 out of 2 and 1 out of 200; (2) a and reflection on the content and quality of the counselling is important risk between 1 out of 200 and 1 out of 1000; (3) and a risk smaller than and necessary . 1 out of 1000 . Participants generally perceived their risk as rather low: Findings imply the necessity for futher studies . about 77% of the women thought they had a risk below 1 out of 1000 before information was offered while this was about 43% after test EP11. Addressing the Psychosocial Aspects of Research on information was given as compared to 72% of women in the control Lethal Birth Defects: A call for Research group (a significant difference χ2 (4) = 162 .8, p < .001) . Before the test A. Bakke1, K. Kessler1, J. Hooks2, R. Best2, K. E. Ormond1; offer, about 50% of women correctly classified their risk. After the offer 1Northwestern University, Chicago IL, USA, Chicago, IL, United States, 2Univer- but before the test was done, significantly more women classified their sity of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, United States. risk correctly compared with the control group (62.1% versus 54.5%; Despite recent advances in genetic technology, little is known about χ2(2)= 9 .90, p < .01) . Although there is an increase in accurate risk the etiology of lethal birth defects like anencephaly . The study of these perception, it is worrisome that still a large number of women had an birth defects is particularly difficult given that many pregnancies are inadequate perception of their risk of giving birth to a child with Down terminated shortly after diagnosis . As such, one proposed method syndrome . involves utilizing genetic counseling resources to enroll patients into a study within days after diagnosis, which is critical to minimize recall EP09. Risk unawareness and psychological consequences of bias of exposures and to obtain tissue samples for genetic analysis . prenatal diagnosis in a case of familial Angelman syndrome One ethical concern of using this method is that participation may E. Razzaboni1, D. Turchetti1, H. Zomer1, S. Ferrari1, D. Greco2, C. Graziano1, pose a significant emotional burden for the parents. Potential benefit to G. Romeo1, M. Seri1; parent participation might include an opportunity to discuss concerns 1Operative Unit of Medical Genetic, Bologna, Italy, 2IRCSS OASI, Troina, Italy. in a supportive environment, emotional support and a decreased Angelman Syndrome, a disorder characterized by mental retardation, sense of isolation, and a feeling of altruism in contributing to scientific absence of speech, seizures and motor dysfunction, caused by loss research . Although it is possible to extrapolate from studies addressing of expression of the maternal copy of the UBE3A gene, is generally the ethical and psychological impact of research participation within sporadic . However, familial cases may occur as the result of mutations bereavement and trauma-based settings, there is no literature on the in the UBE3A gene or of the Imprinting Center . We describe the case emotional repercussions of parental participation in studies focusing on of a pregnant woman having two nephews with Angelman syndrome lethal birth defects . There is also a paucity of literature that examines caused by a UBE3A mutation; due to poor communication within the psychosocial implications of surveying an individual directly after a the family, she was completely unaware of this diagnosis and of the sensitive event has occurred . This paper will provide a detailed account subsequent risk of recurrence until 15 weeks of gestation . Mutation of the existing literature and make suggestions for areas where future analysis in the woman revealed she carried the familial mutation . empiric research would be beneficial. Amniocentesis and prenatal genetic test were then performed, demonstrating that the fetus had inherited the disease . The pregnancy EP12. Prenatal screening for Down syndrome: Are women was terminated at week 21 . The unexpected diagnosis and the getting what they want? subsequent pregnancy termination caused the woman a severe M. M. Peterson; psychological distress showing relevant psychopatological symptoms Genetic Counselling Program Convenor, Griffith University, Nathan, Brisbane, and psychological support was immediately offered . At two-year Australia. follow-up she showed a better adaptation to grief . The unawareness of Ideally, a woman should have educational support, time and the Angelman Syndrome risk appeared to have significantly influenced opportunity to consider her screening options, discuss ethical issues her adverse psychological reaction . Considering this factor, it could be with her partner and others and feel confident in making an informed useful prompting future researches toward a deep comprehension of choice that is relevant to her own personal / family beliefs and current the relation between risk awareness and psychological impact of fetal situation . How often does this happen in reality? anomalies communication . Furthermore, medical and psychosocial The relatively rapid evolution of technology in recent years has led to support received from professional caregivers were of great value an array of prenatal screening tests being offered in clinical practice, for the woman and helpful in her grieving process according to her and women are sometimes expected to make a decision in a brief reports . This led us considerate that a multidisciplinary professional timeframe . Both women and their healthcare providers are often support should be always given in cases like that . left confused by the complexity of new options . Questions are often raised by the media and consumers, as to the apparent ‘routine’ EP10. Difficult choices. Patient experiences with genetic nature of these tests, the way the options are presented by healthcare counselling before prenatal diagnostic testing. professionals and what women really want . E. Dramstad, I. C. Foss, A. Heiberg; A two-part pilot study was undertaken at the Mater Mothers Hospital, Section for preventive Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. Brisbane . Around 300 women (public and private patients) were The purpose of the present study was to put forth genetic counselling surveyed to examine the reasons why pregnant women either have experiences for pregnant women at risks before prenatal diagnostic or do not have a prenatal screening test for Down syndrome, and testing . The aim has ben to get patients to describe their experiences to compare their demographic, obstetric and information-seeking and if this experience has influenced them in the present situation. characteristics . The women’s knowledge of prenatal genetic counselling The empirical basis is built on interviews of nine woman, 38 years or services was also examined . In the same time period, around 150-200 more by expected time of birth . All were recruited from an institution midwives, obstetricians, registrars and family physicians were surveyed approved to give genetic counselling . The interviews were carried out to examine the healthcare professionals’ current knowledge, attitude after the woman had been to genetic counselling but before a prospective and practice with respect to prenatal screening for Down syndrome . Communication 6 EP13. communicating genetic information to family members- inductive content analysis and the results demonstrate the impact of what are the guidelines telling us? the communication processes and the importance of the individual’s L. E. Forrest1,2, M. Delatycki1,2, L. Curnow1,3, L. Skene2, M. Aitken1,2; previous experiences from cancer. Individuals in HNPCC families 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2University of have often experienced early onset cancer in close relatives . The Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, responsibility for informing family members about the hereditary cancer Australia. within the family is perceived as a burden, but is facilitated by an International guidelines recommend that people who undertake genetic open communication and good contact within the family . Experiential tests should inform their relatives if the results have implications for knowledge influences coping possibilities and may strengthen as well them . Experience indicates however that many people do not pass on as weaken these; most individuals who have previously reflected about that information to their relatives . the possibility of hereditary cancer perceive the information about a The authors are investigating families’ experiences of communicating genetic change as a confirmation of their suspicion, whereas those for genetic information and whether there is a role for genetic health whom the knowledge is unexpected seem to need more support . In professionals within this experience . Three stages of the project are order to reduce stress and negative reactions in the latter cohort, we planned including interviews with probands and their family members suggest that future studies should aim at identifying those individuals and a survey of health professionals . Some qualitative preliminary data in a family who need extended support . has been collected, involving individuals with a genetic condition . This paper describes results to date of this research and considers EP16. ‘Oh this is to do with me’: communicating with children the obligations of genetic health professionals who become aware that about newborn screening results. family members have not been informed about their potential risks . F. Ulph1, J. Leong1, C. Glazebrook1, E. Townsend1, F. Shakespeare2; An analysis of the guidelines has been undertaken demonstrating the 1University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 2Nottingham City Hos- differences that exist and the variations in approaches taken between pital, Nottingham, United Kingdom. national, regional and international settings . The data illustrates Background: Newborn screening for cystic fibrosis in the UK raises the gaps in evidence about how health professionals interpret the questions regarding how and when people identified as carriers should guidelines for problems that arise in their practice involving family be informed . A gradual communication process beginning in childhood communication . has been suggested as optimal, although little research has addressed how children understand such information . EP14. Talking about colorectal cancer risk - family influences Objective: To examine genetic counsellors’ experiences of counselling and dynamics children in order to assess how best to communicate with children S. C. Downing1,2; about genetics . 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical methods: Study packs were distributed to all 21 UK Clinical Genetics Genetics, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Centres inviting Association of Genetic Nurses and Counsellors Genetic counselling for colorectal cancer risk is offered to unaffected members to participate in a semi-structured telephone interview . men and women at increased risk to warrant screening . However Results: From the 28 interviews, themes central to communicating their family history may not fulfil high risk criteria. This study looked with children about genetics were identified. Facilitating autonomy at the experiences of individuals with no genetic ‘label’ to explain was viewed as fundamental in counselling children . Additionally, the family history . In depth interviews were conducted with those personalisation of information and turning abstract concepts previously seen for genetic counselling . Interviews were transcribed into concrete knowledge were important strategies to enhance and thematic analysis highlighted areas for consideration, in particular comprehension . lines of communication within the family and responsibility for Counsellors spontaneously identified barriers to communication, relatives . Family communication is not straightforward, generational of which the taciturn child was the most common . Poor family and sibling differences combined with responsibility and the need to communication and lack of materials for children were also named as protect relatives was complicated by some having had cancer . The barriers . Maturity, illness experience, and good family communication results demonstrate the strong desire within these families to avoid were perceived as facilitating counselling . Likewise, school education upsetting relatives whilst encouraging them to be proactive about and the presence of supportive parents were cited as having positive preventative strategies . Complex relationships within families were effects . evident showing the importance of understanding the family structure . conclusions: The results illustrate that although genetic counselling Some participants shared their feelings with the family, for others of children is possible, a number of factors affect its success . Most are disseminating information or just talking about the risk was difficult. amenable to intervention, although their relationship to comprehension Health beliefs had a strong influence in relation to perception of may be complex . Further research on communicating with children screening and the importance of diet and a healthy lifestyle combined about genetics and the development of age-appropriate educational with social taboos relating to bowel disease . None of the participants resources is vital to enable children to utilise the information screening had confirmation that the family history of cancer was due to a genetic programmes provide . predisposition, however responsibility for close relatives was still very important to them . In order to conduct counselling that maximises EP17. Balancing interests in the disclosure of genetic test psychological adjustment of family members, consideration of family results to relatives: An empirically based analysis dynamics is essential . R. Pierce1,2, K. Wolff3,2; 1Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States, 2FUGE-The Bergen Psy- EP15. the importance of communication and Experiential chosocial FUGE-project, Bergen, Norway, 3Department of Psychosocial sci- Knowledge in Hereditary Nonpolyposis colorectal cancer ences, Bergen, Norway. C. Carlsson1, M. Soller2, B. Silverberg2, U. Kristoffersson2, M. Nilbert1; Genetic test results can have important implications for relatives of 1Institute of Clinical Sciences, Lund, Sweden, 2Institute of Clinical Genetics, the tested patient . Consequently, when the patient does not wish to Lund, Sweden. have the test results disclosed, there is a significant ethical tension Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC) is characterized between the interests, rights and obligations of the patient and the by increased risks for several tumor types with the highest risks for interests, rights and obligations of the relatives . To our knowledge, colorectal cancer (80-90% life-time risk) and endometrial cancer policy analyses of this issue have not incorporated empirical studies of (40-60% risk) . Predictive genetic diagnosis for cancer has evolved attitudes of the general population . during the last decade and is enforced since control programs for at- This presentation analyzes the policy implications of a recent survey risk individuals detect tumors earlier and thus reduce mortality, but conducted in Norway . A random sample of subjects (N=1077) were knowledge about how this new information affects the life situation is asked to indicate their perceptions and attitudes regarding disclosure limited . of test results to relatives, with and without patient consent . These We performed oral, tape-recorded interviews with 10 Swedish carriers attitudes were correlated with attitudes and perceptions about other of high-risk alleles for HNPCC . The interviews were analysed through aspects of genetic testing .Counselling strategies and process  Preliminary results show a tension within individuals regarding counselling themselves, probably because they estimated their disclosure . There was a tendency to want to know the results of others, genetic risk as lower and worried less . Most general practitioners were while not wishing to disclose their own . Further, there are indications of unaware of a genetic risk factor in their patient before the pregnancy . a possible link between wanting to know the results against the patient’s Finally, we found no important adverse effects of the timing of genetic wishes and issues of access . The author analyzes the empirical results counselling on the content and affective tone of the counselee- within the context of interests, obligations, and rights to inform a more counsellor interaction during the initial consultation, nor on women’s nuanced understanding of the issue, and to identify possible links satisfaction . to other aspects of the genetic testing experience . Taken together, Based on our findings, an active role of general practitioners and examination of these links may indicate possible policy approaches to the implementation of a routine preconception consultation for every relieving some of the tension associated with the disclosure decision . woman with reproductive plans are advocated . Preliminary results show a tension within individuals regarding EP20. internet paternity testing in italy: is it a good practice? disclosure . There was a tendency to want to know the results of others, P. Tasinato, L. Caenazzo, P. Benciolini, D. Rodriguez; while not wishing to disclose their own . Further, there are indications of Dept. Enviromental Medicine and Public Health-Legal Medicine, University of a possible link between wanting to know the results against the patient’s Padova, Italy. wishes and issues of access . The author analyzes the empirical results Paternity analyses carried out by laboratories via Internet involve within the context of interests, obligations, and rights to inform a more sending the requesting parties a kit for collecting samples followed nuanced understanding of the issue, and to identify possible links by sending back the samples to the laboratory which will conduct the to other aspects of the genetic testing experience . Taken together, analyses . examination of these links may indicate possible policy approaches to Information are given to the subjects via the laboratory’s web site or by relieving some of the tension associated with the disclosure decision . the mailing of written notification. Not complicated analyses are involved . However, the repercussions of EP18. increased risk of breast cancer: do women really want to the result have a great emotional impact that could, when unexpected, know? cause turmoil among the people involved, the greatest repercussions G. Wigbout, A. Van Rens, S. Verhoef, N. K. Aaronson, L. J. van’t Veer, E. M. will inevitably be felt by the children . A. Bleiker; Recently easy-to-use kits have also been introduced in Italy . The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. The Italian Privacy’s Garante is assessing the ethical and legal Background: The Netherlands Cancer Institute began its Family implications but regulations are not yet in place . Cancer Clinic in 1995 to inform people about their possible increased In this work, we want to consider some legal and ethical issues linked familial and/or genetic risk of cancer . In the ensuing 10 years, we have to the method of investigation . observed that approximately 35 % of the clinic attendees prematurely We will analyze problems relating to information, consent and certifying discontinue the counseling process . The aim of the present study was the origin of samples by way of outlining the relevant Italian deontological to investigate the problems that attendees experience with starting laws and codes, and the Oviedo Convention’s information . We believe and/or continuing genetic counseling . that adequate information on this subject cannot be produced via the methods: Self-report questionnaires were sent to women who, during Internet and, consequently, any such consent is not valid . Finally, we a period of 15 months, applied for genetic counseling for the familial will analyze issues regarding the competence of the personnel who occurrence of breast cancer but discontinued the counseling after their carry out analysis and the reliability of the laboratories involved .In first contact. The questionnaire was sent, on average, 18 months after our opinion, the complexity of the situations and expectations linked their first contact with the clinic. to paternity investigations require a special sensitivity in dealing with Results: Of the 73 eligible women, 48 (66%) returned a completed each case, each with its own specific legal and ethical-deontological questionnaire . The main self-reported reasons for discontinuing issues, while taking into account the emotional stability of the subjects the counseling were: difficulties in anticipating the consequences of involved genetic counseling (28%), worries about not being able to cope with an unfavorable test results (20%), not having sufficient information about EP21. Discovering misattribuitted paternity in genetic conseling: the occurrence of cancer in the family (20%), and wanting to postpone ethical and pratical issues the genetic counseling until a later date . None of the respondents L. Caenazzo, P. Tasinato, A. Arseni, D. Rodriguez, P. Benciolini; indicated negative initial experiences with the family cancer clinic as Dept. Enviromental Medicine and Public Health-Legal Medicine, University of a reason for discontinuing the counseling . .conclusion: During the Padova, Italy. initial contact with a family cancer clinic, sufficient attention should be Nowadays, the frequency of children identified as being biologically paid to inquiring about clients’ worries and concerns, and to informing fathered by someone other than the man who believes he is the father them about ways that are available to cope effectively with test results, is such that, in the field of genetic counseling, is likely to encounter both positive and negative . cases of false paternity . In the field of counselling, information is dealt with which is not requested EP19. Genetic counseling during pregnancy: causes and by patients nor expected by them . This information, which seems to consequences regard only the “father” of the family, actually has repercussions for the C. M. Aalfs; entire family . By now, it has been accepted that genetic information is Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. by its nature both individual and familial . Reproductive genetic counselling preferably takes place prior to When dealing with false paternity, as revealed through genetic conception . In the Netherlands, however, an estimated 15 % of the counseling, what should the geneticist’s course of conduct be? In people attend a department of clinical genetics for the first time while accordance with the ethical principles and directives contained in already pregnant . If we want to stimulate preconception genetic the Oviedo Convention, must he/she reveal information in keeping counselling for familial conditions, it is important to gain insight in with his/her duty to inform patients about the state of their health? reasons for the timing of referral . The main aim of our study, therefore, Otherwise, must he/she refuse to supply such information in light of was to explore factors that may affect this timing . A second aim was to the negative repercussions and difficulties in managing them within the address some consequences of the timing of referral for the quality of limited scope of genetic counseling? Should the principle be valued the initial clinical genetic consultation . that a person has the right to such knowledge or should family unity Pregnant (n=100) and non-pregnant (n=100) women who visited our and the serenity of its internal relationships be safeguarded instead? If department of clinical genetics completed a questionnaire before and a geneticist were allowed to make his/her own decisions in individual after the initial consultation . The counsellors completed a post-visit cases, which criteria should guide him/her? Does the danger of questionnaire . The consultations were tape recorded and analysed . In geneticists’ paternalism exist? addition, a questionnaire was sent to the general practitioners of the This work offers a reflection on behavior in cases of disclosure of pregnant women . misattributed paternity, as based on ethical principles also according We found pregnant women to be less inclined to initiate genetic to the Oviedo Convention .Counselling strategies and process  EP22. An exploration of genetic professionals‘ perceptions of arising in families with HCM, minimising the chance that individuals non-directiveness in genetic counselling consultations requiring more time are lost to follow-up . We describe the Oxford E. G. D. Williams1,2, S. Sarangi3; Genetics Knowledge Park model of service involving a genetic 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, United Kingdom, 2North East counsellor which has been implemented over three years . Features Thames Regional Genetic Centre & Mid Anglia Cancer Network, London & of this service include particular attention to counselling pre-clinical Essex, United Kingdom, 3Health Communication Research Centre, Cardiff assessment, and strategies to help families with cascade information University, United Kingdom. and screening . Case studies of psychosocial barriers to uptake of As yet there still seems to be a lack of agreement, amongst those clinical services for HCM are important to inform the development and involved in clinical genetics, regarding what actually constitutes assessment of services for families with inherited cardiomyopathies . non-directiveness . This study aims to explore the perceptions and understanding of genetic professionals relating to non-directiveness EP25. A comparison of different care pathways in two British and its continued appropriateness in genetic counselling . Loosely Genetics centres structured focus groups with eight clinical geneticists and genetic J. Shearn1, C. Patch2; counsellors studied their recognition and understanding of non- 1Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2University directiveness, as well as how appropriate they believe non- of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. directiveness is, and how non-directiveness influences their practice. Patient satisfaction when attending as a result of a referral for Marfan Analysis of transcribed focus groups revealed that participants had the syndrome was examined in two British Genetics centres with different following understanding of non-directiveness: Not influencing clients models of care . Clinic 1 offered a one stop Marfan clinic . Clinic 2 and letting them make their own decisions by; presenting all aspects offered a traditional genetics appointment with subsequent referrals of a scenario, not giving an opinion, not being overtly influenced by as required . ones own values, internally monitoring choice of words and non-verbal The literature indicated that the multidisciplinary clinic may be beneficial signals and responding to clients’ cues on a case-by-case basis . These for patients and health care professionals in terms of efficiency of results may have implications for any future attempts to provide an service and the pooling of resources . Little data exists on patient operational definition of non-directiveness that is collectively agreed satisfaction in different models of care . upon by genetics professionals . Patient satisfaction was measured using an audit tool for genetics service (Skirton et al, 2005) . 25 patients responded to the postal EP23. concepts of Genetic counselling questionnaire, giving a response rate of 49% . There was a statistically G. Mijaljica1, V. Culic2; significant correlation between overall satisfaction and the outcome 1University of Split School of Medicine, Split, Croatia, 2University Hospital Split, measure, greater peace of mind (Pearson’s correlation coefficient Department of Paediatrics, Department for Medical Genetics, Split, Croatia. 0 .007) . Patients in Clinic 1 ranked outcome measures related to a Many studies show that after a positive diagnosis of Down’s syndrome, diagnosis being made or refuted higher than Clinic 2 patients . Clinic 70 to 100% of couples choose selective abortion of the affected 2 patients ranked outcome measures related to understanding the fetus. For example, among the first 7,000 women receiving prenatal condition higher than Clinic 1 patients . diagnosis under a public health programme in New York City, 97% It may be suggested that patients in Clinic 1 achieve ‘greater peace of aborted for Down’s syndrome . mind’ because more of them are told in one clinic appointment whether When deciding to have the procedure, parents-to-be use several they have Marfan syndrome or not . sources of information: the referring physician or genetic counselor, It is important to consider that making a diagnosis is one aspect of a written and electronic media, and other people who had the procedure . genetics referral . The experience of patients given the diagnosis of The same sources of information are present when the parents Marfan syndrome in the one stop clinic requires further investigation . have had the procedure and are expecting and receiving results of amniocentesis . The news that the fetus is affected with a disorder has EP26. ideal genetic counselling in international guidelines even more profound consequences as the couple grapples with the E. Rantanen1, H. Melin2, S. Pöntinen2, H. Kääriäinen1; issue of whether or not to continue the pregnancy . 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Depart- In this paper, we intend to address the issue of genetic counseling ment of Sociology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. after a positive diagnosis of Down syndrome from two aspects . The Background: In order to recognise the societal implications that are first aspect is narrow counseling, which includes information about produced within counselling in the context of genetic testing, there is physical and psychological characteristics the child is expected to a need to study the ideals that are directed towards it . Guidelines for have, as a person affected with Down’s syndrome . The second aspect counselling can be considered to reflect these ideals. is wider counseling, which, along with the medical information, includes Objective: To review how genetic counselling is defined in international experience of parents already raising children with Down’s syndrome . guidelines and to examine what kinds of expectations and ideals are To reach a fully informed choice on a matter important as this, these concentrated on it, after which the ideology behind the ideal counselling two approaches should be equally considered . can be investigated . Methods: Guidelines for genetic counselling that have been produced EP24. Psychosocial barriers to uptake of clinical services for by international and European political bodies, regional professional hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; implications for service design organisations, ethical boards and patient associations were collected C. R. Honeywell, H. Watkins, E. Blair, C. Fraser-Jones; and classified using the computer-aided analysis programme University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. QSRNudist. The classifications were analysed with discourse The provision of services for families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy analysis that focuses on the uniform mechanisms of meanings . The (HCM) has been evolving with the advances in detection, management objective was to find the collectively accepted conceptions of genetic and genetic analysis of this condition . The advent of genetic analysis, in counselling . particular, brings with it the potential to clarify risk status for first degree Results: In the guidelines, counselling is seen as a unique process of relatives and to offer a health economic advantage . However, uptake providing very special information . The speciality of genetic information of clinical screening with or without genetic testing is not one hundred is a core issue, which creates the basis of ideal counselling . The percent amongst at-risk family members. Psychosocial influences information is expected to be too complex for ordinary people to such as chronic anxiety, positive or negative family role models, and understand without the help of specially trained professionals and readiness to confront risk status may extend this process over months particular methods . The ideal counselling concentrates on individual or years . We present three cases illustrating how psychosocial issues choices, whereas family is seen as a problem that endangers the prolonged uptake of clinical services and required flexibility on the part values of individuality and confidentiality. In the constructions of of clinic providers . These issues are more the exception than the rule ideal counselling a well-trained professional counsels people on their and are more likely to occur in families who have suffered bereavement individual situations, telling all the facts honestly, but empowering their due to HCM . Our experience supports the presence of a healthcare own evaluations and ethics . provider designated to handle and keep track of psychosocial issues Counselling strategies and process  EP27. Application of a specific instrument to evaluate the level EP29. Awareness on Genetics and Genetic counseling: overview of anxiety (sAt) in 16 families with a diagnosis of triple X in their of an outreach programme model for a developing country. daughter A. Udumudi, A. Jagannathan; D. Quagliarini1, O. Albanese2, A. Kustermann1, P. Castorina3, U. Cavallari3, F. GeneTech, Hyderabad, India. Lalatta3; Low levels of awareness on Genetics, illiteracy, resource-constraints, 1Prenatal Diagnosis Unit Obsterics and Gynecology Fondazione Ospedale lack of services near the place of residence, compulsions of work, Maggiore Policlinico Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento travel constraints are some of the reasons for people not availing Scienze Umane Università Studi Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Genetic counseling in the rural, semi urban and other districts of Unit Department D.B.N. Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Mangiagalli Andhra Pradesh, (India) . Most of the people living in such areas have e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy. never availed counseling despite the prevalence of Genetic disorders Sex chromosome abnormalities (SCA) are the most frequently occuring in their families or being affected by them . A model of service to reach chromosomal abnormalities both at prenatal diagnosis and at birth . this unreached section of people has been evolved and implemented Approximately 1/400 newborns has SCA and incidence at prenatal for the past few years . The model involves intensive networking and diagnosis is even greater (1/250-1/300) . establishing effective linkages between the professional team offering Among SCA, triple X diagnosis, which has probably little clinical Genetic services and the medical practitioners, other clinical service consequences to the affected individual, requires complex and providers and the community . The programme serves as a single challenging genetic counselling with not fully documented outcome . window system of service delivery to the community at the community We have identified 26 couples who requested a genetic counselling itself through community mobilization . The programme comprises after the prenatal diagnosis of 47,XXX in the first or second trimester of various Awareness building measures, sensitization processes, of pregnancy (period 1998-2005) . linkage building, Genetic Counseling, Sample generation and follow Among these, 7 couples asked for termination of pregnancy, 3 were up . The model has been a viable approach to offer services to patients lost at follow-up, 16 accepted to be included in our study . The protocol and families who have hitherto not availed any professional help for included clinical genetic evaluation with auxological measurements Genetic awareness, counseling or testing facilities . Though patients and detailed personal history . With parent’s consent, pictures of the turn out in large numbers, their needs are identified and met in a very child were taken to document dysmorphisms and familial traits . professional manner with due importance to ethical issues . A questionnaire including an assessment of motor, language, The paper will provide an overview of such community level initiatives behavioral and cognitive skills was then administered . Information in different places and share the professional, social and psychological about the relationship with the pedaitrician and other family members impact of 75 such programmes . were collected as well . Preliminary results did not show any relevant physical or congnitive EP30. Risk perception, worry and satisfaction related to a delay. In three cases language delay was identified. A general high genetic counselling session level of anxiety in the relationship between parents and daughter C. Bjorvatn1,2, A. Carlsson1,2, B. Hanestad1,2, N. Øyen1,3, G. E. Eide1,4, G. Ber- was observed . This observation prompted us to apply evaluation glund2,5, G. Kvale6,2; instruments specific for language area and, for age four and above, a 1Dept of Public Health and Primary Health Care, University of Bergen, Bergen, Separation Anxiety Test (SAT) for both children and parents . Norway, 2The Bergen Psychosocial FUGE-project, University of Bergen, Ber- We believe that this instrument will help us to better undersand the gen, Norway, 3Center of Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland long term consequences of the prenatal communication of a 47,XXX University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 4Center for Clinical Research, Haukeland karyotype . University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 5Dept of Public Health and Caring Sci- ences, Uppsala University, Sweden, 6Dept of Clinical Psychology, University of EP28. Development of the genetic counsellor workforce- a UK Bergen, Bergen, Norway. Department of Health funded scheme Genetic counselling for hereditary breast / ovarian cancer and L. Kerzin-Storrar1, C. Barnes2, H. Skirton3; colorectal cancer was evaluated by assessing patients’ perceived risk 1Academic Unit of Medical Genetics St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United of developing cancer before and after genetic counselling . In addition, Kingdom, 2Guy’s and St Thomas’s NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Uni- the level of worry and satisfaction with genetic counselling (SCS) were versity of Plymouth, Taunton, United Kingdom. analysed . The 2003 Government White Paper (Our Inheritance, Our Future) on Two hundred and thirteen patients with a family history of breast genetics stimulated the expansion of specialist genetic services in the / ovarian cancer or colorectal cancer answered a questionnaire United Kingdom (UK) . The government was committed to increasing immediately before and after genetic counselling (response rate: the genetic counsellor (GC) workforce to help address pressure on 77%) . genetic services . Most UK genetic counsellors have a background Results showed that the patients’ perceived risk decreased significantly in nursing, but an increasing proportion have completed a Master’s (p < .0001) after genetic counselling . However, there was a discrepancy degree in Genetic Counselling . This diversity of background was between risk perception in percentage and risk expressed in words . considered a strength within genetics teams and the Association of Forty-one percent of the patients believed they had the same or less Nurses and Genetic Counsellors Registration system was designed to risk for developing cancer compared to other persons at same age ensure that people from a wide range of backgrounds were eligible to and gender. Furthermore, patients were significantly less worried after undertake the two-year training period prior to registration . However, the genetic counselling session (p< .0001) . Low satisfaction with the there was a danger that the need to leave salaried posts to undertake counsellor, high perceived risk for developing cancer and younger genetic counsellor training would act as a disincentive to qualified age were predictors of high level of worry . Although the patients were health professionals joining the profession . exceedingly satisfied with the genetic counselling (mean score on The AGNC proposed a centrally-funded GC Training Post Scheme to the subscales of SCS: 11 .2, range: 3-12), 27% gave a wrong answer the Department of Health to provide salaried posts for those entering regarding whether they were included in a surveillance program . In the profession. Funding for up to 50 posts was granted, with financial conclusion, counsellors seem to met the patients’ psychological support for the trainee’s salary and educational allowance and a stipend requirements, but perhaps not their informative needs . More than 40% to the host department . On completing training, the post-holder is of the patients assessed their own risk to be the same or less compared expected to be ready to apply for registration . Fifteen Genetic Centres to others, suggesting that the patients have difficulties understanding in the UK were approved as training centres and, initially, 22 trainees their risk of developing cancer . were appointed . Thirteen have now completed their training and eight are near completion . A second phase of trainee appointments has been allocated . Data on the backgrounds, destination after training and the registration status of post-holders will be presented .Predictive testing 00 EP31. testing the children: Do non-genetic health-care providers information does not ascertain that results are interpreted as intended . differ in their decision to advice genetic pre-symptomatic testing Especially for inconclusive results, in-person disclosure and discussion on minors? A study in five countries in the EU. of the consequences is required . A. M. C. Plass1,2, M. J. H. Baars3, M. C. Cornel1,2, C. Julian-Reynier4, I. Nip- pert5, H. Harris6, U. Kristoffersson7, J. Schmidtke8, E. Anionwu9, C. Benjamin6, EP33. Psychosocial aspects of genetic testing in families at high K. Challen6, R. Harris6, L. P. ten Kate1,2; risk of developing multiple tumors at various sites and ages. 1Department of Clinical Genetics and Human Genetics, subdivision of Com- C. R. M. Lammens, N. K. Aaronson, S. Verhoef, E. M. A. Bleiker; munity Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, NKI-AVL, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 2EMGO-Institute, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Nether- Background: Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) and Von Hippel-Lindau lands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Disease (VHL) are characterized by an increased risk of developing 4INSERM UMR379, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Université de la Méditerranée, multiple tumors at various sites and ages for which preventive and Marseille, France, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Münster, Germany, 6GenEd treatment options are limited . Coordinating Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, Purpose: To investigate the uptake of genetic testing for LFS and VHL, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 8Institut evaluate the psychosocial consequences of (not) undergoing genetic für Humangenetik, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany, testing, and assess compliance with recommended surveillance 9Faculty of Health & Human Sciences, London, United Kingdom. programs . Introduction: Within Europe many guidelines exist on genetic testing Patients and methods: In collaboration with the nine family cancer on minors, but there is no common EU policy regarding this topic . clinics in the Netherlands a nationwide cross-sectional study is being Genetic testing in children is recommended only under circumstances performed . The 10 known mutation families with LFS (± 70 adults where a clear medical and psychological benefit to the child can and 50 partners) and the 40 known mutation families with VHL (± 160 be demonstrated . Pre-symptomatic genetic testing in minors is adults and 110 partners) are invited to participate in the study . Data recommended for disorders for which medical intervention exists, and are collected via postal questionnaires which asses experiences with for which early detection improves future medical health . However, in genetic testing and associated preventive health behavior, cancer daily health-care practice it may be difficult to apply these guidelines. worries, general and cancer-specific distress, identity development, Aim: The aim of this study is to see whether non-genetic health- self-esteem, family relationships and communication, feelings of care providers in five different EU-countries would act similar once quilt, quality of life and attitudes toward prenatal diagnosis and confronted with parents request of pre-symptomatic testing on their pre-implementation genetic diagnosis (PGD) . For a subgroup of minor children for a treatable disease . participants (n=100) a semi-structured interview will address the more Methods: Structured questionnaires were sent out in five different EU complex issues . Data collection has just started . countries (Germany, France, Sweden, The UK and The Netherlands) to Relevance: Insight in the impact of genetic testing for family members GPs and paediatricians, presenting them with an imaginary scenario, at high risk of developing multiple tumors at various sites and ages in addition of which questions were asked about whether or not they will aid in planning appropriate genetic, medical (i .e ., screening), felt that the children presented in the scenario should undergo pre- and psychosocial health care services . It will also serve as a model symptomatic genetic testing . for investigating the impact of genetic testing for other comparable Results: There was agreement between countries on testing the oldest cancer syndromes that undoubtedly will be identified with increasing child, aged 12, and not testing the youngest child, Tom (6 months) . frequency in the future . But there were large differences between countries in recommending a genetic test for the child at the age of 8 years . Physicians in France EP34. Other factors of psychosocial impact of presymptomatic and Germany would recommend a test, whereas physicians in The testing for late-onset neurological disorders UK, Sweden and The Netherlands would not . M. Paneque Herrera1,2, J. Sequeiros1,3, L. Velazquez2, M. Fleming1,3; Conclusion: It is important to formulate a standard non-ambiguous 1IBMC, Univ. Porto, Portugal, 2CIRAH, Holguin, Cuba, 3ICBAS, Univ. Porto, guideline on genetic testing on minors in the EU . Portugal. The implications of predictive testing for the partner have received EP32. Written information of msi-results - how well are they little attention so far, as have the psychological implications of understood? presymptomatic testing in relation to family dynamics . What happens R. Jost1, C. Schroeter1, C. Jung2, M. Tariverdian3, M. Kloor4, M. Keller1; in Portuguese and Cuban families affected with late-onset hereditary 1Division of Psychooncology, Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, Univer- diseases? What is the impact in these families due to the fact of having sity Hospital Heidelberg, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University relatives at risk or having affected members? Do descendents at-risk Hospital Heidelberg, Germany, 3Department of Surgery, University Hospital with a result of “carrier”, really experience psychological well-being Heidelberg, Germany, 4Division of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Pathology, similar or even better that the general population? Or does this mean University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany. that the expression of this emotional suffering finds its way through Purpose Screening for MSI out of tumour tissue has proven a sensitive somatization? A real psychosocial orientation that takes into account procedure to detect possible cases of HNPCC . Within the German the family dimension, together with the individual one, still needs HNPCC consortium MSI analysis is performed routinely, followed by further and greater research, so does the impact of the diagnosis on search for mutation with a MSI-H result . Subsequent to comprehensive the family . Motivated by these psychological aspects, we are carrying multidisciplinary counselling, participants receive a written summary out a protocol of research to assess the psychosocial impact and the of the MSI result . So far, no information is available as to how this family functioning of children at-risk inside our predictive programs in information is understood and adequately interpreted by counselees . Cuba and in Portugal . We present now the preliminary results of 27 This study aims to explore the consultands’ comprehension of a MSI Portuguese subjects involved in this research until the present, at a summary letter . methods: 4 weeks after notification of the MSI result time when their 3 month follow-up has been completed . Until now, no by letter, 225 subjects completed questionnaires, aiming to explore significant differences have been shown among the pre-test and post- the comprehension of results . 107 subjects received a MSS result, test levels of anxiety, depression and somatization regardless of the 88 were informed of a MSI-H result . In 30 subjects, the result was presymptomatic results . This study is continuing at the present moment, inconclusive, due to a MSS result in the presence of clinical criteria searching for other factors of psychosocial impact of presymptomatic indicating HNPCC . Results: Overall, 90% of consultands considered testing and family dynamics . the written MSI summary comprehensible and easy to understand . 83% of counselees assigned a low risk (MSS) correspondingly rated their risk of HNPCC to be low . Among counselees assigned a high-risk (MSI-H), 52% accordingly rated their risk to be high (correspondence 52%) . Among subjects receiving an inconclusive result correspondence of self-rated and assigned risk was found as low as 30% . conclusion: In case of a MSS-result written information appears an appropriate means . In case of MSI-H and inconclusive MSI-results, written Predictive testing 01 EP35. Disseminating BRCA test results identified in the EP37. short-term psychological impact of predictive testing for research context to relatives of deceased prostate cancer machado-Joseph disease in the Azores islands (Portugal) patients: a qualitative study of relatives‘ experiences. C. Gonzalez1, M. Lima2, T. Kay3, C. Silva3, C. Santos2, J. Santos1; E. Ormondroyd1, C. Moynihan1, A. Ardern-Jones2, R. Eeles1, S. Davolls1, M. 1Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 2Univer- Watson2; sity of the Azores, Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 3Hospital of D. Estefania, 1Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 2Royal Marsden Hospi- Lisbon, Portugal. tal, Sutton, United Kingdom. Objective: The short-term impact of the pre-symptomatic genetic test This study was established as an adjunct to an earlier, national study (PT) for Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) in the Azores (Portuguese at the Royal Marsden Hospital and UK Institute of Cancer Research, Islands) was assessed in 46 individuals at risk who completed the PT which detected pathogenic BRCA2 mutations in a number of men Program . Methods: Scores for depression and anxiety were used as diagnosed with prostate cancer before the age of 55 (Edwards et al, indicators of the subjects’ emotional status immediately before the PT 2003) . The men had died before the results of that study were available, and 1 year after disclosure of the results . Results: Global levels of and the Clinical Genetics team at the ICR/RMH attempted to contact participation in the Azorean PT Program for MJD were high (20 .7%), the next-of-kin offering an information/counselling session . particularly in Flores Island (35 .8%) . For the total sample, mean scores The current study is a psychosocial evaluation of the impact of being of depression and anxiety before and after the PT presented without contacted about the existence of a genetic fault in a deceased relative . clinical significance. No differences were found for depression and A snowball sampling strategy has been used to recruit relatives with anxiety scores before and after the PT . Furthermore, when grouped by whom the next-of-kin has shared this information . We are exploring: test results (carriers/non-carriers), there were no differences between • relatives’ reactions to learning about the genetic test results in their pre- and post-test levels . Conclusions: Results indicate that the test deceased relative, result did not cause a decrease in the psychological well-being of the • prior and current perceptions of risk, and risk management individuals tested . The high number of participants performing the decisions PT in the small and isolated community of Flores Island, where MJD • communication with other relatives represents a source of stigma, was interpreted as an indication that • information and support needs in this particular population the PT offers the individuals at risk the • whether relatives perceive that they have experienced benefit or possibility of liberating from a stigma, and, hence, from exclusion . harm as a result . Participants, some of whom have and some have not elected to have EP38. correlates of presymptomatic testing acceptance in genetic counselling, include partners, adult children and siblings of late-onset neurological diseases and familial cancers: some the deceased men . Semi-structured, in-depth interviews with twelve preliminary findings within a comprehensive psychological relatives are currently being analysed using a grounded theory framework approach . Findings will be discussed, including the importance of the L. Rolim1,2, C. Paúl3, S. Lêdo1, Â. Leite1, M. Fleming1,3, J. Sequeiros1,3, J. A. role of the communicator who may not be the closest relative . Effective Zagalo4,5; communication and subsequent handling of the information, whether or 1CGPP, IBMC, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Univ. Fernando Pessoa, Porto, not this includes engagement, is dependent on a positive relationship . Portugal, 3ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4Fac. Psicologia e Ciências da Educação, Univ. Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Hosp. Univ. Coimbra, Coimbra, EP36. six years follow-up in the psychological protocol for Portugal. presymptomatic testing for FAP-i (AttRV30m), mJD and HD: Having as a starting point the proposal of a comprehensive some preliminary results psychological framework, we developed this exploratory study in order S. Lêdo1,2, Â. Leite1, L. Rolim1,3, M. Branco1,4, S. Sequeiros1,5, J. Sequeiros1,6, to investigate the relationship between selected psychosocial variables M. Fleming1,6; and acceptance of presymptomatic testing . 1IBMC, Univ. Porto, Portugal, 2ISCS-N, Porto, Portugal, 3Univ. Fernando Pes- All participants were persons at-risk, tested for familial amyloid soa, Porto, Portugal, 4Hosp. Geral Santo António, Porto, Portugal, 5ISPA, Lis- polyneuropathy type I or ATTRV30M (FAP-I, n=80), Huntington disease bon, Portugal, 6ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Portugal. (HD, n=15), Machado-Joseph disease (MJD, n=17), hereditary breast Over the past 6 years, we have followed a large number of individuals and ovarian cancer (HBOC, n=18) and hereditary non-polyposis at risk for three late-onset neurological disorders: Machado-Joseph colorectal cancer (HNPCC, n=19) . All were interviewed before disease (MJD or SCA3), familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) type I disclosure of the test results . - ATTRV30M, and Huntington disease . They came for presymptomatic Participants who had reported higher acceptance of presymptomatic testing and entered the psychological follow-up protocol at our testing believed that test uptaking had more advantages than predictive and preventive genetics centre . disadvantages, relied more heavily on behavioural (problem solving) or This preliminary study presents an initial approach to the psychological cognitive (logical analysis) approach coping-strategies, and had more consequences of presymptomatic testing for those diseases, in positive attitudes towards doctors and medicine . On the other hand, a sample of more than 350 at risk persons (60% females, 40% participants who had reported lower acceptance of presymptomatic males), which uptook genetic counselling and testing, and underwent testing showed greater decisional conflict: they were more uncertain psychosocial evaluation . about their decision to be tested and felt uninformed, unclear about As indicators of their emotional state, we chose scores of depression values (pros and cons of each option), unsupported in decision and anxiety, reached with application of two psychological scales making and unsatisfied with their decision; moreover, they perceived (Beck’s Inventory of Depression and Zung’s Anxiety Scale) . These more disadvantages in presymptomatic testing, and scored higher on have been evaluated at four moments of the protocol: baseline (before neuroticism . testing); and three weeks, six months and one year after disclosure of These results suggest that tested individuals may represent a very the genetic test results . heterogeneous group, at the affective, cognitive and motivational Results shown that, for the vast majority of subjects, genetic testing did dimensions . To the extent we can delineate the role of these dimensions not modify their psychological status, into depression or anxiety, and in the uptake of presymptomatic testing, we may target pre-test that the average scores did not increase after test result was revealed . psychological evaluation and genetic counselling more effectively . In fact, significant changes into a depressive or anxiety disorder have never been identified at any moment, with the use of the adopted instruments; the average scores were lower than the threshold 9 for depression or than 40 for anxiety . Despite these results are concordant with previous studies in literature, we may still need further research, and implement the use of different instruments and variables .Predictive testing 0 EP39. Presymptomatic testing for late-onset neurological in 2005 (upon definitive publication of the new Portuguese law on diseases and familial cancers: an exploratory psychosocial genetic testing) that we begun following a structured protocol which study conducted in Portugal includes the psychological evaluation of all at-risk individuals . J. A. Zagalo1,2, L. Rolim3,4, C. Paúl5, S. Lêdo3, Â. Leite3, M. Fleming3,5, J. Se- Although both HD and FAP are late-onset neurological diseases, queiros3,5; psychological disorders/psychiatric complaints are exclusive to HD 1Faculdade de Psicologia e de Ciências da Educação, Universidade de Co- patients, in whom they may represent the first disease symptoms. imbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Hosp. Univ. Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3CGPP, The purpose of this work is to characterise the psychological profile IBMC, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4Univ. Fernando Pessoa, Porto, Portugal, of healthy at-risk subjects and to examine any differences between 5ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal. HD and FAP groups . These issues are particularly important when This exploratory study was carried out to analyze differences in socio- anticipating the impact of predictive results, and instrumental when demographic and psychological variables among individuals at-risk for developing an adequate early intervention psychological program . late-onset neurological diseases and familial cancers . 8 HD and 19 FAP subjects, were evaluated so far .Besides an interview, All participants were persons at-risk, tested for familial amyloid we tested each individual using: Acceptance of the Predictive Testing polyneuropathy type I or ATTRV30M (FAP-I, n=80), Huntington disease Scale, State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI), MMPI (revised), Risk (HD, n=15), Machado-Joseph disease (MJD, n=17), hereditary breast Perception of being a carrier . and ovarian cancer (HBOC, n=18) and hereditary non-polyposis We have found no statistical differences between HD and FAP groups colorectal cancer (HNPCC, n=19) . All were interviewed before for demographic data, test acceptance, State and Trait anxiety, risk disclosure of the test results . perception, and personality traits . We found a negative correlation Individuals at-risk for HBOC were older, more educated and considered between state-Anxiety and acceptance of testing, and a positive themselves to be at a higher genetic risk than those at-risk for the correlation between state-Anxiety and childless, in both groups . other diseases. Subjects at-risk for FAP-I reported significantly higher This is a preliminary analysis with a limited number of subjects . satisfaction with life than those at-risk for MJD . At-risk individuals However, we will be will evaluating quite some more individuals before for HNPCC reported significantly higher levels of neuroticism than EMPAG . Our the other groups, and perceived a higher emotional burden than experience reinforces the importance of targeted psychological those at-risk for FAP-I . Moreover, individuals at-risk for MJD showed intervention in the context of presymptomatic testing . significantly lower adherence to presymptomatic testing than the other groups .Given that FAP-I is a treatable condition and MJD is not, it is EP42. Psychological particularities and personal representations not surprising that the former reported higher subjective well-being . of subjects undergoing to genetic testing for hereditary colonic It may be that those undergoing HNPCC testing are a less selected cancer and, therefore, a less psychologically robust group than the other C. Fantini-Hauwel1, J. L. Pedinielli1, S. Lejeune2, S. Manouvrier2; groups . Acknowledgement of these differences can be applied to 1Université de Provence. Laboratoire PsyCle. Département de Psychologie, Aix improve psychological evaluation and genetic counselling of at-risk en provence, France, 2Service de génétique clinique. hopital Jeanne de Flan- individuals who participate in presymptomatic testing programs . Pre- dres. CHRU, Lille, France. test assessment of psychological well-being and personality could be Familial history of cancer could lead to psychological vulnerability that used as a basis for targeting those most likely to experience adverse could interfere with genetic counselling and adjustment after result reactions to the test outcome . announcement. Our aim is first to evaluate psychological vulnerability of 127 subjects (61 unaffected, 66 affected) who have undergone EP40. Beyond consent: ordinary abuses in HD presymptomatic mutation searching for colonic cancer and secondly to describe genetic testing in italy. personal representations and beliefs, prior to the first counselling. P. Zinzi1, G. Jacopini1, M. Frontali2; The questionnaires Center for Epidemiological Scale for Depression 1Institute of Cognitive Science and Technologies, National Research Council, (CES-D) and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) were employed Rome, Italy, 2Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, National Re- to assess distress and open-ended questions were proposed to access search Council, Rome, Italy. to beliefs about genetic predisposition . HD has been one of the first and most influential experiences of genetic RESULTS: subjects who have undergone genetic testing were more testing. Although the procedure does not offer specific clinical benefits, depressed than non clinical population (χ2 =77.84; p=.000). Compared genetic testing has been implemented as a mean to promote at risk with unaffected individuals, affected subjects were more depressed (t=- individuals’ autonomy and emotional well-being . In order to pursue 2.05;p=.04), more anxious (t=-2.89;p=.005) but were not concerned by this aim, the International Guidelines recommend HD genetic testing trait anxiety . Surprisingly, 30 .7% had estimated their own risk as null or being managed in a protocol including the provision of pre and post- weak and 69 .3% had considered they were at high or higher risk . Half test counselling in order to reduce the risks of catastrophic reaction to of the subjects had a bias perception of their own genetic susceptibility, a positive result . which they defined as higher like others family members, invoking 1) However, during the last years we have seen a diffuse trend to physical and/or psychological similarity with an affected close relative, perform genetic test for HD as a “normal” laboratory analysis taking 2) the number of cancer , 3) or depressed cognitions like fatalism and blood samples from people at risk without any specific counselling hopelessness . and we were able to collect and document some of these “abuses” . CONCLUSIONS: These results highlight the particular vulnerability This practice fails to protect people at risk as it does not provide them of subjects participating to genetic testing for colonic cancer . Some with the opportunity to evaluate the pros and cons of knowing own subjects have biases, naives representations which could be a barrier genetic condition and to give a really informed consent to the test . Our to medical information, preventive strategies and emotional well being, data suggest that most of these tests have been performed in order to following the genetic results . Implications and consequences for future obtain blood samples for research purposes . We propose to assess if adjustment are discussed . similar events have occurred in other countries and analyse how the internationally agreed protocol can assume a normative value for HD EP43. Partners of mutation-carriers for Huntington’s disease: genetic testing . forgotten persons? M. Decruyenaere1, G. Evers-Kiebooms1, A. Boogaerts1, K. Philippe1, K. De- EP41. Psychological evaluation for predictive testing for myttenaere2, R. Dom3, J. P. Fryns1; Huntington Disease and Familial Amyloidotic Polyneuropathy 1Center Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Psychiatry, Leuven, type1: A Portuguese experience. Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium. A. S. Leonardo1, I. Cordeiro1, M. Fenha2, I. M. Gaspar1; This study focuses on psychological distress and coping strategies 1Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa, in partners of tested persons five years after predictive testing for Lisboa, Portugal. Huntington’s disease . Sixteen carrier-couples and 17 non-carrier- Presymptomatic testing for Huntington’s Disease (HD) and Familial couples participated in the study . Self-report questionnaires were Amyloidotic Polyneuropathy Type 1 (FAP) is available at Genetics’ used, assessing depression level, anxiety, intrusive and avoidance Department of HSM, since the late nineties . Nevertheless, it was only thoughts and coping strategies .Beliefs and cultural aspects 0 Results: Partners of carriers have as much distress as carriers, and significantly more. Carers of HF attributed to environmental causes for some distress variables even more (p<0 .05 to 0 .001) . They clearly and those for CP cited psychosocial and lifestyle factors significantly experience more psychological distress than non-carriers’ partners, more . as expected (p<0 .05 to 0 .001) . Regarding coping strategies, carriers’ Types of attributions made reflect current scientific knowledge - partners adopt more passive strategies (passive-regressive and with HF individuals considering environmental factors as significant avoiding reactions; p<0.05) and less active strategies (social support contributors to disease and symptoms, CP individuals emphasising seeking and problem solving; p<0.05 to 0.001), compared to carriers. mainly on Psychosocial attributes whilst single gene conditions For both carriers and partners, the adoption of more passive strategies attributing to mystical factors . was associated with more distress and the use of more active strategies with less distress (for carriers: p<0.05 to 0.001; for partners: p<0.05). EP46. Qualitative assessment of illness representations The presence of children before predictive testing was an additional in relatives at-risk for late-onset neurological disorders: a result-specific distress factor. grounded theory approach Conclusion: Carriers’ partners have at least as much psychological Â. M. T. Leite1, J. Sequeiros1,2, C. Paúl2; distress as carriers, but partners have the tendency to draw back . 1IBMC, Univ. Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Portugal. The results suggest that the grief of carriers’ partners may be This research evaluated the illness representations of persons “disenfranchised”, or not socially recognised, as if they have no right to at risk for late-onset neurological disorders (Huntington disease, mourn . We moreover interpreted the results referring to psychological Machado-Joseph disease and familial amyloid polyneuropathy - type I defences and imbalanced partner relationship . Finally, we formulate ATTRV30M), based on their answers to three open questions . some implications for genetic counselling . Our aim was to explore these illness representations and compare them with those of persons at-risk for another genetic disease EP44. What representations lie behind presymptomatic testing? (haemochromatosis was chosen as the “control” disease, due to A psychodynamic perspective of a case study. the fact that the burden is much less, as it has effective preventive A. S. Leonardo; measures) . Hospital Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal. We presumed that individuals at-risk who come for pre-symptomatic The aim of this presentation is to think about psychodynamic concepts testing of late-onset disorders might present negative illness behind genetic counselling for presymptomatic testing . representations, once they are pressed by the doubt of being or not We all went through an identification process with the primary objects being a ‘carrier’ for such incapacitating and incurable diseases . - mother/father - to construct our own identity . The individuals that These questions were subordinated to two themes: (1) illness approach genetic services are no different . We will try to understand representation and (2) motivation to undergo presymptomatic testing . how the process of identification with a sick caregiver can interfere (1) Referring to illness representation, questions were: 1- What does with the subject’s thoughts and behaviour concerning presymptomatic this illness means to you?; and 2- What do you know about this illness?; testing . As an example of the impact of identification by introjection, we and (2) referring to the motivation the question was: 3- Why did you will discuss the case of a woman with a difficult relationship with her decide to come for presymptomatic testing? sick mother, who believed to be positive for Machado-Joseph Disease, Using the program NUDIST, we could find several thematic-answers even though she had not been tested yet . We will see that this strong in all questions, and for all diseases, what allowed us to create main belief is the result of a fusion of her own Self with her mother’s Self . categories (thematic-categories) that would then unfold in several We propose that the representations of at-risk individuals about their other subcategories . sick caregivers and the quality of their relationships (secure/insecure) We conclude that quantitative answers may replace representation with them are important issues to consider and a key to understanding and expression of feelings and affections . Thus, these individuals have their attitude towards presymptomatic testing . the reason to come for presymptomatic testing outside themselves (in The psychologist must be aware of these representations of the the others), and not inside themselves (in their future or in their need Self and realise that they are unique for each case . This is also the to know) . reason why an interview can be the most important instrument in the psychological evaluation . EP47. Genetic counseling to people with deep-rooted Belief Key - words: presymptomatic testing, mechanisms of identification, systems: the indian perspective. secure/insecure relationships, Self . A. Udumudi; GeneTech, Hyderabad, India. EP45. illness and symptom causal attributions in single gene India is a Kaleidoscope of diverse cultures, languages, faiths, beliefs, and multiple gene conditions having an ambiguous and socio-religious customs and sentiments . The population explosion, environmental trigger. consanguineous marriages in some parts of the country, marriages J. Scerri1, E. Ferguson1, C. A. Scerri2; between people of the same community enhance the risk for genetic 1University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 2University of Malta, disorders, There remains disparity in levels of economic, social, Msida, Malta. educational and technological development between the urban and The study explores the extent to which peoples’ attributions reflects the rural population . Dichotomy in Gender roles, lay beliefs on traditional genetic status of their condition and current scientific knowledge. healing practices, the social stigma attached to some genetic conditions Types of attributions made by patients (and their carers) with single and the strong belief in “Karma” - fruit of ones action - also influence gene (Thalassaemia, Becker`s Muscular Dystrophy patients, N=38, the attitude towards resorting to Genetic counseling or genetic tests . [TM]), multiple gene having an ambiguous (Coeliac , Psoriasis, N= 77, In this socio-economic-cultural backdrop, another major factor to be [CP]) or environmental trigger (Hay fever, N= 77, [HF]) were compared . encountered is the lack of awareness on different aspects of human Participants were interviewed to assess illness and symptom causal genetics in all strata of the society . attributions . Following factor analysis, Environmental, Psychosocial, The paper will focus on the challenges and accomplishments in Life-Style factors for Patients and Carers and Mystical (Patient group the field of genetic counseling with reference to the Indian context. only), were identified for Disease. For Symptoms Environmental, Comprehensive analysis of more than 3000 counseling sessions will Psychosocial factors for carers and patients and a Mystical (patient be presented. It will share some field-based experiences and some group) and Life-style factor (carers only) were identified good practices in the Indian context to reach people with appropriate HF individuals cited the greatest number of attributes for disease and information on Genetic disorders and the process of managing and symptoms followed by CP patients . For cause of disease, environmental preventing them . It will also highlight the changing scenario, efforts to and lifestyle factors were cited significantly more by HF individuals, bring the science of genetics to people and the promises it holds for mystical factors by TM patients and Psychosocial factors by HF and improvement in the situation . CP patients. Carers of HF attributed the condition significantly more to environmental causes, whilst those of CP and HF cited psychosocial factors more . For symptoms, environmental and mystical causes for HF individuals and psychosocial attributes for CP patients were cited Living with a genetic disease 0 EP48. Experiences of the clinical Genetics staff, in cyprus, specific to HNPCC were assessed through standardised and study- about caring for linguistically diverse patients. specific measures (1) before and (2) 8 weeks after genetic counselling. T. Delikurt1, T. Clancy1, H. Middleton-Price2; Regression analyses were performed to determine the impact of 1St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2North West Genetics various characteristics of the illness experience on cognitions and Knowledge Park, The Nowgen Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom. distress specific to HNPCC. Several cultural components, one of which is language, have a Results: The perception of cancer-related threat was shown to decrease significant impact on the provision of, and access to, health care. with the number of relatives affected by cancer, and to increase There is an increasing need for health care professionals to become when counselees had experienced the death of close relatives . No culturally competent when they care for patients who are culturally and direct effect of PE was found on perceptions of risk; while an indirect linguistically diverse . There is a well-established clinical genetic service effect was mediated by cancer-related threat . None of the various in Cyprus which provides care for the whole population . Cyprus has characteristics of PE was related to distress specific to HNPCC. substantial immigrant communities . This study aimed to explore the Conclusion: Differential effects of PE were shown to shape counselees’ experiences and perceptions of the Clinical Genetics Staff in Cyprus perceptions specific to HNPCC. Since PE are likely to influence caring for linguistically diverse patients . Semi-structured interviews counselees’ response to clinical risk assignment, they should be taken with 3 staff members of the Genetics Clinic, 1 interning student and 1 into account during genetic counselling . multidisciplinary team member were carried out . All the interviewees were either bilingual (in Greek and English) or EP51. Genetic discrimination in Australia: the clinical multilingual (in Greek, English, French, and Arabic) . The Clinical perspective Genetics Staff do not have access to trained interpreters . Patients who S. D. Taylor1, K. Barlow-Stewart2, M. Otlowski3, S. Treloar3, M. Stranger4; speak neither Greek nor English have to rely on other family members, 1School of Social Work & Welfare Studies, Central Queensland University, friends or the multilingual clinic staff to interpret and translate for Rockhampton, Australia, 2Centre for Genetics Education, Royal North Shore them . All the clinical staff were concerned that not being able to Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 3Centre for Law and Genetics, University of Tas- communicate directly with these patients could result in problems mania, Hobart, Australia, 4Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, of miscommunication, inaccurate translation and risk of interpreters Australia. avoiding difficult issues or expressing their own feelings and views. All Genetic discrimination is defined as the differential treatment, either the interviewees felt the counselling element of consultations was the favourable or unfavourable, of asymptomatic individuals on the basis of most difficult when there was a language barrier between themselves their actual or presumed genetic differences . The Genetic Discrimination and the patient . Project (GDP) in Australia has investigated multiple perspectives regarding the issue and experience of genetic discrimination, including EP49. Do women seeking genetic counselling for hereditary those of consumers, clinicians and genetic counsellors, insurers and breast cancer have a pessimistic risk perception? employers and members of the legal profession . Clinical geneticists W. Otten1, S. van Dijk1, C. J. van Asperen1, H. Meijers-Heijboer2, J. Kievit1; and genetic counsellors are uniquely placed with regard to the 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus Univer- concerns of at-risk individuals regarding genetic discrimination and are sity Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. required to advise them appropriately according to professional and PURPOSE: The purpose of the present study was to examine whether legal standards . This paper reports on data obtained from Australian women who seek genetic counselling for Hereditary Breast and clinical geneticists and genetic counsellors with regard to the issue Ovarian Cancer (HBOC), assess their own risk different when they of genetic discrimination, its perceived relative importance to clients compare it to either (a) an average woman in the general population, and its impact upon their clinical practice . Survey and interview data or (b) another woman also seeking genetic counselling . In addition, from about 50 clinical genetic service providers and social workers we explored some medical and psychological factors related to these are presented, with all states of Australia represented . Insurance, women’s comparative risk assessment . privacy issues, family dynamics, employment and social stigma METHODS: Before counselling, 620 women filled out a first were the domains perceived by genetic clinicians, counsellors and questionnaire assessing their comparative risk estimates . social workers to be of most concern to their clients regarding the RESULTS: Results showed that these women consider their risk higher potential for discrimination . Experiences of unfair treatment reported than that of a woman from the general population (i .e ., a pessimistic by clients regarding insurance and employment were more likely to response), but equal to the risk of another counselee . The latter have occurred with genetic testing for Huntington disease and familial comparative risk measure was also more normally distributed implying cancer . Data regarding the impact and practice response of clinicians that comparing to a similar other person is a more relevant comparison . and counsellors to the issue of genetic discrimination are presented . Women were more pessimistic comparing to another counselee if they The legal aspects and implications of the issue within clinical contexts had had breast cancer, and more optimistic if they had no first-degree are discussed . relatives with breast cancer, perceived a low absolute risk, and had stronger dispositional optimistic tendencies . EP52. Psychopathological profile of children with common CONCLUSIONS: Overall, women who sought genetic counselling for dysmorphic syndromes - transformation or transaction breast cancer had unbiased comparative risk perceptions and correctly throughout adulthood. Prognostic skills of the postnatal genetic assessed their own risk status . counseling S. Shopova, A. Shopova, E. Simeonov; EP50. Previous experiences with cancer in the family - impact on Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. health beliefs and distress in persons at risk of HNPcc Testing the cognitive capacity is a modern diagnostic approach for M. Keller1,2, R. Jost1, H. Sattel1, C. Jung3, M. Kloor4, J. Gebert4, M. Tariverdian5; patients with genetic diseases, which are often diagnostic problems 1Division of Psychooncology, Heidelberg, Germany, 2University Hospital, Hei- due to their variety . delberg, Austria, 3Dpt. for Human Genetics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Aim: To study and to define the specific cognitive and behavioral Germany, 4Dept. Molecular Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Germa- phenotypes of patients with some common DS and their transaction ny, 5Dept. for Visceral Surgery, University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany. or transformation throughout adulthood . To indicate typical behavior Background: From a clinical perspective it is regarded common sense of the families with affected children according to their communicative that prior experiences (PE) with illness and death shape current capabilities and their expectation from the genetic counseling and their perceptions of a hereditary disease and one’s own risk . The impact of interpretation of the genetic risk . PE on counselees perceptions has been rarely explored in empirical Results and discussion: These syndromes manifest cognitive capacity studies . In this study, the impact of PE with cancer was explored in deviations of different severity . IQ level in an individual patient changes persons at risk of hereditary bowel cancer (HNPCC) . with age . The patients with DS show the most maladaptive behavior . Methods: Using a prospective design and consecutive accrual, 183 Autism and ADHD are frequently observed in part of the DS . The unaffected individuals at risk of HNPCC were assessed . PE with relationship between intellectual functioning and adaptive skills is in regard to cancer in the family of origin were elicited by interview inverse proportion . during comprehensive genetic counselling . Perceptions and distress The families are major - introverted or extroverted and several Living with a genetic disease 0 subgroups . the psychosocial implications of being at risk for BRCA1/2 mutations Conclusions: 1 .The patients with some dysmorphic syndromes has therefore focused mainly on women to date . The small body manifest specific psychological profiles of cognitive and behavioral of literature exploring the psychosocial impact on men at risk for characteristics according to the genotype and the age . 2 .They may be BRCA1/2 mutations suggests that their primary concern is for their successfully used both in support of diagnostic process and as a basis children but relatively little is known about the way these men perceive for adequate medical and psychological intervention and counseling their personal cancer risks and what their support needs are . The of parents 3 . Most of the families interpret the genetic risk mainly in aim in this study was to explore the attitudes and experiences of men the context of their reproductive memory and the wish for healthy at risk for BRCA1/2 in the context of risk perception, genetic testing children . and support needs . In-depth interviews were conducted with 8 men (5 BRCA1/2 carriers and 3 at 50% carrier risk) . Interview data was EP53. Let us play... and tell, and draw and build ourselves analysed qualitatively using tools from Grounded Theory . Many of D. A. Zarri; the men, whilst they apparently viewed their personal cancer risk as AISP, G. Gaslini Children’s Hospital, Genova, Italy. ‘low’, described having made modifications to their lifestyle in order Polland’s syndrome is a malformative rare disease and AISP is a to minimise their risk . All but one of the men described experiencing young association, born in 2002 . Since the beginning, AISP has frequent, but not particularly intense, intrusive thoughts with regard choosen the way of enlarged and growingly communication between to their own or other family members’ cancer risks . The nature of professsional careers and patients, to increase therapeutic alleance these intrusive thoughts and reasons why the men had sought, or and the knowledges about the disease . Thanks to this attitude, AISP declined, genetic testing were explored. The findings, whilst limited in has created a net in which people can find answers to the most significance, provide a foundation on which to base further qualitative, common doubts and questions . The corrispondence sent to the web and quantitative, research . site has shown as the most meaningful requests are those regarding quality of life, so AISP decided to organize annual plenary meetings, EP56. Adults with a genetic condition: genetic service with professional careers, families and patients, in which scientific expectations information takes as much place as educational trainings . During C. L. Gaff1,2, E. A. Lobb3, I. Winship2, E. Hughes4; the last meeting, educational trainings were performed, by a team of 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Genetic Health Ser- seven professional educators and two psychologists, in psychomotility, vices Victoria, Melbourne, Australia, 3WA Centre for Cancer and Palliative Care, occupational and music therapy, and narration laboratories . At the same Edith Cowan University, Perth, Australia, 4Genetic Support Network Victoria, time, a team of five, among thoracic, orthopedic, and plastic surgeons, Melbourne, Australia. provide patients and families with tecnichal advices . The effectiveness In Victoria, Australia, a dedicated genetic service for adults is proposed of this “formula” had been evaluated in a plenary discussion at the end to extend existing pediatric/obstetric and cancer genetic services . In of the three- day meeting . Comparing the results obteined working with order to ensure client-centered services, this pilot exploratory study 168 among patients and parents, aged from few months to 52 years, sought to identify the genetic service needs and expectations of we saw that this kind of intervention improves quality of life because it adults with a genetic condition, as well as their experiences obtaining allows them to see and to exploit their own personal resources, always genetic information . Adult members of support groups in the Genetic existing in spite of every kind of disease . We suggest to repeat our Support Network of Victoria were invited to participate in a series esperience in all the situations of chronical disease . of focus groups . These groups were audiotaped and transcribed verbatim . Data was analysed using constant-comparative method EP54. Living With Disability: the impact on siblings proposed by Glasser and Strauss . A total of 21 individuals (10 men S. L. Smalley1,2; and 11 women) aged 22-66 years participated; they were affected by 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clini- 9 different genetic conditions . Participants expected a genetic service cal Genetics, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom. to provide an advocacy role within the health system and to provide Research carried out on the impact of disability on families has primarily a coordinated service with continuity of care . However, the extent to focussed on the parents of disabled children . In contrast, this study, which these expectations were met varied . Participants highlighted carried out as part of an MSc, looks at the experiences of siblings who the need for different information and support at different stages of have brothers or sisters with learning disabilities . This retrospective their lives and their disorder. The findings suggest there is a need for study aims to illustrate how, if at all, a sibling’s disability can affect a genetic services provided by a multidisciplinary team and highlight the person throughout their life . need to be responsive to the different psychosocial/medical needs of In-depth qualitative interviews were carried out in the participant’s adults who are affected by a genetic condition . The themes emerging homes, transcribed in full and analysed for emergent themes . Six from this project serve to inform those responsible for service planning participants were involved and reported both positive and negative and development, ensuring services best meet the needs of those for emotions surrounding their sibling’s disability . whom it is intended . Participants were able to clearly recall childhood emotions and describe how these changed as they got older . Many of the emotions EP57. Family experiences of X-linked retinitis pigmentosa (RP) experienced were limited to childhood whilst others continued into adult and genetic testing: a case description. life . Participants also reported how their feelings often became more J. Allard1,2, G. Hall1, G. Black1; positive towards their disabled sibling as they got older and gained 1Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetic Service, St. Mary’s greater understanding . Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, The results of this study have implications for both parents and health Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. professionals working with disability and highlights the need to provide X-linked recessive RP (XLRP) is generally considered a severe form adequate information and reassurance to such siblings throughout of RP, with males typically experiencing nightblindness and peripheral childhood . vision loss in the first decade, progressing to partial or complete blindness by their thirties or forties . The recent characterisation of two EP55. Attitudes and Experiences of men at Risk for BRCA1/ XLRP genes now means that genetic testing is becoming an option mutations for families . However, there is very little research into XLRP families’ M. McAllister1,2, P. D. Marks1; perception of genetic testing or the psychosocial impact of the condition . 1 Nowgen (North West Genetics Knowledge Park), Manchester, United King- Using qualitative, semi-structured interviews, this descriptive case study dom, 2 North West Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Academic Unit of aims to explore the experiences and reflections of one extended XLRP Medical Genetics, University of Manchester, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, family, some members of which had previously undergone genetic United Kingdom. testing . The results presented highlight the psychosocial impact XLRP Pathological mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes predispose can have both on an individual and their extended family . Among the individuals to an increased risk of certain cancers . This risk is much most challenging burdens emphasized were the continuous need for greater for women who face a relatively high chance of developing readjustment to deteriorating levels of vision, the uncertainty about breast and ovarian cancer over their lifetime . Research investigating prognosis and a lack of understanding in the wider community . The Living with a genetic disease 06 diagnosis evoked very powerful feelings of guilt and resentment within scientific and psychosocial aspects of genetics. The greatest impact this family; with damaging consequences for family communication occurred through the poetry, with many people reporting that they were and isolation of an affected relative . The experience of linkage analysis emotionally moved by the messages conveyed . underlined how individual family members can operate using different primary defences and coping strategies, and that such differences EP60. Psychosocial outcomes of bone marrow transplant for can be a source of tension and friction . Experiences of carrier testing mPs i Hurler Disease: Patient self-report of personality and and presymptomatic testing revealed psychosocial and emotional personal adjustment consequences and emphasized a requirement for careful pre- and C. A. Pitt, C. Lavery, N. Wager; post-test counselling. The findings of this study raise implications for Society for Mucopolysaccharide and Related Diseases, Amersham, United both future practice and research . Kingdom. Aims: To explore the composite scores, clinical and adaptive scales EP58. changes in coherence of speech across time in women at of the BASC Self Report of Personality (Reynolds and Kamphaus, increased risk of developing hereditary breast cancer 1992) in terms of norms for children and young people affected S. van Dooren1, J. Landsbergen-de Vette1, R. W. Trijsburg1, C. Seynaeve2, M. by Mucopolysaccharidosis I Hurler Disease (MPS IH) post-BMT . M. Tilanus-Linthorst2, J. G. M. Klijn2, H. J. Duivenvoorden1, A. Tibben1,3; Particular attention was given to the Personal Adjustment composite 1Medical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The of the BASC-SR and to its contributors . Participants and Method: Netherlands, 2Daniel den Hoed Cancer Centre, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Eighteen MPS IH patients post-BMT participated in this investigation, Netherlands, 3Centre of Human and Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The along with their biological mothers . The children’s ages ranged from Netherlands. 8 to 25 years . Semi-structured interviews with the children’s mothers Introduction: 357 women at increased risk of developing hereditary were utilised, and the children and young people were administered breast cancer participated in a psychological study on effects of regular tests of cognitive function and the BASC: Self-Report of Personality . surveillance, using self-report questionnaires around two surveillance Results: Hierarchical multiple regression on the Personal Adjustment appointments. However, self-reports may reflect opposite conditions1,2 . composite of the BASC demonstrated that 95% of the variance could Coherence of speech, the ability to talk about a subject in a truthful, be explained (F = 18 .741 , p = .051) by child health and disability 3,2 consistent manner, is used as a measure to identify such opposite factors, and factors associated with the mother and the family conditions . Objectives: to examine changes in coherence over time, environment . In terms of the clinical and adaptive scales of the BASC, and to explore if coherence was correlated with distress . no overt behavioural difficulties were observed. However, possible Methods: three structured interviews were held in a random subgroup trends emerged, which highlighted adjustment difficulties with school of 43 women . Two were held after a surveillance appointment (m1, and feelings of inadequacy for the 8-11 year age group; and a tendency m3), and one halfway two appointments (m2) . Raters gave the towards inhibition and withdrawal for the 12 years and over age group . interviews a numerical (1-9; ≥ 5 = coherent) and a categorical score Conclusion: The findings illustrate how aspects of parenting and the (free, entangled or dismissive) . Self-reported psychic distress was family, as well as aspects of the MPS disease, require attention when measured with the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale and the providing support to patients . They also highlight the importance of Impact of Event Scale . appropriate, consistent classroom support, and question whether Results: mean levels of coherence were at m1: 4.6; at m2: 4.2; at m3: psychosocial support should be considered within the school 4 .9 (p< 0 .03) . Intra-individually these scores differed > 2½ points in 28% environment . of the participating women. Percentages of women classified as ‘free’ were: at m1: 33%; at m3: 29%; at m4: 56%. At m3 (the home-situation), EP61. social characterization of consultands requesting the majority of the women were classified as ‘entangled’ (63%). Higher presymptomatic testing and examples of social intervention levels of coherence of speech (numerical) were correlated with lower N. M. M. Oliveira, J. Sequeiros; levels of intrusion (m1), avoidance (m3, m4) and depression (m3) . Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, PORTO, Portugal. These results and their implications will be discussed . Communication and information are associated with genetic counselling 1 . DudokdeWit,A .C . et al. Am J Med Genet 75, 62-74 (1998) . because they are essential to reduce anguish and anxiety in individuals 2 . Shedler,J . et al . Am. Psychol. 48, 1117-1131 (1993) . at-risk for late-onset neurological diseases (Huntington disease, Machado-Joseph disease and familial amyloid polyneuropathy, type I EP59. Hidden images in the Family Album: using art and poetry - Portuguese, Andrade or ATTRV30M) . These incapacitating diseases to raise awareness of the psychosocial impact of genetic have several implications at the social and psychological level: conditions on families. structural, cognitive and emotional changes . H. Skirton1, K. Walton2, A. Hallett3; In presymptomatic testing, evaluation by the social worker has the aim 1University of Plymouth, Taunton, United Kingdom, 2Artist, Bristol, United King- to assess an adjusted (resilient) or unadjusted answer of the persons dom, 3Author, Bristol, United Kingdom. at-risk, when informed about their status of being or not a mutant One aspect of the role of the genetics health professional is to inform gene ‘carrier’ for one of these diseases . Resilience is their ability to and educate health professionals, families and the general public . This answer appropriately to difficult situations (biological or social and paper will describe an innovative project aimed at enhancing public psychological conditions), using their internal (intra-psychological) education about genetics and raising awareness of key psychosocial and external (social and affective environment) resources . This ability issues for families and society . should allow a good adjustment and social insertion . The project team consisted of a genetic counsellor and two artists, one Our genetic counselling protocol includes a social evaluation of the a visual artist and the other a poet . The artists conducted a series of following factors of risk: (1) factors connected with familial configuration workshops with six people who had experience of a genetic condition (separation of the couple, longstanding misunderstanding, violence, in the family . The conditions included Down syndrome, Huntington alcoholism, chronic disease or death of a close relative, etc.); and (2) disease, familial cancer and skeletal dysplasia . Following the factors of their social environment (poverty or economical fragility, workshops and discussion with the genetic counsellor on the nature unemployment, unfavourable housing characteristics, relational of her work, the artists created an exhibition of work using multiple isolation, etc .) . photographic images, an installation focussing on the work of Mendel, After this assessment, a social intervention will take place if the and poetry to convey the complexity of experience and emotion individual at-risk does not have abilities or competences to cope with associated with genetic disorders . An exhibition was initially held in their reality, which is changed by disclosure of the results (either if a Public Library . The images and poetry have also been used in a carrier or not) . number of presentations and workshops and are on semi-permanent display in a public hospital corridor . Evaluation of the project was undertaken via analysis of freehand comments recorded by attendees, interviews with six persons who attended the exhibition and a written questionnaire to stakeholders . Feedback indicated that the exhibition had raised awareness of the Living with a genetic disease 0 EP62. the psychosocial aspects in Phenylketonuria in Republic EP64. Parents and children: transmitting genes, knowledge and of moldova responsibility. O. Usurelu, N. Usurelu; A. J. Clarke1, M. Arribas-Ayllon2, S. Sarangi3; Association of Rehabilitation of Children with Phenylketonuria, Chisinau, Re- 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United public of Moldova. Kingdom, 2CESAGen, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Health Com- The psychosocial aspects in Phenylketonuria(PKU) are the following: munication Research Centre, Cardiff, United Kingdom. the doctors can’t manage to offer enough time to give parents the From our corpus of interviews with families about their genetic instructions on the diet, children are with mental retardation, they conditions, we have identified themes that relate to parental decisions can’t adopt in the society and parents can’t work . Earlier 86% of PKU about the genetic identity of their children . These include decisions children were with severe mental retardation . about whether/when to pass on to the child information about the Methods: Association of Rehabilitation of Children with PKU from potentially inherited disorder in the family, and the possibility of genetic Moldova organized a Daily Center for supporting the families that have testing to clarify the genetic status of a child . PKU children under their care . This includes: Parents may acknowledge that they should discuss their family’s genetic condition with their child, and the issue becomes one of finding 1 . Parents’ School (psychological support and legal redress) the right time. Parents recount their own experiences of finding out that they had inherited the condition to account for their decisions 2 . PKU School (teaching of low Phenylalanine diet) whether to pass on information to their children . They can draw upon “bad experiences” EITHER to explain why they wish to do better (be 3 . Parents’ Club (exchange of their experience) more open with their child) OR to justify/explain why they are unable to do this . 4 . Preparation of brochures, booklets Suggesting that a genetic test be performed on a young child can be proposed as a way out of such difficulties EITHER because the child 5 . Didactic materials for parents and specialists may not have the faulty gene OR because it would ensure that the Results: 25 families with PKU children (0-21years) received the teach- parent can transmit the genetic test result to the child whether or not ing courses . 13 PKU children whose families started teaching from the the child, when older, would choose to be tested . In this way the parent children’s birth have normal development . They go to general kinder- hopes to pass on to their child their moral responsibility as well as their gartens with their diet prepared by parents . These parents have an op- genes . portunity to work . 3 children who started a new diet at 3 years have easy We discuss the variety of accounts given by parents of their decisions mental retardation, but they went to general schools . 1 girl (21years)- and what we can learn about how they envisage their child becoming restarted the diet on new, she became better and she was employed . an autonomous individual . Other 8 children whose parents didn’t keep a steady diet before this education have the improvement of the development in dynamics . EP65. Attitudes towards genetic diagnosis and coping strategies Conclusions: The vision of the society on PKU children can be changed of persons suffering from hereditary spastic paraplegia by the Association of Parents and Specialists by creating an Information S. Taeschner1, J. Kassubek2, F. R. Kreuz1,3; and Training Center for parents, young families and specialists in vari- 1Institute of Clinical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Technical University Dresden, ous fields (social, pedagogical, psychological, medical...) Dresden, Germany, 2Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Ulm, Ger- many, 3Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Vivantes Hospital “Hum- EP63. the psychosocial impact of severe and profound hearing boldt”, Berlin, Germany. loss for people with NF2 Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are a group of late-onset, M. B. Kenney, R. Macleod; genetically caused, neurodegenerative disorders . A few can be Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, Manches- diagnosed genetically . The aim of the study was to investigate attitudes ter, United Kingdom. towards genetic diagnosis and coping strategies of families affected Neurofibromatosis Type 2 (NF2) is an autosomal dominant condition with HSP . which almost universally results in the development of bilateral We distributed 410 questionnaires as following: vestibular schwannomas (V .S .) . Hearing is impacted by both the Questionnaires Questionnaires existence and surgical removal of these V .S . Schwannomas also occur Percentage on the other cranial, spinal and peripheral nerves . (Evans et al,2003) delivered received Little is known about the psychosocial impact on affected individuals Patients 307 132 43 .0 of living with NF2 . A qualitative study was designed to explore the experiences of adjusting to significant hearing loss as a consequence of NF2 . Six adults affected with NF2, all of whom had lost their Patient’s partner 38 12 31 .6 hearing in one ear (n=3) or were completely deaf (n=6), agreed to be interviewed . Participants were given a choice of how they wished to Risk-persons 48 11 22 .9 communicate in the interviews, i .e . light writer, lip-reading etc and the approach to conducting research interviews for deafened people with Risk-person’s 17 2 11 .8 poor morbidity will be discussed . partner Interviews were fully transcribed and participant’s accounts were analysed for emerging themes using the constant comparison method Summary 410 157 38 .3 (Glaser and Strauss, 1967) . Although the study was designed to look at the impact of hearing loss Here, we will report the results in the patients’ group only: in NF2, all the participants spoke of the combined interaction of hearing 102 (77%) of the patients back up genetic diagnosis in order to know loss with the other physical effects of the condition including tinnitus, their own gene status (58), to prevent gene transmission (19), to plan problems with balance and chronic tiredness . In addition to the physical personal life style (18) and to manage family planning (14) . Only six difficulties, all had experienced emotional and social consequences reject genetic diagnosis, because knowledge is insignificant (4), there including feelings of isolation and problems communicating with friends, is neither cure (4) nor prevention (2) of HSP . Psychological problems, families and health professionals . The key impacts of living with NF2 problems with social environment and data protection do not play such and how participants felt these could be helped will be presented . an important role as we know e .g . from Huntington’s families . Coping strategies were investigated by using the Trier Coping Scales . In summary, patients suffering from HSP cope more in an active manner than in a depressive or avoiding one . Support in coping was more expected from neurologists (78%), family members (66%), GP’s (63%) and partners (59%) rather than by self-help groups (33%), genetic counsellors (30%) or psychologists (17%) .Common disease 0 The specifics of HSP compared to Huntington’s disease or EP68. Being at risk for a genetic disease, fatalism and the role of heredoataxias and differences in attitudes and coping strategies will the self be discussed . The knowledge of these differences may be important L. Claassen1, L. Henneman1, H. C. W. de Vet1, T. M. Marteau2, D. R. M. Tim- for genetic counsellors . mermans1; 1EMGO-Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Psychology & Genetics Re- EP66. Exploring causal beliefs, perceived risk and controllability search Group, King’s College, London, United Kingdom. of diabetes type 2 among high-risk individuals with and without Providing people with genetic risk information may induce preventive a family history of Dm2 behaviour if a person beliefs that this can reduce the risk . However if L. Henneman1,2, L. Claassen1,2, M. Pijl2, G. Nijpels1,2, J. M. Dekker1,2, D. R. M. a person assigns excessive causation to genes, he or she may either Timmermans1,2; adopt a fatalistic attitude towards the risk and/or accept only medical 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2EMGO Institute, approaches . Perceptions of controllability of genetic risk may be linked Amsterdam, The Netherlands. with the way people see themselves; the self-concept. People with A family history of diabetes type 2 (DM2) is one of the strongest risk a static self-concept (SSC) consider fixed traits as primary causes factors for DM2, reflecting the consequences of genetic predisposition, of behaviour and process self-relevant information in a way that is shared environment, and common behaviour . Despite the prevalence consistent with this deterministic perspective . People with a dynamic of DM2, little is known about the perceptions of (risk of) DM2 among self-concept (DSC) understand themselves in terms of goals, needs high-risk populations . Using semi-structured interviews, causal beliefs and states of mind and put more emphasis on situational influences. It of DM2, perceived DM2 risk and feelings of controllability were explored is likely, that when faced with a health threat, people with SSC are more among high-risk individuals aged 56-75 years with (n=9) and without susceptible to feelings of fatalism and show less preventive behaviour, (n=14) a family history of DM2 . especially when the threat is associated with a genetic susceptibility . Most participants perceived DM2 as multifactorial disease, and could To test this, a static-dynamic self-concept questionnaire was validated . often name several causes including ‘genetic factors’ . Although the The final (7 item) questionnaire displayed some predictive validity. majority of people with positive family history was inclined to mention When asked to imagine themselves in different health scenarios ‘genetic predisposition’ as a cause, this was not always brought up in (representing a lifestyle risk for cardiovascular diseases (CVD), a explaining why family members were affected . The role of ‘genetics’ risk based on a positive family history of CVD, and a genetic risk for was seen as more pronounced when more than one relative was CVD), people with SSC compared, to people with DSC, perceived less affected (“it runs in the family”) . Overall, DM2 risk was perceived low in control and showed a stronger preference for cholesterol-lowering both groups . Only four individuals with positive family history perceived drugs over lifestyle changes, especially when the risk was presented a (slightly) higher risk compared to other people of the same age . The as genetic. The findings suggest that the questionnaire can be used to absence of DM2 in the family was often used as a reason to perceive help explain differences in responses to genetic risk information . a low DM2 risk . Ways to prevent DM2 were mostly unknown or were not seen as very effective, especially when genetic predisposition was EP69. Professionals‘ opinions on population cholesterol seen as major cause for DM2, suggesting a sense of fatalism . This screening to detect inherited high cholesterol research indicates the need for more public health communications on H. van den Nieuwenhoff; the role of a positive family history in causing DM2, and on possible Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands. preventive measures . To detect Inherited High Cholesterol in an asymptomatic stage, a Dutch patient organisation offered cholesterol tests via mass media invitation EP67. Determinants of familial risk perception of common to persons with a family history of cardiovascular diseases . If tested diseases positive, persons were referred to health care professionals . F. M. Walter1, J. Emery2, S. Sanderson1, S. Sutton1; We conducted individual semi-structured interviews with 13 1Department of Public Health & Primary Care, University of Cambridge, United professionals (in the fields of cardiology, genetics, ethics, psychology, Kingdom, 2Department of General Practice, University of Western Australia, justice, policy and patient interests) to explore opinions about the Australia. media campaign (including the cholesterol test offer) in population Background: Taking a family history is increasingly becoming screening . Ethical concepts and WHO criteria for genetic screening part of the risk assessment and management of common chronic were used for analysis . disease in primary care . Patients’ understanding of their family history While almost all professionals classified the cholesterol tests may influence perceptions of both their risk of the disease and its offered as population screening, many did not perceive it as genetic management . screening, because no DNA was examined (ignoring the Dutch Health Objective: To identify which factors best predict familial risk perception Council definition). Four professionals were generally positive about among primary care patients with a family history of one or more the campaign, as it ‘increased people’s autonomy and beneficence common chronic diseases . (i .e ., enabled informed choice for preventive measures) and increased Design & Methods: A survey of UK patients identified in general justice (i.e., notified all persons irrespective of family communication)’. practice, having a family history of either cancer, heart disease Two professionals were generally negative, as the campaign or diabetes . The FRisk questionnaire was developed using both ‘decreased the autonomy (i .e ., by pressure to test and to enrol in follow- established measures and items drawing on our recent qualitative up), decreased the perceived importance of environmental risks, and work . increased medicalisation and blaming-the-victim’ . Seven professionals Results: The 754 respondents (response rate 62 .0%), were mainly perceived benefits of the campaign, but had as well doubts: insufficient female (61 .1%) white British (92 .3%), with mean age 48 .6 (SD 11 .9) . public information on follow-up, insurance discrimination, and lack of Multiple regression analyses revealed that believing that the disease adequate care for persons tested positive . ‘runs in the family’, is a serious condition, and has a genetic cause, To conclude, the professionals did not speak the same language and were the most significant predictors of familial risk perception. Younger did not agree about the acceptability of mass media approaches to age, being of non-white British ethnic origin, feeling ‘like’ the affected detect familial predispositions . A debate among stakeholders may relative, and with vulnerability at a similar age, were also significantly improve communication and forming of more united opinions . related to higher risk perceptions . Conclusions: Predictors of familial risk perceptions among a primary EP70. Risk perception among women receiving genetic care population may differ from the biomedical model of identifying counselling: A population-based study the number of relatives with the disease and age at which they were E. M. Mikkelsen1,2, L. Sunde3, C. Johansen4, S. P. Johnsen1; affected. The findings will inform the development of a family history 1Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus C, screening instrument to facilitate both management of familial risk of Denmark, 2The Bergen Psychosocial FUGE-project, Bergen, Norway, 3Depart- chronic diseases, and behaviour change to reduce the disease risk . ment of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus C, Denmark, 4Department of Psychosocial Cancer Research, The Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark. Background A number of studies have demonstrated that women who Common disease 0 receive genetic counselling for hereditary breast or ovarian cancer it difficult to define accurately; PGx was perceived to be of benefit both improve their perception of risk after counselling . However, a great on a personal level and for the general public; patients gave opinions number of women still over or underestimate their personal risk post- about PGx services based on their experiences of their illness, taking counselling . Most studies on genetic counselling lack control groups, medicines and using the NHS. This is the first known UK study to and to our knowledge no studies are population based . It is thus still explore individual patients’ views of PGx services . Although patients questionable whether genetic counselling provides a more accurate were initially unclear about the definition of PGx, they did understand risk perception when genetic counselling is a standard service offered the concept of what a PGx service could offer . Patients gave clear throughout the population of women at risk of hereditary cancer . examples of their perceptions about the benefits, costs and the Purpose To examine women’s perceived lifetime risk of cancer, the potential implications for developing a healthcare service . accuracy of risk perception and possible predictors for inaccurate risk perception after counselling . EP72. Public attitudes towards human genome science in method A population-based prospective cohort study including women Japan_willingness to donate their bloods (N=319) who received their first genetic counselling for hereditary K. Muto1, A. Tamakoshi2, I. Ishiyama3, A. Nagai3, M. Kokado4, K. Mimura5; breast and ovarian cancer risk, and two reference groups . Reference 1Shinshu University, Faculty of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 2National Center Group I consists of women (N = 417) who received mammography . for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu City, Japan, 3Yamanashi University, Ya- Reference Group II consists of women (N = 1,271) randomly selected manashi, Japan, 4Center for Life Science and Society, Tokyo, Japan, 5Ochano- from the Danish population . mizu University, Tokyo, Japan. Data were collected by standardized, questionnaires mailed prior to Objectives: While some large-scale and long-term prospective counselling or mammography and 12 months post-counselling . Data genome studies were launched in Japan, peoples’ attitudes toward on the counselling session, including the assessment of the woman’s human genome sciences are unclear . The purpose of this study was to objective risk of breast cancer, were retrieved by questionnaires from describe their present attitudes, uncertainties and information sources the doctors providing the counselling . and seek further discussions for better science communication . Results Final results of all research questions examined in the study Participants and methods: A postal questionnaires to 4,000 adults will be presented . randomly sampled nationwide . Participants were asked about their scientific literacy, feelings, values and risk cognition toward genome EP71. Exploring patients’ views on pharmacogenetic testing sciences including basic sciences, health related sciences and food C. P. Eddy1, E. A. Fargher2, B. Newman1, C. Pearson3, K. J. Moriarty3, K. sciences . Payne2; Results: A total of 2,171 completed the questionnaire (991 men and 1Regional Genetics Service and Academic Unit of Medical Genetics, Manches- 1,180 women; 18-60 years old). The response rate was 54.3%. Of ter, United Kingdom, 2North West Genetics Knowledge Park, The University 70 .5% of participants were “interested” in health related genome of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Gastroenterology Department, studies and 69 .6% agreed to promote these studies . With regards Royal Bolton Hospital, Bolton, United Kingdom. to willingness to contribute to research, 39 .1% agreed to donate Clinical evidence indicates that individual people may react differently their blood, 13% disagreed and 47 .1% were uncertain . Of 39 .1% to similar doses of medicines . Pharmacogenetic testing (PGx) is participants, they donate their blood if researchers disclosed “my own” advocated as an approach to predict how patients will respond to results (78 .5%) in safe environment (71 .4%), when privacy were strictly certain medicines . There is no published evidence on patients’ views protected (69 .4%) . Half of respondents seek direct communications of PGx . It is vital to explore patients’ opinions before the widespread with researchers; informed consent in plain language (56.5%) and introduction of PGx into healthcare practise . This study aimed to explore disclosure of interim research results (51 .9%) . Unwillingness was patients’ views on PGx services provided by the British National Health constructed by unexpected disadvantage (40 .7%), possibility of breach Service (NHS) . Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 11 of privacy (38.4%), confidentiality of genetic makeup (35.1%) and just patients (mean age 56 years; 7 women) with inflammatory bowel scariness (33 .6%) . disease, currently taking medicines . A topic guide was developed Discussions: In spite of lower willingness rates and accompanying using the published literature and show cards with a lay definition of conditions, higher participant rate, 75-85%, is observed in genome PGx . Interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim . Data were studies in Japan . Focus group interview studies will be followed to analysed using the constant comparative method . This presentation confirm absence of compulsion or persuasion to participate in their will describe the key emerging themes . Some examples of the themes decision making process . emerging are: patients had no previous experience of PGx and found